I, the author of this book, have completed it for you, my sons, as a part of the knowledge in medicine, complete and perfect. I have reached the goal with its clarity and simplicity. Now I see fit to finish it with this practical section which is an exercise in doing by hand.
For practice by hand is rare in our land and time, to the point where its science was almost forgotten and its effect ceased. And only a few small sketches of it remained in the books of the ancients, which were worn out by hand and obscured by errors and imperfections until their meanings became obscure and their benefits were lost.
So I saw fit to revive it and compose this section in the manner of explanation, clarity, and brevity, and to provide the images of all surgical instruments as it is an increase in explanation and a means for what one may need.
And the reason that there is no skilled artisan by hand in our time, for the craft of medicine is long and its master should be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen described. until he knows the benefits and health of the organs, their commingling and separation, the number and exits of the bones, muscles, nerves, and arteries, and the place of their exits.
Therefore Al-Bukhart said that the doctors in name are many and in deed are few, especially in the craft of the hand, and we have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
For whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned from anatomy will fall into error and kill people with it, as I have seen many who pretend to this science without knowledge or understanding.
And I have seen an ignorant doctor cut on a sow's wart on the neck of a woman, so he tore some of her neck veins and the woman bled to death before his eyes.
I have seen another physician remove a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the bladder and the stone was large so he broke it with an instrument made of a piece of the catheter. The man died about three days later and I was called to remove it, so I saw from the stone and the bladder what I estimated would have been the case.
And I saw another physician who was a barber among some of our countrymen who practiced medicine.
Then I told a young black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the heel with an open wound, and the physician rushed foolishly and tied the fracture tightly to the wound with ropes and pieces of cloth so as not to let it breathe.
Then he left him to his desires and then let him be for a few days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage until his leg and foot swelled. And I supervised the destruction.
Then I was called to him and I quickly loosed the bandage, so he regained his relief and calmed from his pain, but the corruption had taken hold in the member and I was unable to reverse it.
And the corruption continued to spread in the member until he died.
And I saw another physician who cauterized a malignant tumor and it ulcerated after a few days until his victim became enormous, that being that if the cancer is pure from black bile then it should not be exposed to iron at all.
But only if it is in an organ which can be entirely excised.
And therefore, my sons, you should know that the practice by hand is divided into two parts, a work which goes with safety and a work which goes with corruption in most cases.
And I have warned wherever the operation from this book is done which involves danger and fear, that you should beware of it and reject it.
Beware that the ignorant will not find a way to operate and incise, so take care of yourselves with firmness and safety, and tend to your sickness with compassion and certainty.
And use the best method leading to safety and a praiseworthy outcome, and fight against the dangerous and difficult diseases that are cured.
And take precautions for yourselves so that you are not led astray in your religion and world, it is more worthy to your dignity and will be raised in this life and the next by your destiny.
For Galen has said in some of his advice, do not treat a bad illness lest you be called bad doctors.
And this text is divided into three gates.
The First Gate.
In the furnace by fire, and in the sharp medicine, hastily prepared from ancient times to modern days, and pictures of instruments and furnaces for cauterizing, and all that is needed with the hand.
The Second Gate.
In incisions, cuts, venesection, cupping and bloodletting, and in surgical wounds, removing arrows and the like, all of it hastily prepared and ordered, and pictures of instruments.
The Third Gate.
In cupping and trephining, and in treating the scrofula and the like, all of it hastily prepared from ancient times to modern days, and pictures of instruments.
The First Gate.
In Cauterizing.
And before mentioning its use, it is necessary to mention the way of its benefit and harm, and in which temperament it is used.
And I say that the discussion about the way of the benefit and harm of cauterizing is a long speech, and a precise science, and a subtle secret, and a group of wise men have spoken about it.
And they disagreed in it, and I have shortened their little speech for fear of lengthening.
I say that honey is beneficial in general for any bad temperament, whether with a substance or without it, except for two temperaments: the hot temperament without a substance and the cold temperament without a substance.
As for the cold temperament with a substance, they have differed regarding it; some have said that honey is beneficial in it, while others have contradicted them saying that honey does not cure an illness which is due to heat and cold.
And it is unlikely that someone suffering from a hot and cold illness would be cured by a hot and cold medicine. And the one who contradicts [this] has said that honey with fire may benefit someone suffering from a hot and cold illness which occurs in the bodies of people. For when you have mixed the body and moisture of man with the temperament of fire, the body of man becomes cold.
And I say, because experience has shown me this many times, except that it should not be imagined by one who does not know and is not experienced in the matter of honey. And I have considered the differences in temperaments among people, and the condition of illnesses themselves, their causes and symptoms, and the length of their time.
And as for the other temperaments, have no fear from them, especially cold and moist illnesses; all physicians have agreed on this and have not disagreed that honey is beneficial in them.
Know, my son, that the fire treatment with honey is a secret of healing and its excellence over the hot medicine treatment because fire is a pure essence that does not exceed the action of the limb it cooks, nor does it harm another connected limb except for a slight damage.
And the honey treatment with hot medicine can exceed its action to what is beyond the limbs, and perhaps it will cause a disease in the limb that is hard to cure, and perhaps it will kill; but fire, because of its nobility and the purity of its essence, does not do this except if it is excessive.
It has been proven to us through experience, the length of service and care for craftsmanship and standing on the facts of the case.
So I have refrained from lengthy speech, and if not for the fact that it would not befit this book, I would have told you in secret, more obscurely and by what manner it is done on the bodies and repelled with diseases with philosophical words, evident proofs to make you understand.
Know, my sons, that they have differed in the time suitable for the cautery and have made the best time to be the spring season.
And I say that the cautery can be suitable in every time, so that the damage caused by time is absorbed into the benefit which is brought about by the cautery. And especially if the cautery is for strong and severe pains that cannot be delayed, because of fear that it will follow with more intense suffering which is worse than the damage caused by time.
And do not think, my sons, that the cautery which cures a disease so that it will never return again is a remedy.
And you are not to think that the cautery is merely a remedy which adjusts the temperament and dries up the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
Except that the cautery is preferred over medicine by its quick success, strong effect and sharp power.
And it is possible that the disease may return after a time, according to the temperament of the patient and his constitution and strength, and what accumulates in him from impurities and neglecting himself in acquiring them from food and things like that from the causes.
God forbid that the disease in which the cautery is used is a mild disease and in an organ with little impurities and moistures. Similar to the relief of dental caries from pain and the like, it may not return in this case, at least.
And as for the saying of the common people that the tooth is the last remedy, it is a true saying, but not in what they say by which they believe that there is no cure that benefits either with medicine or without.
And the meaning of that the tooth is the last remedy, is that we have used types of treatments for a certain illness and those drugs did not benefit then we use the tooth as a cure, and from this comes the saying that the tooth is the last remedy. No, in the sense which the common people and most of the ignorant physicians have gone to.
And the early ones have mentioned that the tooth made of gold is better than the tooth made of iron, and they said this because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said it does not spoil the place of the tooth, which is not at all.
Because I have tried that, and found it to do so in some teeth rather than others, and the tooth with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, except that if you heat the alloy in the fire of gold, you will not know when you protect from the fire that causes redness of the gold.
And because cold rushes to it quickly, and if you increase on it in heat it melts in the fire, and if you hesitate it fails, so the craftsman falls into trouble because of that, for this reason the tooth made of iron has become quickest and nearest to the right in our practice, God willing.
And I have regulated this chapter on the tooth into sections that I have arranged from head to foot, so it may be easy for the student who wants it, God willing.
The first section.
In the tooth of the head, one tooth.
This remedy is useful against the dampness and coldness which cause headaches, frequent fevers on the head towards the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain. In general, for every disease caused by coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, lethargy and similar afflictions.
An image of this remedy is to have the physician first order a purging draught that cleanses the head, three nights or four as the physician deems necessary for the strength and condition of his patient.
Then have him shave his head with a razor, then make him sit before you reclining, with his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your finger at the base of his nose between his eyes, and where you reach with the middle finger mark that place with a pin.
Then light the resinous torch which this picture shows.
Reveal from the bone as much as a fistful of hair or a nut, then lift your hand if it comes loose otherwise go back with the same instrument or something else if it becomes cold. Until you see from the bone what I have told you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, let him drink a dose of it, put a poultice on the place and leave it for three days.
Then load a poultice soaked in fat on him and leave it until the pricking from the burning goes away then treat him with the greasy ointment until he is cured if God wills.
And they said that an open wound, as soon as it becomes foul, lets out the badness and is better and more beneficial.
And some of them mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone and hold the torch until a part of the thickness of the bone is burned, then it will be stripped after that what has been burned from the bone is treated.
They said it should be irrigated abundantly until it has a strong effect on the bone, so that it falls from the bone like the small gemstone or small pearl. They claimed that vapor rises from that place and the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals. I do not see these two kinds of irrigation at all except in some people, and through deceit and leaving me better and safer if it were to occur. The head swells when its natural connection is disrupted, as we have seen in the rest of the organs.
And especially when the patient's head is weak by nature. The first kind of irrigation is safer and better in my opinion, and I have seen it work well, so try it if Allah wills.
The second chapter.
In the irrigation of the head also.
If a persistent and prolonged headache occurs in the patient, along with chronic pain, and he has used bandages, poultices, plaster casts, paints, dressings, especially if one type of irrigation that we described was tried on him without benefiting him from it, then look. If the patient's head is strong in constitution and not weak, and he finds a severe burning sensation, then irrigate him with another kind of irrigation on top of that lightly. Then irrigate each of his temples with a kind of irrigation until the skin thickness is reduced and the amount that we described on the bone becomes apparent. And irrigate a kind of irrigation in the back of his head in the place known as the saw, and lighten your hand in this, do not expose the bone because the patient will find it painful, unlike all other head irrigations, and I will mention this irrigation in its place.
And it is desirable that the irrigating instrument used for the temples and back of the head be softer than the one used for the middle of the head, and this is its shape.
Chapter Three.
In a case of chronic suppurating fistula.
If a wound occurs on the head accompanied by headache and headache extending to the eye, the healer should purge it with cleansing medicines for the head, and apply all other treatments mentioned in Tashbih al-Amradd as was said previously. If that does not succeed, apply cauterization to both faces. Either by applying the hot caustic drug or with iron.
And as for cauterizing with the hot drug, take a single clove of garlic, peel it and cut its edges from both sides, then make an incision in the place of the pain on the forehead with a wide probe until there is a space under the skin that will hold the clove.
Then it is put under the skin until it disappears, then a strong thread is tied over it tightly and left for as long as fifteen days, then it is removed and the garlic taken out. The wound is left for two or three days, then it is covered.
Over it a string soaked in fat is applied until the area becomes septic, then it is treated with ointment until it heals, if God wills. And if you wish, do this with some of the caustic medicines that I mentioned in chapter eighteen on caustics.
And as for cauterizing it with iron, do so in this manner: Protect the metal instrument that looks like:.
It is called the iron rod, the mizmar, because its head resembles a reed with some bulging and in its middle is a small nail.
Then you place it on the site of the wound, and hold your hand steady as you rotate the iron rod a little at a time, and the amount that burns through the thickness of the skin is about half of it. Then you raise your hand so that the vein beneath does not burn and cause bleeding, then soak a string in salt water and place it on the site and leave it for three days. Then take the quill with fat then treat it with ointment until it is healed if God wills.
And if you wish to cut this joint with the sharp side of the scalpel coming from the lancet and to beware of cutting the artery in this non-chronic joint.
The Fourth Chapter.
In a chronic joint.
If you have treated the joint with what has been mentioned from the preceding treatment and what has been mentioned in dividing the diseases, and the treatment has not benefited and you have seen that which cannot be treated by applying the first treatment with medicine or cutting with fire. You must preserve the sharp lancet until it whitens, then you learn on the place of pain with a stroke as long as half a finger or so and leave your hand once and pull it tightly until you cut the artery and reach towards the bone.
But you must beware of cutting the jaw that moves when chewing so as to burn the muscle or the nerve driving it, causing twitching.
And be on guard and beware of arterial bleeding which you have cut because in its cutting is a pitfall. Especially for one who is ignorant of what he does and has not been proven by the way and to leave the work first.
And the treatment of bleeding from the artery on its face will be mentioned in its place in this book if God wills, if you see that which cannot be treated by this cutting.
And if you saw the body of the patient being swollen, then apply the lancet in the middle of the head as we have described and treat the wound until it is healed if God wills.
And if you wish, then use the lancet which we have mentioned in the chapter of cutting the vein with the lancet having two sharp edges because it is a better and safer cut than this.
The Fifth Chapter.
In ears which are inflamed.
If there occurs in the ear inflammation due to cold and it has been treated with poultices and all the treatment which we mentioned in the classification, but the pain does not go away, then clean out the cavity which is called the point shown in this drawing.
Then cauterize it with it after heating it, around the ears all over as they turn or around them both if there is pain in both. And it is removed from the beginning of the ear a little after the place has been marked with ink, and the caustic is as much as ten points in each ear or so, then the places are treated until they heal if God wills.
The Sixth Chapter.
In cauterizing the deafness.
The deafness which is treated with caustic is from the type which occurs from phlegm as I mentioned in the classification of diseases.
And a caustic is avoided for the type that occurs from membranous and convulsions of the nerve.
If you have treated this type of deafness with ceruse and safflower and mustard paste, but your treatment did not help, then the patient should be cauterized with three caustics. One at the root of the ear and the second a little below the nostril and the third at the meeting of the lips.
And make your caustic opposite to the sick side because relaxation occurs on the healthy side.
And a drawing of the caustic is that you apply it to the tip of the upper ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another one in the nostril, and its length should be as much as the eyebrow.
You lower your hand with the caustic until you burn as much of the skin as half its thickness, and this is a drawing of the cautery and it is a type of scorifying which we mentioned earlier but it is a little softer than that, as you see. It is necessary that the needle be in it a little thicker, then treat the place as was mentioned above until it heals with God's will.
Chapter Seven.
In case of chronic ulcers.
If you have treated the ulcer and done what was mentioned to us, but your treatment did not succeed and it is not due to fever, then take four cauterizations. On every hundredth of his head a cauterization and a cauterization in the middle of the head as we mentioned and a cauterization on the nape of his neck as was said before.
The recipe for the cautery as mentioned, and also he may cauterize a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach, it will be more effective, then treat as was said before.
Chapter Eight.
In case of forgetfulness (or perhaps "forgetting" being a euphemism for mental illness) .
The one who is from phlegm should be given the patient a drink first of large purging herbs for the brain.
Then he should shave his whole head and carry on the back of his neck a poultice of turmeric written in an article for indolence it is repeated sometimes because it is a cure.
And do the same on the rank mentioned there exactly then it is blameless, otherwise take three cauterizations on the back of his head they should be arranged from the top of the head to the neck.
Make a thickness of a finger between each cauterization and the next one then treat the cauterizations as was said before, if you wanted to increase it and the patient is able for that then take the middle cauterization.
If you wanted to increase it then take on the hundredths and treat him until he heals, and the cautery is olive-like in the form that was mentioned before.
Chapter Nine.
In case of apoplexy and relaxation of all the body.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head with aloe and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head and put three stitches in the middle of the head and one on each horn of the head and one at its back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if he was in a paralysis of relaxation of the body and it is necessary for him more than that and the patient is liable to this and the disease is strong and firm, then put four stitches on the vertebrae of his back. And inform him to put stitches until they burn most of his skin and raise your hand then treat him as mentioned before until he recovers if God wills, and the stitches should be olive green.
The Tenth Chapter.
In case of epilepsy.
It is necessary to clean his brain first with large aloe and all the treatment which we mentioned in the classification if the patient is big and liable to take medicine.
But if he is a boy who cannot take medicine, then the cathartic and cleansing emetic for the brain should be used before that by many days with his nourishment being improved.
Then shave his head and put a single stitch in the middle of the head as mentioned before, and another stitch at its back. And on each horn of his head, a stitch, if the patient is strong and liable to it, then put the stitches which we mentioned in the case of paralysis of relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back, and the stitches should be olive green as mentioned previously.
If the patient is a boy then make the stitches gentle in this form.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In case of malnutrition.
If the cause of malnutrition is foul humidity and thick phlegm, administer to him the medications we mentioned for one with epilepsy.
If the cause of malnutrition is a tendency towards blackness and the body of the patient is wet and foul, purify his brain as mentioned in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, then make a tight cake from flax like a circle and place it in the middle of his head; the patient sits upright with it grasped on all sides. Then take one pound of old goat fat.
Then heat it on the fire with moderate heat until the finger can be placed in it; then pour it into the middle of his head, in the circle, and leave it until it cools. You do this for the patient once a week along with his other good treatment, until he is cured, if God wills.
And if you wish to cool him, put many small pieces of ice without grasping the mortar with your hand but rather with a spoon; for this kind of medicine moistens the brain moderately.
Then place on him a cloth that has been dipped in lard or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In case of water flowing into the eye.
If you find that water has flowed into the eye at its onset, as indicated by the signs mentioned in the division, first purify his head and protect him from all moisture, then bathe him in a bath immediately for some days.
Then shave his head and administer a medication in the middle of the head, then apply two medications on the temples if water flowed into both eyes initially or into one eye alone if it flowed into only one.
Then cut with the mortar all the veins and nerves under the skin, so that the medications be placed in them from the width of the temples, and preserve him from bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it off from the place with any treatment you can and we will come to wisdom in ligating the blood vessels and cutting them and cautioning against bleeding.
And it may have a boil beneath the bones, two severe ones.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
For chronic tears.
If the eye discharge is chronic and permanent, and it comes from the vessels and blood vessels that are outside the head and you have found out that this is due to a large amount of thick cold mucus then apply the remedy I have described for running water. A poultice on the middle of the head and two poultices on the temples and two poultices under the bones at the back of the head, and if you need to add more then apply a poultice each side of the eyebrow with a small cloth.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
For a nasal polyp.
If you have treated him with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment has not been successful then take him to a wetter place for three nights, then shave his head and apply the middle poultice with an olive cloth. Then apply with a chamomile cloth two poultices above the eyebrows under the hair a little and caution from the blood vessel, do not cut it, and this is the picture of the chamomile.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
For a poultice to relax the eyelid.
If the eyelid has relaxed due to an illness or moisture then apply a poultice to the eyelid with this helianthus cloth.
And if you want then apply above the eyebrows a little two poultices in each direction and separate from the temples and let the length of each poultice be on the length of an eyebrow.
Do not overdo with your hand, but to the extent that a third of the skin burns, and the appearance of the cauterizing is like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
For cataract in the eyelid.
If its threads have turned inside first, then the cauterizing within it is of two types. Either the cauterizing with fire or the cauterizing with a burning medicine, as for the cauterizing with fire then the operator should command that the threads be left before doing so if they are of those which he removes in order to let them lengthen and even out.
If they are removed when it is sprouting, then bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until it has grown. When it has grown and evened out, put the head of the operator in your hand, then teach him on the eyelid with ink an indication like the shape of the leaf of Asa tree.
The indication begins close to the threads, then place a cotton swab soaked in egg white or the spittle of a gazelle under the eyelid, and protect the shape of this cauterization.
Then cauterize on the shape which you taught him a little at a time, many times until the surface of the skin which is in the shape of the leaf of Asa tree all burns and becomes clear, and the sign of the success of your work that you see the eyelid has firmed up and the hair has risen from the fold of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave him for three days, then place a cotton swab with fat on it until the hairs of Khashkrish fall out, then treat him with ointment until he recovers if God wills it, in case some hair returns after time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the cauterizing on that place as you did first, and if there is hair in the lower eyelid then burn it until it returns to its natural place without harming the eye's hair, and as for cauterizing with a burning medicine then it is that you command the operator to leave the threads until they lengthen and even out.
Then make a figure from paper of a linen cloth. And take from the accustomed soap and unextinguished gypsum, each a weight equal to a dinar or about that, grind them together well and do this with a mill so they don't dry out. Then spread some of it on the paper you made like a linen cloth and put it on one eye or both. And put under the eye a moistened swab in white egg whites and the tip of the probe in your stone.
And put your thumb on top of the medicine and compress it a little while you move it whenever the probe finds the bitterness of the medicine because it finds a sting like fire. As long as it finds the sting, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. If the sting subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen like it rises when burned with fire or by cuts. If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine did not take effect and was not absorbed until you complete your work and scorch the eye, then put on it a cotton soaked in fat so that the blister of burn disappears.
Then treat it with ointment or its equivalent until it heals. And you must be extremely cautious when working so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and hair grows inside the eye.
Then reapply the medicine to that place in the eyelid which relaxed especially as you did at first, then treat it until it heals. And this is an image of a linen cloth.
Know that the eyes of people can differ in size and largeness, so according to that let your treatment be, and do not think that the correct way is easy for one who has an ulcer with this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
Regarding the transparent membrane which is exposed in the eye's corner.
If you treated the transparent membrane with what we have mentioned in the sections on diseases, and your treatment was not effective, it should be applied with this quality.
The patient should place his head in your lap and a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it firmly so that it does not move or strike against anything.
Then you put a wet cloth in the white of egg or in the saliva of the hyena on his eyes, then cover the compress which is in this form.
It should be folded like the shape of a swan's feather from one end which is the part with the membrane, and if you wish it to be perforated at the other end and if you wish it to be sealed like a jar, but this foldable one is better for your treatment, God willing.
Then you squeeze the transparent membrane if it is open, and let out its contents and clean it, or if it is not open then you should open it and take out its pus, then put the compress on it which is very tightly held by your hand until you reach the bone.
And keep your hand a little away from the membrane, from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient becomes anxious and the compress falls into the corner of the eye and damages it. And if you reach the bone with the first treatment, and otherwise, then redo the compress again as needed.
And leave it for three days, then put on him a cloth with fat and treat him with the dried ointment until he is cured. And if forty days pass and he does not get well, then put on him the sharp and potent medicine until the bone is revealed, and refer him to what will be mentioned about this in its chapter, God willing.
And another method of treating the transparent membrane mentioned by some earlier people, is to make an incision on the place of the membrane and then put a thin cup in the same cut.
You place in it the weight of a dinar of molten lead, and hold your hand with a good firm grasp. The patient should not stir at all, lest the molten lead run into his eye. You should put on the eye of the patient a moistened cotton pad, either in the white of an egg or in water.
If the lead corrodes the navel, it burns its place and cures it in a wonderful manner. If the navel is cured with what we have mentioned from treatment and medication, then that is good. Otherwise, there must be the use of an incision into the nostril and returning the navel to the course of the nostril as will come next about this.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
A treatment for a cut lip.
A split in the lip is often called a "shu'rah" and especially so in the lips of children, for it often occurs. If you treated this split as we mentioned in its division but the treatment was unsuccessful, then bring near a small, thin iron blade like this.
Its hollow is against the edge of the blade, then you place it over the splint with the wheel until the treatment reaches the depth of the split. Then treat it with cauterization until it heals, God willing.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
A treatment for a boil occurring in the mouth.
If there appears in the root of the gum or in the tonsils or at the roots of the teeth a swelling, then it becomes an abscess and bursts and became a foul-smelling boil, then you treated it but the treatment was unsuccessful, then you should bring near a cautery to fit into the boil.
Then you insert it into the boil, heated, through a puncture in the boil and hold your hand until the cautery, covered, reaches its top and bottom. You do that once or twice then treat it after that with what we have mentioned from treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the material (tissue) is dry and has been evacuated, then it is sufficient. Otherwise, one must explore the site and remove the putrid bone as will be mentioned in its chapter if God wills.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In loosened fistulas and gaping ulcers.
If the ulcer has loosened due to moisture and the fistulas have been moved and treated with medicines but did not heal, then place the end of the instrument on your knee before you shape the handle which will be shown after this, after placing the tube over the molar.
Then the instrument with a handle, warmed up by turning a wheel, is inserted into it and your hand is held firm until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. Then you raise your hand and repeat the process as desired. Then the patient fills his mouth with saltwater.
And hold it for an hour, and then throw him. For the moving tooth will be fixed and the loosened ulcer will tighten, and dry out the rotten moisture.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In cases of severe toothache.
If the toothache is from cold or there are worms and treatment with medicines did not heal it, then a poultice is applied on the two cheeks either a poultice of fat or a poultice by fire.
As for the poultice of fat, take cow's fat and boil it in an iron basin or a caldron. Then take a thread and wrap it on one end of the stick then immerse it in the melted fat and put it on the painful tooth by turning the wheel and hold it until it cools down.
Then repeat it several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. And if you want to immerse a wool or thread in cold fat and put it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron shield over it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterization with fire, this is that you should proceed to a copper or iron tube and it will be in its contents some thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the instrument. Then tie the cloth which comes in its shape and put it on the same side and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times.
For the pain will go either with its sight on that day or another, and it is advisable after that cauterization to fill the instrument's mouth with good fat and keep it for an hour then discharge it, and this is the shape of the cautery.
It will be cauterized at any point you wish and as best you can; and this is the shape of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On cauterizing pigs.
If the pigs are full of phlegm and cold moisture and have not been seasoned with medicine to be cooked quickly, then tie the hollow cautery which has this shape, the ends being perforated.
Let the smoke come out from the other end at the cauterization, and put it covered on the same boil once or twice if needed until it reaches the depth of the boil; and if the boil is small then make the cautery to the size of the boil.
Then leave it for three days and carry a cord soaked in fat on top of it until what has burned with fire is gone then treat it with ointment and bandages until it clears up, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
On cauterizing of congestion of the chest and shortness of breath.
If the moisture has overcome the trachea and especially if that is accompanied by cold temperament, it is advisable to cause the instrument to discharge with gentle medicines first, then cauterize it with a cautery in a puncture of the nape at the base of the larynx in the lower place.
Be careful not to apply the cauterizer to the joints, and do not burn more than half of the skin. Then apply another pad at the junction of the neck in the last hair from the side that has been mentioned, making a wavy mark on the part that was previously mentioned.
Then treat it as mentioned until it heals by God's will.
Chapter Twenty-fourth.
For the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moistness, and it is not accompanied by fever or phlegm, and the illness is chronic, then apply a pad on top of the clavicles in the lower concave hollows and another pad in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the pad should be wavy, like the shape mentioned before. And if you wish, it can have dots with the kind of caustic that is called a dot, and its form has been mentioned in the treatment of ear pain, and the dots should number about thirty.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until he heals. And you can make a pad of three branches like this shape and hasten to apply the cauterizer with it, because you can cauterize three pads at once with it, and this is the form of the pad.
Chapter Twenty-fifth.
For the cauterization of dropsy.
If the shoulder joint slips out due to wet and running discharges, or it does not stay in place when returned until it becomes a habit to slip again at the slightest movement, as we have seen, then it should be put back first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the right side, then the skin inside the joint is lifted up with your left hand's fingers if the joint has slipped inwards.
Then cover with the cloth having two folds the one which its form is shown here.
Then pound with it the skin until it penetrates to the other side and the form of the pounding appears four poundings, and it can be pounded with a cloth having three folds so that the form of the pounding is six poundings and the folds are on the surface of the wound.
And this is the picture of the cloth having three folds.
And one can be added to this number, so the poundings will be eight. Then it is carried on top of the pounded parts with crushed pepper and salt then bandaged with a warm wet cloth and the limb is not moved until it is strong, and if there was an avulsion above that happens rarely.
So pound on the hip one well-ribbed pounding or many poundings with a dotting so that the joint gets strong and the moisture goes away and the swelling subsides.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
In the pounding of the stomach.
If there occurs in the stomach a coagulation and much moisture until it comes out of its temperament and frequent discharges to it and it was treated with types of treatment but did not cure then the swelling should lie on his back and extend his legs and hands then pound him three poundings. A pounding under the middle of the chest by a finger with a ribbed pounder and two poundings below one side each until the form of the poundings appears triangular and is kept apart so that they do not meet when they congeal and the depth of the pounding is one third of the thickness of the skin and it will be in the shape.
On this form and to this depth without more.
And if you wished pound it one big pounding in the middle of the stomach on this form.
The mold in which this medicine is pounded into the shape of a circle such as shown here.
And the stomach is pounded into dots for him who fears from this medicine, and that is to draw dots on the back of the mortar in which he wants to pound it with a pointed pounding stone then pound it with a pointed mortar then treat it with the treatment that was mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In the cold liver medicine.
If someone is shown from the liver and has pain due to coldness and dampness or a bitter wind until it came out of its natural temperament an excessive exit and was treated with what we mentioned in the classification, but this did not heal. It is incumbent on the patient to lie down and pound three medicines with ink on his chest, of this quantity and shape, over the liver below the arm pits where the human arm ends.
And after each pounding and every pounding with the thickness of a finger, and the medicine will be on the length of the body straight up and do not hold your hand to the mortar yes.
And the quantity that burns from the thickness of the skin is half, and it will be as much. The patient should stand on his feet if he cannot stand then be lying down with his legs extended and arms raised, and this is a picture of the pounding stone.
And you can pound these medicines with a mortar and pestle if you have a craftsman with skill and caution so that the medicine does not penetrate too deeply into the skin and burn it all and reach the abdomen and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin, therefore be cautious.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In swelling of the liver with medicine.
If a tumour is shown in the liver and you wanted to know if that swelling was in the fatty part of the liver or in its membranes, then it would be found by the doctor that if it was in the fatty part of the liver then he finds him heavy and painful without intensity.
If there is a tumor in the hepatic duct, with the pain being very severe, and you have seen that the doctors have failed to treat it, then the patient should lie on his back with his head raised. You should apply catgut to the hot place.
Then cover the cauterizer in the fire, and it is the cauterizer which resembles a millstone. This is its shape. Then cauterize it with one burn until the skin is all burnt and the burn ends at the peritoneum so that the thread comes out entirely, then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.
And this kind of cauterization is not permissible to be used except by one who has been on the path of medical practice for a long time and has practiced these diseases many times through experience, then he offers to do something like this and leaving it up to me is better.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the cauterization of the hernia.
The ancients mentioned the cauterization with the roots of Zarawand for the cold hernia, and that it is taken from the long dry root of Zarawand one root as long as you find it, thicker than a finger, then soak it in oil and heat it up. Then cauterize with one burn in the middle of where the ribcage connects to the neck, and two small burns slightly slanted towards the area under the beard, and two large burns between the third and fourth ribs.
And two also in between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly slanted towards the back a little, and another burn in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach, and three burns from behind one in between the shoulders and two on either side of it below the burn that will be in between the hands.
And it is not advisable to deepen your hand with the cauterizer, but rather let it be on the surface of the skin, somewhat reddened. And some of the ancients mentioned that there are people who use an iron cauterizer resembling a millstone and wrap it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the same tumor.
The swelling comes out, as we mentioned in the case of the liver tumour, and in this case from the boil-like abscesses either the patient dies at his hour or is exposed to a pustule with no cure.
Chapter thirty.
In an abscess of the spleen.
If you have treated the illness of the spleen with what we mentioned in the classification and your treatment did not succeed, then the abscess is of three forms, all correct. One of them is that you should cauterize it with three or four cauteries laid out along the length of the spleen.
As in the cauteries of the liver, which we have shown its shape, and it is between each cauterization a space equal to or slightly more than the thickness of a finger. And the manner of cauterizing is the same as that mentioned in the cautery of the liver; whether deep or shallow, with the patient lying on his back.
And the other form is in the armpit, where you raise the skin over the spleen from the end of the patient's left arm and lift the skin so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then you insert the forceps well protected until they penetrate on the other side, then take out the cauterizer and there will be four cauteries. And if you want to cauterize with the other cauterizer of three silver threads.
Then treat the place of the cauterization after leaving it to suppurate for a few days, as this is more successful than all that has been mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter thirty-one.
In an abscess of dropsy.
The cauterization is beneficial only in the zekky dropsy, if you have treated the dropsical patient with what we mentioned in the classification and your treatment did not succeed then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach.
Another incision on the liver and another on the spleen, two behind his back between the vertebrae one next to his chest and another next to his stomach. It will be according to the depth of the incision close to a finger's thickness of skin. Then the incision is left open for a long time to allow pus to drain.
The surgeon should not neglect the treatment after the incision in what is suitable, so that the pus gathering comes to him quickly and he is cured. The shape of the knife which is used for cutting through the ribs will be curved as its previous form, and the one used for cutting through the vertebrae will be olive-shaped.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
For the incision of the feet and legs.
If they became inflamed at the ankle and were filled with yellowish fluid, it is necessary to make an incision on the back of the foot in the spot between the tendons.
Hold your hand with the knife and do not twist it, then lift your hand and do not return it at all; for the yellowish fluid will be drained out and the knife will remain in this shape.
Then incisions are made on the legs, two incisions in each leg. The incision is made with the sharp edge of the knife and is made along the length of the leg, one under the knee and another lower down towards the middle of the leg. And on each thigh, two incisions are made.
Leave the incision open without treatment for a long time so that the fluid drains out, then treat it with what has been mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
For the incision of dysentery.
If the dysentery is due to cold and humidity until one's strength and digestion are weakened, and those in the stomach and intestines become feeble, and despite being treated with various remedies he did not recover, and you see the patient is capable of undergoing an incision, cut a large incision on his abdomen. For what has been mentioned concerning the stomach, with a circular scraper and four knives around the suture. Softening it with a gentle mallet-scraper and a knife on top of the intestines, large or two small ones.
If you see the fluids abundant and the intestines full of it, then insert a knife into the groin and a knife into every region. Perhaps you may add two small knives next to the large one near the stomach; it is a successful remedy which will not fail by the will of God.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
For a scraper for hemorrhoids that are seated.
If they are seated hemorrhoids, many or one, and they are of thick, cold or foul liquids, and if the treatment mentioned in the division has not been successful, then insert three knives under the lower part of the back, below the table, slightly like a triangle.
And a knife under the suture, like two fingers. If you estimated that his stomach has chilled and his food does not digest, and if you see his face disfigured, then insert on the stomach a large knife as mentioned before, and a kidney knife. And another one on his belly with a mallet-scraper, and leave the knife open for some time then treat him until he recovers by the will of God.
The thirty-fifth chapter.
For a scraper for abscesses.
After cutting it, if the abscess has been cut, then warm the scraper that resembles a file, then insert it heated into the same abscess that has been cut and press with your finger until the scraper reaches the duct of pus from which the blood is flowing, do this once or twice.
If the abscesses are many, then insert each one with a knife as we have described, and treat them with ointments that suit them until they recover. And if you inserted it with a large knife on cotton was more effective in terms of benefit.
Chapter Thirty-sixth.
In the case of a patient who has an abscess in the seat and its environs.
If the abscess does not yield to incision and the treatment we have described for it, then perhaps he is clear of the abscess. And if one of them becomes purulent with foul discharge, first you should probe him with a fine cannula.
Then know the depth of it by the cannula, then make a plug like a millstone, and insert it firmly into the abscess on the same level as the depth of the cannula that you put in it, and redo the abscess until all the foul bodies burn up entirely two or three times as much as needed.
And it is preserved from burning a nerve if there is one, or a large blood vessel; and if the abscess runs into the bladder stone or into the rectum.
You should be careful about these places, and you only do that if the abscess is in a fatty place and you have estimated that it is not connected to anything else. Then treat the area until it heals; and if the area becomes closed off and the material stops flowing from it for a long time, then know that he has completely recovered.
And if the material does not stop flowing from it, then know that it is connected to something or there is a foul bone in its depth or something like that which will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-seventh.
In the case of an abscess of the kidney.
If it happens in the kidney and there is pain from cold or severe indigestion, due to which the patient's pulse is weak, then you should compress him with the compress of two stones on the same level as the kidney like a single compress for each kidney by the compress made from a figwood stick, and perhaps you can put a third one in the middle, so three compresses are lined up, and this is more beneficial.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
In the bladder case.
If a weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to coldness and wetness, until it is unable to retain the catheter for urine, place a poultice below the bed on the bladder where the pubic hair begins; a poultice on the right side of the bed and another on his left.
And it will be on both sides of the poultice according to the extent that the thumb is bent; a poultice at the lower back or two if necessary, and the compresses being crescent-shaped as mentioned before.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
In a poultice for the uterus.
If something happens in the uterus from coldness and wetness, it will resist the cord and its flesh will rot and its delivery will be difficult or painful when it comes, then three poultices should be applied around the bed as we mentioned in the case of the bladder. And a poultice on cotton at the lower back or two, and the compress being crescent-shaped.
The fortieth chapter.
In a poultice for hip dislocation.
Rheumatic discharges can be directed towards the seat of the hip, so that it will become a reason for its displacement, and the sign is when one leg becomes longer than the other if they are put together; and you find in this place the seat of the dislocation empty, then apply a poultice to the seat of the hip itself in the shape of a circle.
After having applied the mud around the seat as it revolves, so that the seat falls in the middle of the circle; and the compress which is presented in the case of the stomach if this compress is not available, then apply three poultices with the large oleo-pine compress.
And shape the poultice to a depth according to the thickness of all the skin, then treat it until it cures if God wills.
Chapter Forty-two.
For the piles.
If there occurs pain and inflammation in the perineum, and this is due to coldness and catarrh, and the treatment mentioned in the section has not been effective, and time has elapsed, then it is advisable that the cause of the trouble be relieved from thick mucus by means of the oil of the mastic or the oil of the Saburah and similar things.
Then cauterize it and apply the cautery to the pile itself on two forms, either a caustic or fire. The cauterization by fire is performed on many faces, one of them being that you apply three caustic pieces in this shape.
It becomes a healthy depth and there will be, between each caustic piece and the next one, a thickness equal to that of the finger. The cautery is olive-like. A caustic may also be applied in the middle on the top of the perineum itself so that it becomes four pieces. If you wish, cauterize with a ring like that mentioned in the cauterization for cutting the perineum, one piece.
In order for the ring to encircle all of the perineum and burn all its thickness, this is the form of cauterization in piles if the pain is constant on the perineum itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then cauterize two pieces, one on the thigh in the place indicated by the pain itself and another above the perineum with four fingers towards the external side a little. The cautery is very thin and the depth of the cauterization is only as thick as the skin.
And if it indicates that the pain extends to about the length of a foot, then cauterize where it indicated for you with a thin cautery point three or four or more times as needed. And if it indicates pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize there one thin cautery piece.
All vessels are preserved from cutting to the skin, until an artery or large vein is cauterized. This will leave a bad and prolonged ulcer on the wound.
And I have seen one person and another, in whom the vein was cut above the ankle and it ran to the wound. Then the leg swelled until gangrene reached the foot and all of it became putrid. And then diarrhoea and death occurred afterwards. If the pain is in both legs in the same manner.
And some of the wise men have mentioned making a catheter for an intestinal fistula, in this manner: it is made from metal and its diameter is half a finger's breadth. It has at its mouth thickness like that of a date stone or slightly less. Inside it there are two other catheters, one inside the other.
And there is a space of the breadth of a thumb between each catheter. The catheters are open on both sides and their height is around the breadth of one or two thumbs. It has a metal handle attached to them which holds them firm, this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it is red-hot, and then embers are placed upon the fistula, and the patient lies on the healthy side. Three rounded cauterizations are made at one time, and it is left for three days. Then it is plugged with fat and the wound is left open for a period of time.
This type of cauterization is rarely used because it is troublesome and its appearance is frightening, and most people do not have the patience for it. However, it is a good type of cauterization for someone who can endure it and suffers no harm from it.
And as for the cauterization by burning medicines, it is that you make two tubes resembling the pharynx, into which mercury or iron rods are placed.
There are two flaps of skin on them, one raised to a thickness of about the width of an index finger. The lower flap is open and so is the upper flap. Some part of each has been held in place against the other in this way.
Then you place them on the hip joint and the patient lies on his sound side, keeping your hand soft. You pour hot vinegar between the two circles and it is heated with a qaliya for a while. He holds it for about an hour, then he endures the burning and the pain.
Until the pain subsides, you then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the vinegar from the hip with sweet water. Then leave it for three days and put fat on it until the blackness of the burn fades away and let it go a few more days until the discharge ceases. For that is most beneficial.
Then you treat him with ointments until he heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, a poultice is made for him as was done on the hip, in the same way, and this is the characteristic of hot water and I have proved it in the chapter on treating diseases.
You take from the moist salt and unheated gypsum, each a part of one, crush them together and put them in a new pot that has been pierced with a small hole at the bottom, like the size of a reed. Then you place under the base of the pot another pot filled with a mixture.
You pour on the salt and gypsum from sweet water so that they are submerged by a finger. After you have kneaded them well with your hand, leave the pot until the hot water flows into the lower pot filled with mixture. Then collect all that water and pour it again over another layer of gypsum and another layer of salt also freshened up.
And it becomes very hot in its severity, it will be effective in many activities of medicine and in all the other members because it does to the effect of fire exactly. And among the medications that can be used on the hip is thapsia and honey of balsam with crushed gypsum and soap.
Galenus tells the story of an ancient man who healed the pain of the hip and the eruption of herpes, and greatly magnified his affair, claiming that he does not need any other treatment and cures him once.
Until he may enter the bath carried and come out cured, it being to take from the green chicory then if the green is not found the fresh one is taken and its root is crushed with some fat and put on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or in the thigh.
And it is bound and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels quiet from pain, then he is put into the bath. If his body becomes hot he is put into the tub. The pain goes away and he is cured by the will of God. And if he is not cured a plaster is made again on him after ten days once more.
And if he is cured by the will of God. And know that it should not be used for any patient with this remedy except after the body has been purged, and Dioscorides mentioned that if a goat's fleece is rubbed on herpes then it benefits from it.
And the wool is on this condition, taken and immersed in old oil, and put on the deep place which is between the palm of the hand and the elbow, being closer to the elbow. Then take a dried goat's fleece.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes a char, then put it on the wool and leave it until it extinguishes. Then take another one and do the same until he feels with his elbow to the hip that the pain has settled by the will of God. And this type of plaster is called the goat's fleece plaster.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
A plaster for the pain of the back.
The pain in the back may arise from many causes, either because of a fall or a blow or excessive purging and similar things, and it is due to an accumulation of cold, wet matter. And this plaster falls into this category alone.
What should be done when one uses a cold liquid substance is that, after emptying the abscess with a poultice of the same sort as before, he should apply three layers on top of the body where the pain is located, on the same surface of the table, after marking the place with ink in each layer five or more ointments, according to what appears to be the likelihood of the abscess and its strength.
And it should be a poultice with a pointed spatula and if you wish to strengthen it three or four poultices with an oval spatula of medium size in this form.
The Third Chapter on the Severest Type.
In a poultice to begin the fistula.
Often this affliction is seen in young children and the sign of its onset in a child is that difficulty breathing occurs when walking or moving, and you will find at the end of his vertebrae a knot that has appeared and rises above all other knots.
If you see this and want to stop it, apply with a spatula which is circular in shape like this. To take the poultice on every side of the vertebra evenly and if you wish to strengthen it around the vertebra with a pointed spatula one or three layers, and let the points be close together then treat the place until it clears up as we mentioned.
And beware of using the poultice in the fistula which is due to a rupture of the nerve.
The Fourth Chapter on the Forty-fourth Type.
In a poultice for gout and pains of the joints.
If the pains of the joints are due to cold dampness and have ascended to any member of the body, and if the pains occur in the legs, then it is the habit of physicians to call that a special type of gout.
If the cold gout has been treated with the types of treatment we mentioned in the classification and the pains have not gone away, then the poultice will remove them, and that is by applying it after draining around the joints of the legs many poultices, and the spatula should be olive-shaped of medium size like this.
If you need to prick a spot on the man's face, do it with the puncture awl. If the pains rise into the knees or to other joints, and this often happens, rub three or four times each time with this olive oil awl from every side.
If you need more than this rubbing, rub without deepening your hand with the awl; rather it should be as a thickening of the skin only. If the pains rise into the thighs or to the back, use what we mentioned from the awl in its place.
If the pains are only in the hands, puncture around the wrists like two rows. If the pains remain in the fingers, puncture them on every joint with a point and on the palm of the hand. If the pains rise after some days to the elbows or armpits.
Apply the oil to them from every side and let the surgeon not deviate from good treatment and taking of medicines, for if he eats well and expels phlegm then with this rubbing he will recover with God's will.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
For the treatment of boils.
If a boil appears in the groin and some of the discharge and pus have flowed into the testicles and this is happening soon, it is advisable to order the surgeon to let him abstain from eating for a day and to use what causes evacuation by stool from his abdomen.
Then he lies on his back in front of you and order him to hold himself until the pus or discharge becomes prominent, then push it with your finger, then mark with a pen under the boil on the os pubis an indication resembling half a circle with its ends towards the upper body.
Then protect this shape of the awl.
Until it comes white and expels the pus, then discharge the matter or pus into his abdomen. Then put a servant's hand on the place so that the matter does not come out again. The servant has placed himself between the surgeon's legs and I have placed a cushion under him and another servant has tied his legs.
Finally, he takes hold of the patient's chest with both hands. Then, the instrument is lowered onto the same mark and a pressure is applied with it standing upright until the bone is reached or returned to its place again if it was not reached on the first try.
And be careful not to press the instrument too hard while you are chipping, so that it does not burn him. For if this happens to the patient either death or a great fracture will result. And know that whenever you do not reach the bone with the chisel your operation has failed. And the chisels for children should be soft on their limbs and for adults on theirs.
Then treat the place of chipping with fat for three days until the redness goes away, then treat it with bandages until it heals. And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
And it is necessary to make his food for the duration of his treatment soft, so that the contents do not emerge when he defecates or urinates. Then if he wants to get up after forty days use a strong bandage and hold him fast for another forty days, and reduce his fatigue, fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.
For if he is treated in this way, he will be completely healed, God willing. And I will mention the treatment of an abscess by cutting into it through its opening, God willing. And as for the perforation that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and was initial, if you want it not to increase, then make a straight chisel incision from it according to its size. And make an incision in the skin like a third of it, then treat it as we mentioned, for he will not increase, God willing. And some of the earlier ones have mentioned that they would chisel out the perforation with a triangular chisel in this form.
After you have learned to cut with the styptics and there becomes a line on the upper side of the incision and another line down and you lower your hand in the middle with one firm stroke, the first finger being easier and better if God wills.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
On The Scissors.
If an injury occurs in some organs due to a fall or blow and the pain persists for a long time and treatment with medicine does not cure it, one should then apply pressure with a blunt instrument; every organ should be compressed according to its size, weakness and strength.
And if the pain and swelling subside from it then he is cured of the first pressure; otherwise, one should apply the pressure again to it because it is customary for these pains to move from the organ to what is next to it so one should follow them with the pressure until the sick part heals.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
On The Scarring of Leprosy.
But those afflicted with leprosy may benefit from the pressure greatly, especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to putrefaction of phlegm and blackness.
If you want to treat him with pressure, then look; if the leprosy is initial and you have treated it as mentioned in the classification and it has not decreased or stopped and there was a fear that corruption would take over all his juices, then compress on the head five pressures. The first in the middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples and one from behind on the prominence of the nape, and press with the pressure a little deeply so that it affects the bone with a slight effect.
And it will peel off from him scales which are easily exhaling heavy fumes and also compressing it with the same pressure on the navel as mentioned above; and if the leprosy has continued on the sick part and a clear sign of it appears, then one should compress these pressures that were mentioned on the head. Bandages on the tip of the nose, two bandages on the cheeks, two bandages on the neck vertebrae, six on the back vertebrae and a large one on the scrotum when the penis is limp, another above it in the same table, two on each thigh, one. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the armpits and compressing on every joint of his fingers and feet bandage and on every heel of his feet and wrist of his hands.
And he must be protected from the nerve behind the heels lest they be hurt. And a bandage can be put on the shin bone, another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver. Know that the more bandages you apply, the more beneficial and safer it is.
Know that the patient does not feel pain from the bandage as the healthy person feels it because his body is numb, and it should be according to the age of the patient whether old or young on the parts and joints as mentioned in the characteristics of the bandages.
Then treat the bandage with fine linseed oil and honey, along with all other treatment until it heals by the will of Allah Most High.
The Eighth and Forty-Eighth Chapter.
If the numbness of a limb or part is treated with medicines, ointments and bandages but it does not heal, then cover the same limb or part with bandages according to its size whether large or small like your hand and arm in thickness of skin slightly.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. And sometimes the numbness which is exposed to hand and foot on the back vertebrae, when the nerve that moves this member goes out, the numbness will go away.
And none should be attempted except by one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of members and exit points of nerves that move the body.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Leprosy.
If the leprosy has progressed and no remedy of medicine has been effective for it, put on him a dressing in depth slightly according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness goes away and its colour changes.
Then treat him with a mixture of fine wormwood, crushed rose mallow leaves and either the blood of a sheep or the blood of a cuttlefish, each one part, all mixed together and spread on a cloth and apply to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to stop it, apply a caustic ring around it as it turns. Some wise men have mentioned that one should apply a strong dressing in the middle of it, but I do not see anything in this because I fear it will suppurate and I have seen this happen many times.
The correct method is to cauterize around it with a ring as we said, or with many dressings.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On the Treatment of Erysipelas.
If erysipelas has occurred in one of them and it has slowed down in healing either due to the active humour that caused it or due to old age, which is a weak constitution, or due to time, and you want to speed up the healing process then cauterise around it with many small dressings sprinkled.
Then leave it alone because it will speed up in healing; and if you want to stop its progress with a caustic, then let the flame of this instrument be the one.
And let it down in the middle of the erysipelas until it penetrates the skin; and let the caustic be below so that evacuation will become easy, then treat it as it should be until it heals.
The second and fifty-second chapter.
In the mouth of the eater.
The eater is a corruption that seeks in the body that it eats, just as fire seeks dry wood. If you see the eater in a place that can be inflamed by fire, treat with many small and large cauteries according to the need of that place where the eater is.
Then treat it from all sides until the corruption is completely eliminated, and nothing of it remains at all. Then leave it for three days and carry on the burnt places with sulphur powder mixed with oil until the eschar forms completely and all the corruption leaves.
Then treat it with poultices suitable for flesh. If you see after three days that the flesh is growing healthy growth without corruption in it, and otherwise make the caustic again on what remains of the corrupted places, and the eater can be treated with hot medicine.
For it has a place that serves with fire more quickly and better, and I mentioned its treatment with hot medicine in the classification, so take it from there whenever you need it.
The third and fifty-third chapter.
In the treatment of iron splinters, whether inverted or not.
This condition often occurs in the soles of the feet and is a harsh, rough thing that afflicts the man. The treatment for it is on two sides, either by cauterization with fire or by hot water.
As for the treatment with fire, it is that you make a heated cautery similar to the feathers of an eagle made from iron, according to what surrounds the splinter on all sides and with a thin edge. Then place it over the splinter and turn your hand around the cautery until it reaches deep into the splinter.
He should leave it for three days when he intends to drain it, then tie it up with crushed wild leek, salted and smeared on, leaving the dressing on overnight. If it comes out from its roots, then treat the site of the wound with a poultice made from the juice of plants that cure flesh until it heals, if the splinters are not inverted.
And it often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. It is necessary to take a tube from copper or iron or eagle's feathers and insert it over the splinter or boil then pour into the tube hot water in a small quantity.
And grasp the hand with it as you turn it a little with a slight squeezing of the hand so that the rim of the tube affects the base of the splinter and the hot water finds its way to penetrate into the base of the splinter, and the patient endures for an hour the heat of the water.
Then leave it, for the splinter will come out with its roots. Do this one by one until all of them have been removed from the body, then treat their places after they have come out with a poultice made from what plants juice cure flesh.
The 52nd Chapter.
For the abscess.
If it occurs to one abscess from the cold on a nerve or a quart of fever or other such thing, then apply to it four or five poultices on a backrest between each poultice and in his chest a poultice. And to his stomach, a poultice with olive oil, for the abscess subsides and the chill of the disease is quickly resolved.
The 55th Chapter.
For the poultice of boils that occur on the body.
It may break out on the body with foul boils that are caused by thick and rotten cold substances, therefore it is necessary at their first appearance to apply a soft poultice to the head of each boil made from an alder twig that has been set on fire or the tip of a long absinthe plant or olive wood.
And the bloodletting should be done in its beginning flow on this quality, so it will not increase and the cause of the ailment is cleared from it, except that it should be after evacuation of the ailment by venesection.
The 52nd Chapter.
When cutting the artery.
A severe bleeding of blood often occurs from an artery that has been severed when a wound is exposed from the outside, or when cutting and excising a tumour or part of a limb and the like, making its cutting difficult.
If it happens to anyone, then hasten with your hand to the mouth of the artery and put your thumb on it and press it gently until the blood is contained under your thumb and nothing comes out from it. Then place a number of small and large laurel twigs in the fire and fumigate them until they become very smoky.
Then take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery burst open, and put the twig on the same spot after you remove your thumb and hold the twig until the blood stops.
If the bleeding bursts forth when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the twig cools down, then take another twig with forceps from the twigs in the ready fire and keep doing that one after another until the blood stops.
And you should preserve, not burn a stick that may be used and cause another bleed on the ailment, and know that if blood is bleeding from an artery then it cannot be cut or especially if the artery is large except in one of four ways: either by cutting as we said, or by amputating it if it has not been severed. And if it is severed, its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop. Either bind it with tight threads or put on medicines whose purpose is to stop the blood and bind it tightly with ligatures.
But as for one who attempts to cut it with a bandage or by tight traction or placing burning objects and the like, then it does not get cut at all, unless in rare cases. If there is an exposure of that sort and it is not treated by a doctor or medicine, let him hasten to place his forefinger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
And he should tightly compress it until the blood becomes constricted and flows out from above the wound, and on the artery and finger, let not cold water be removed from him always so that the blood may coagulate and become cut off. And during that time, one looks to see what kind of thread or medicine it requires.
The Second Chapter.
Concerning the incision, the cut and the cupping and wounds similar to them.
Al-Khalkh said: We have already mentioned in the First Chapter the illness in which thread is applied with fire and burning medicine, its causes and reasons and tools and forms of cauterization, and we made that into chapters from ancient times.
And I follow in this chapter the very same way as it was, so that it may be easy for the student to obtain what is required from him.
Before I begin with that, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more complications than what was in the First Chapter.
And because of that, it is necessary to be more cautious in this chapter, for the work in this chapter often results in hemorrhage from the blood by which life is maintained when an artery is opened or an incision is made on a tumor or abscess or surgical treatment or removal of an arrow or incision on a stone and the like, all of which are accompanied by complications and fear, and death often occurs in most of them.
And I advise you against falling into what is doubtful, for it may happen to you in this craft that there are types of people with various illnesses, among them some who have grown tired of their sickness and are resigned to death.
Those whose pus and swelling are severe, and whose condition is such that it suggests death, among them are those who give you their wealth in the hope of being cured, and their illness is a struggle. It is not fitting for you to assist any of these people at all.
Be cautious with them as much as you desire and are eager, do not proceed with anything of this kind except after a certain knowledge that leads to the good outcome which will befall them. Use in all treatment of their illnesses the precept of knowledge and warning of what will lead to safety.
For you in that is a support for gaining praise and glory, mention and thanks. May Allah guide you, oh sons of prudence, and do not prevent you from what is correct and from the guidance. That is in His hand, there is no god but Him.
And you have dealt with this chapter in the best way that has been mentioned in the chapter of the cure for what is old since ancient times, so may Allah make it easy for you to ask from him what you want.
The First Chapter.
In the treatment of water that accumulates on the heads of children.
This pus often presents to children at birth if the mother presses the child's head without gentleness and it may also be due to a hidden affliction that is unknown.
I have not seen this affliction in anyone but children, and all of them whom I saw died quickly from it. Therefore, I have seen that work is left undone with them. And I saw a child whose head was full of water and the head increases every day. Until the child was unable to sit up due to the swelling of his head and the moisture increasing, until he died.
And this moisture is either between the skin and bone or under the bone on the peritoneum. The treatment for that, if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the swelling is small, is to cut a single incision in the middle of the head from front to back until the water flows out and here is the appearance of the instrument used.
If the humidity increases and the swelling becomes greater, make it two crossing incisions in this shape:.
And if the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the seams of the head open from every side and the water drops down when you press it with your hand to inside, and not lightly on this you should make three incisions in the middle of the head like this shape:.
And after the incision, all the humidity comes out then the incisions are tied with linen and silk, and it is soaked from above with drink and oil until the fifth day, then a bandage is applied and the wound is treated with resin and ointments and you do not leave the head tightened nor feed the patient with dry food little moisture.
until the member becomes strong and healed, another way of making an incision is that you look where the bone of the swelling appears and the gathering of water because it may be in the back of the head more or in front of it or in the right or in the left.
meaning by the incision where you see the swelling and the fullness of water, so cut it as much as you can, being careful not to cut through a vessel and cause bleeding which would kill the patient with the draining of the humidity.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears known as the carotids.
When one of severe falls to the eyes or to the chest was presented and I timed that and it did not heal with the treatment of drugs, then the treatment in this was cutting these two arteries.
So if you wanted to cut them, you should shave the head of the patient with a razor then rub the place with a coarse cloth so that the artery appears then tie the neck of the patient with his own clothes then look where the pulse beats and their two hidden places which are behind the ears and rarely concealed except in some people.
Then teach it to him with ink, then cut them with a sharp knife cut completely to the bone and this will be at the head's width. And if you wish, insert the knife from under the artery and push it up in cuts. The length of the cuts will be about two folded fingers.
If the nerve is cut, blood will exit a pulsating and rapid flow in front of him. And if the artery does not appear to the touch, it should be measured from the ear after a measure of three fingers, then teach with ink and incise to the bone. What should be done.
The blood will send a quart on the pulsing and maybe it sent more or less all of that according to what appears to you from the strength of the artery and its fullness. Then look at the wound, if something remained from the membrane on the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot swelling is not exposed, then tighten the wound with a thread of torn linen and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Cut the arteries in the inguinal region.
If an inguinal abscess has formed in a person or sudden severe swellings from flowing liquids and heat in the muscles of the inguinal region or a severe and lasting headache and like that, and he was treated with kinds of treatment of medicine but it did not benefit him, we have tried in this illness to cut the arteries in the inguinal region or cauterize them as we described.
The procedure for cutting it is that he should shave the artery in the inguinal region, and what is meant by this is the visible artery in the groin, as its pulsation will be evident to you and rarely will it conceal itself except in a few people.
Or if it is very cold, and it has concealed itself from you, then have him draw his neck cloth tightly so that you can see the artery, and then rub the place with a cloth or dampen the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then the surgeon takes what he has cut from here. Then he carefully flays with it the skin until he reaches the artery, then inserts in it an instrument and pulls it up until he brings out the vessel from the skin and frees it of all the adhesions under it from every side. If the artery is thin, then he dilates it with the edge of the instrument. Then he cuts off from it a portion as much as its ends may spread apart and constrict, so that there is no bleeding. For indeed if it was not resected or severed the blood does not flow at all. Then he drains out blood from it with six or three [absorbent?] pads.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread. The thread will be either of silk or of the tendons of the bowstring so that before the wound heals decay does not reach it and bleeding occurs.
Then cut off the excess between the ligatures. She does this either at that time or after a longer period, and if you wish to compress it tightly onto the bone with a blunt instrument until its edges are resected. It performs this action in his place or better as we said.
But if the wound is with fever or he has a bad temper because the compression helps in the destruction of moisture and it becomes more solid for benefit, then after tying the arteries, the place should be stuffed with moist lint and on top compresses are put and after healing he treats with dry medicines which make flesh grow again, with poultice until it heals God willing.
If during your work there is bleeding from the artery, then hasten to cut it off either with a clamp or fill the place with alum and bind your hand until the blood stops. If nothing comes to you, put your finger in it so that the blood clots.
Wanna al-mawd' bi'l-ma'i ash-shadi'd il-barid hatta tusakin al-hadda wa tastadhahu 'ala ma yanhaj, wa mimmahu akhaffa wa ashal min sall al-shiryan an tukwa al-'arq biha'thi al-mikwah dati'ssakinayn ba'da annata'almawadiin bil-maddad.
Wa tanzilha hamiyyan jadda hatta tublig ila'l-'azm wa ynqata' al-'arq fi mawadiin lake yataba'du ma bayna tarifihi fainnahu la yaltaham bihadih al-mikwah al-bittah, wa hazihi surat al-mikwah.
Takuu hada al-sakinayn tihsab al-mukaddati al-saghirayni illa anha takun akall hada min al-sakkin kathiran in kannatuhuma hadatin kalsaki sakkin asra' ilayhuma al-barad wa lam yinqata'l-ham bu'sran, fa in kan lahum ba'du mukaddatin amtasak fihim har al-nar.
Wa qata'ta'l-ham bu'sran, wa hazihi al-'amilu a'zhimu min kulli 'amilin wa akhaffa wa ashal, wa likin ba'da ma bayna al-sakinayn kadru ghluz al-a'sab.
Al-fuslu ar-rabi'.
Fii 'ilaji saylan ad-damu' al-harrati'd da'imah ila'l-'aynin.
Idha kana't ad-damu' da'imah wa kan saylanaha min al-'uruq allati 'ala qhaf al-ras min kharij lam yantafa'da fiha shay'an mimma yu'alli bi'l-ilaaj at-tibbi bi'al-adwiyah wa raayt wajh al-'ilal qad ahammar. Wa yuhassu fi jabinhi dibibun kada dibib al-naml wa 'aynahu mahzulatan ratti'atan qad takkalt ashfarihuma wa tashabbut ajfanahuma min hada ad-damu' fa'adzartat al-awliya' fi 'ilajiha ila hadih al-'amilu wa yusammuhu al-'ilaaj bi's-sif, wa huwa an ta'amru'l-ilal bihiyal shahr allazi fii jabinhi.
Then make three incisions parallel to each other along the forehead, with each incision being about two fingerbreadths long. The first incision should be in the middle of the forehead, running lengthwise with the nose. The second incision should be a little way from the movement of the muscle above the eyebrow, and the third incision should be on the other side.
And preserve yourself from cutting the arteries that are in the sides. Keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and after each incision make a distance of three fingerbreadths with a closed fist. And be sure to have with you pieces of sponge or many cloth rags so that the blood may be absorbed.
Then insert the sharp instrument into the sides, as shown in these drawings. Then insert the instrument into the incision next to the eyebrow, and peel off all the skin in between the two incisions along with the serous membrane on the bone. Then do the same thing from the middle incision to the third one, then withdraw this instrument. And also insert into the first incision another instrument called a sharp skinner from one side and a blunt one from the other side, as shown in this drawing.
And its sharp side will be directed upwards towards the skin-covered flesh, and its blunt side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut all the vessels that come from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer layer of the skin.
Then do the same thing from the middle incision to the other one. After a moderate amount of bleeding, squeeze out the clots from the cut blood vessels. Then insert a thread made of linen or cotton into each incision and apply a compress that has been soaked in wine, oil or vinegar and fat.
So that a hot abscess will not form. And on the third day, the dressing will be removed and much thread soaked in warm water will be used to tie it, then treat it with pomegranate ointment smeared with rose ointment and all that is used to treat wounds until it heals with God's will.
Chapter Five
In the treatment of tears and abscesses coming to the eyes from within the head.
When there occurs in one of them a lot of sharp abscesses which are persistent, and the eyes flow with pus from them, their vision has become weak and the conjunctivas have been ulcerated, and eyelashes have fallen out from them. And there will be in the depth of the head a sharp and severe pain, followed by a continuous headache. Know from these signs that those materials and abscesses come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to blow their nostrils through their forehead then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be in the depth of the head a sharp and severe pain, followed by a continuous headache. Know from these signs that those materials and abscesses come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to blow their nostrils through their forehead then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or slightly elevate the skin and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and the incision will reach the bone. Keep your hand far from the moving muscles of the jaws when chewing, so that if the bone is exposed and you have cleaned all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with a lint or a piece of linen thread. Then draw from above with string and soak the string in drink and oil so that there will be no hot abscess. When you have cleaned it and seen that the hot abscess has broken, you should scrape the bone until new flesh begins to form.
Then treat it with the dry remedy which makes flesh grow, like taking from barley flour two parts and from onion four parts and preparing a plaster from them, and using in growing flesh in wounds of this type.
Chapter Six
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds, either a hard metal stone like iron and glass or a plant seed like sesame seeds and the like, or something liquid such as water and vinegar etc.
If it is an animal, then when a stone has fallen into the ear, whether it be a small or large stone that cannot get out of the ear, take the sun in the ear. If you see the stone only grease it with juice from the purslane plant or the Syrian plant then try to extract it by moving the head or using an aspirator tube. Close the nostrils when sneezing comes after putting a collar of wool or hair around the ear and inclining the ear upwards. Often it will come out with this treatment. If it does not come out, otherwise try to extract it with a soft sponge which is shown here.
If it comes out with the sponge, otherwise try to extract it with a soft, almost straight forceps. If it does not come out with that and then make a copper tube and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal yes.
Close the area around the tube with a thin layer of wax ointment so that the air does not have a way other than the tube. Then pull it with your breath pulling strongly and often it will come out with this treatment. If it does not come out as we described, otherwise take from Balsam of the Nabateans or from a well-tempered resin which is taken with birds put a small amount on the tip of the spatula.
After wrapping a tight thread around it then insert it gently into the ear canal after the ear has dried out of moisture. If it does not come out with all that we described, hasten to the incision before a hot abscess or swelling occurs.
The recipe for the incision is that you cut the instrument in a mortar first and let out as much blood from it as its strength allows, then put the instrument between your hands and tilt the ear upwards and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part when it is lowest.
And the incision will be crescent-shaped until it reaches the stone then remove it with as much of the instruments as possible and stitch up the incision quickly and treat him until he recovers.
And as for if the thing that has fallen into the ear is from one of the plants that grow and swell, try to take it out with what we have mentioned. If you are unable to take it out, then take a thin, gentle lancet in this shape.
And try to cut with it the type of plant that has fallen into the ear. You do this only if you are certain that the seed has become attached by the heat of the ear until it becomes small fragments, then remove them with a blunt forceps or a soft spatula or a gentle scoop.
As we mentioned, it is easy to take it out. And as for the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary to use a syringe with a wick first, and he has filled his ear with something of soft flax and is lying on that ear which contains the water; then take it out with that.
And if not, then take a number of small stones on the smooth palms and heat them slightly with fire. The operator will insert one into his ear canal and step with one foot from that side and hit with another stone on the one in the ear.
And he will continue to do this with a stone, a stone, until all the water is gone. And sometimes the water will come out by taking from wool or one hair and putting its tip into the ear and having the other end burned in fire until most of it burns then return another hair.
He will do that several times until all the water comes out or is drawn with the syringe as mentioned in the stone. And as for removing the animal that has entered it, look; if it is small in body like a mouse and the like, remove it with what was mentioned in the division, and as for.
If its body is large and can be felt, try to take it out with a spatula and forceps and this is easier than all that enters the ear. And as for removing the worms that have generated in the ear if you treated them with what was mentioned in the division in the article of the small things and your treatment did not succeed.
Look at the ear towards the sun. If something of a worm appears, remove it with a spatula or fine tweezers. If nothing is seen, take this tube.
It is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the drill can hold it, then twist it strongly several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you about a stone.
If they do not come out as we mentioned, use the syringes which I mentioned, and you will find that the first ones have used it to kill the worms, and it is in the treatise on syringes. Pour oil and medications into the ear with this instrument. Here is its shape:
As you see, it is made from copper or iron, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you want the pipe inside to be of iron that is strong, or if you want, take a rod and wrap cloth tightly on its end.
Then pour oil or juice or what you want from these medications into the tube which is in the ear. Then insert the rod with the cloth on its end from above and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil goes deep inside the ear and you feel it.
With the drill inside, let what you pour into the ear have been slightly warmed in the fire. And beware that it not be very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of the stoppage opposing to the ear.
Some children may come out from their mothers' wombs with their ears unperforated.
And also some people may have a stoppage in the passage of the ear from an injury or flesh growth within it, and this stoppage can be deep inside the hole of the ear that cannot be seen with the eye.
And he may show a little outside the puncture and be seen with the eye, for what shows in depth of the ear and is not seen with the eye will be in most cases difficult to remove, and that which can be seen should have the patient's ear put into the sun. And you look at it; if you see a membrane visible then open it with a fine syringe, this is its appearance:.
It has one end with some protrusion a little limited in some of it and the rest of the syringe is smooth on both sides so as not to hurt the ear. If the membrane from flesh had grown in the passage of the ear, then grasp it with a fine forceps and cut it off gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the membrane is in depth of the ear, then take a fine malleable object smooth it, heat it slightly in the fire and insert it into the passage of the ear. If you feel the membrane with what the patient feels from heaviness of hearing then file it gently.
And be careful not to injure the auditory nerve, then insert into the ear a thread as large as the size of the puncture that you tied in the Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are certain about closing the wound or take a thread and dip it in water and sprinkle on it powdered alum.
And use it. If you see the ear has become inflamed and a hot abscess, then you should remove the thread and replace it with another thread that you tied in rose gum so that the hot abscess calms down, then treat it until it clears up.
If bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear and apply the rest of the treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding in the chapter of cauterizations.
The eighth chapter.
In the treatment of blisters that appear on the vulva.
These blisters that appear on the eyelids may be watery and dry; it is necessary to grasp them with a pincer or forceps and cut them out from their origins, then apply powdered zaja on the place.
If it bleeds from them, cover it with a soft lentil-like cotton wool and it is better to wash it after cutting; often it returns if something remains of its origins, and when it is burned with fire those origins are burnt out and do not return.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the treatment of conjunctivitis that appears on the eyes.
Often something similar to cold in its severity and softness is presented on the eyelids.
And so it was called the cold, which is a gathering of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and lower eyelid; and in its treatment look at it: if the cold appears prominent on the surface of the eyelid move towards one direction or another then the matter is easy: incise it with an incision from outside.
Then gently scrape it from all sides until it is eliminated, then tie it with forceps and cut it out. If you are not prepared to cut it except after the eyelid has been perforated by the incision, that will not harm the patient at all; if the incision was large, gather it together with a suture and treat it until he heals.
And if it is small, do not worry about it; the ointment will hold it and heal it. And if the cold is leaning towards the inner surface of the eyelid towards the inside surface, turn over the eyelid and tie the cold with forceps without needing to make an incision and scrape it from all sides.
And if the eyelid perforated by cutting, that will not harm anything; then wash the eye with salt water after cutting the cold and treat the place with what heals until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten.
In the treatment of corneal ulcers that are exposed in the eyelid.
The corneal ulcer is a growth that occurs in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it most often affects children, who are weighed down by their eyelids and exposed to eye infections from dust, and they cannot look towards the light of the sun. So that tears may rush to them.
So they always lie on their faces and sleep with tears streaming down, and their eyelids are moist under the eyebrows, puffed up, and if you press the place with your fingers, you will feel the corneal ulcer between them, and the way to treat it is for the doctor to put his nose close.
Then take a flaxen cloth and prepare an ember from it, and make from that ember a circle of the same size as what encircles the corneal ulcer on all sides, then place it on it and compress with your fingers from all sides so that the corneal ulcer gathers in the center of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a sharp scalpel cut, and it should not be larger than the cut which is made in an incision, but as for depth, you should cut all the skin until you reach the corneal ulcer.
Then in most cases, the corneal ulcer will protrude from the cut in the shape of a piece of white fat, you should draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers outside and as you turn your hand right and left until it is removed, and beware of increasing the incision lest the scalpel touches the eye and harms it.
If the corneal ulcer does not protrude from the cut at first, then it is necessary to increase the incision a little gently until it emerges, then pull it out as we said, and then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the place and bind it with a bandage, and some people crush salt.
Put it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that moisture will dissolve, then treat him until he is clear. If an ulcerous sore occurs in the place, cure him with soothing poultices until he clears up.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In kinds of eye bandaging.
If a growth occurs in the eyelid, excessive hairs outside of their natural course under the normal hairs and I pluck them out, for they harm the eye and cause types of disease such as permanent tears, laxity of the palpebrae, white spots, and thickening until that becomes a reason for blindness of the eye.
Eye bandaging is done in four ways, either by cauterizing with fire or by the hot medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or that the bandaging be by stitches and sewing or with reeds as I remember.
You should place the tip of the needle in your hand then turn the eyelid with your left hand, if it turns over and so on, else you insert a thread into the lower eyelid and guide the needle through from above, and it will be near the hair itself, and pull the thread up with the eyelid.
You turn it over with the roller then cut in the inside of the eyelid, without the excess hair, with a sharp blade from the larger opening to the smaller one, then you guide the thread and put under the eyelid a small pad of cotton or a cloth, then stitch on the eyelid with a needle.
Like the shape of a paper mulberry leaf, but it should be shaped to your liking in raising the eyelid because people differ in that, so some may need you to cut from the eyelid an appropriate amount, according to how much the eyelid has relaxed.
And some may need you to cut less, all that according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then you sew with a blade along the two stitches I made and start from the larger opening to the smaller one, and the single incision will be near the natural hair like the thickness of the roller.
Then insert the pincers into one of the skin corners, then peel off all of it. Then gather the lips with a needle and fine wool thread and clean the blood and seal what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with something that adheres.
If you wish to do so and otherwise do not care, then the stitching and threads will remain for three or four days, then treat it, and if you wish leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and contracts. The eyelid rises when the wound is closed and joined together, and stitching is better.
This face from the cataract I have mentioned that the old ones have described, except that there is a burden on the eye lid and it is one of good works and no danger in it. And another face in the cataract also that you learn a shape on the eyelid like the shape of an aspen leaf as we have described. Then lift the eyelid with three pincers that are separate or grouped in this shape:.
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors as shown, cuts gently.
If you cannot hold the pincers and it is not firm for you, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the shape and insert another thread near the larger corner and a third thread near the smaller corner and gather between your fingers the threads gently then lift up your hand gently.
Then lift up the skin that has been learned on it all as we have described, then gather the lips of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. If there is a red and hot pimple at the place you cut or opened, calm down that pimple with calamine and similar soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also turn its lashes over, it is necessary that you apply to it what we have mentioned from cutting and stitching and cauterizing with fire and hot medicine and cauterizing with fire or hot medicine more effective and lighter on the eye than cutting and stitching in both of them.
Cleaning with reeds is done in this manner: you turn the eyelid and cut the incision from inside as I have described, then make two or three thin rods of equal length to the eyelid and less in width than that of the knife.
And I have made on the ends of each of them, from both sides where the threads cling, then brought them together gently upon what remained of the eyelid and tightened the rods from both sides tightly and left them for some days; because the tightened skin dies and blackens and decays.
Until it falls away by itself; if I delayed, then I cleaned it with the mortar and treated it until it healed. If there was adhesion, the eyelid rose and the lashes of the eye did not fall out. This is the shape and size of the rods that are made in this way.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On elevating the eyelashes that have fallen from the eye with a needle.
If it is a hair or two that the operation is for, take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk that has been smoothed out, then tie its ends tightly in a very gentle knot; let its length be about the length of a finger.
Then pass another fine thread under the knot in the needle and tie its ends if you wish, then place the needle on your hand close to the sun so that it can be seen clearly; because it is a delicate operation. Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the excessive hair.
And perform it within the eyelid with the drill until it comes out from above the natural hair, then pull the thread up over the knot and insert into that knot the hair if it is one or two or three at most.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread within the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pulled the thread and did not bring the hair with it, then pull the thread downwards with the silk thread that you made in the needle until the thread comes out through the upper hole.
Then you redo the hair in it and pull them, do that until they rise in the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then release the ligatures and the thread and take it out and pull the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair takes its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add to it a long hair from natural hair so that it rises with it or leave it until it grows after a period of time. Then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of scarring that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The one that is exposed to this scarring is called an eye twitch and this scarring is either natural or adventitious, the adventitious being from the spread of a wound or cut or tear and the like.
And the manner of treatment is to cut that stratum and separate its edges and make a thread from linen and tie it until it heals, and it should not be treated with things that dry and contract.
If you did that, the scarring returned in a more severe form than it was, but if you used things that swell like soap and gum with water that has been poured into it, and an ointment of diachylon mixed with something from paint and dyed on the thread and treated with it.
And the goal of treating it is to strive with all effort that it does not stick together in its original shape, and this operation which we mentioned is only some repair of the scarring, not that the place returns to its former shape at all.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of scarring that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This scarring which occurs from the lower part is what is called a scar and it is either natural or adventitious, the adventitious being from a wound or cut or tear and the like.
The method of performing it is to take a needle with two threads and pierce the flesh, then carry the needle from the left side to the right side until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh. Then raise the flesh with the needle and cut it off with a wide scissors.
If the fold of the eyelid returns to its proper form, otherwise take a spatula and place it on the site of the incision and turn with it the eyelid and make two cuts inside the eyelid so that their ends meet and thus form an angle. Until they meet, its shape will be similar to this shape:.
And it will resemble the Greek letter lambda. Then remove that flesh as much as its sharp edge is below what follows the eyelid, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches and sew him with a wool thread. Then treat him with the mentioned ointments and plaster until he heals.
And if the cleft has been exposed from a cut or stitch or knot, then it is necessary to make a small incision without cutting off the eyelashes as mentioned above. Then spread between the lips with a plaster as we have mentioned.
And in the treatment of a cleft whether from above or below, one should proceed according to what is available for its appearance. For it may have many differences in form, and the craftsman finds a way to deal with it as best he can.
Until its shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease guides you on what is suitable for him in terms of treatment and tool in most cases.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
For the adhesion of the eyelid to the lacrimal or to the canaliculus.
This adhesion may be exposed to many people so that the upper eyelid adheres to the whiteness of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering it in its natural actions. It is necessary to insert the tip of a spatula under the eyelid.
She places it above or with a gentle curette, then cuts the adhesion with a fine syringe so that the cut is not sharp like the cutting of the curette, lest the surgeon be disturbed and the curette slips out, harming the eye. Your cut should be as though you are scraping off that adhesion.
She waits until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion is completely gone, then she pours into the eye a salty water which cleanses it with that or injects into it from the zinc calamus dissolved in water, then she spreads between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
She places above the eye wool moistened with egg white, and after the third day she uses the saturated syringes until it clears.
The 16th Chapter.
For cutting the nail plate and the flesh of the paronychium.
The nail plate is either sensitive and resembles a thin hard spike, or not sensitive and resembles a frozen white dampness which becomes solid if touched with iron or taken with the curette it will be cut.
And a curette is not placed in it, and both kinds start from the larger paronychium until it spreads a little bit to cover the observer and prevent light and eye movement, and the way of working in cutting them is that the surgeon places his head in your hand.
Then he opens his eyes and you lift the eyelid with your hand, then you catch the nail plate with a gentle curette and stretch it upwards, then you take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or cow and strong thread, and bend the tip of the needle slightly and push it into the middle of the nail plate.
She carries it out with the needle and ties it with a strong thread, then stretches it upwards and scrapes with the hair the side of the nail plate which is next to the pupil as if she were spreading it with the hair until its end, then cuts the rest at the root of the paronychium with a fine syringe or small scissors and leaves the natural flesh of the paronychium.
Oh no! If it does not expose the cut of constant bleeding, then the nail plate is probed with a file and wire alone as we said before. Then it is peeled off with a smooth lancet on that end whose picture is shown here:.
And it is guarded that the lancet should touch the conjunctiva, and a fistula would occur, so tears would flow. Then after cutting, something of powdered salt or zingiber root powder is put in the eye and left until another day, then treated as it needs until it clears up.
If the nail plate is not sensitive and an injection needle cannot be inserted into it, nor can a file be fixed in it, then this type of nail plate is often treated with medicines until it clears up as I described in the section. And if you want to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
Take a smooth and soft lancet with a light edge as shown here:. And peel the nail plate off with it gently from above. If you see that it is becoming loose and breaking apart, and the peeling has only affected the surface, then instill something of zingiber root powder or red pepper powder or powdered salt into the eye, and close the eye until another day.
Then, reapply the treatment to it until all of them are gone, unless a hot pimple is formed in the eye; then leave it and treat the hot pimple until it clears up. Then, reapply the treatment to it with the peeling until it clears up. As for the thickening of the eyelid skin.
For if the thickening is painful to the eye, then bind that thickening with a file and cut some of it away, do not be precise in cutting so that a constant bleeding does not occur. Then sprinkle in the corners zingiber root powder or red pepper powder until it clears up.
The 17th Chapter.
In cutting away purulent growths and what springs from excess flesh in the eye.
There may grow in the eyes of some people red flesh-like tissue until it covers or comes close to or overflows onto the eyelids and perhaps the lids turn outward resembling a rose's thorn.
And as for the treatment, have the patient sit with his head on your knee then open his eyes and catch all that red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or take hold of it with a needle or spatula then cut the first bit after the other until all of it is completely removed from the eye and preserved from harming it, and your cutting into it can be either with the razor that we described in removing nails or with a small scissors. As for cutting off what protrudes from the eyelid in a similar way to how you cut away the threads as shown in the chapter on that, which is below this one.
If you have cut it and all the purulent growth has gone, then fill the eye with ground salt or scatter red powder-like drugs in it and place a piece of white linen from outside over the eye to prevent the hot swelling.
But if some purulent growth remains and bleeding occurs and you fear the hot swelling, then leave the eye alone and treat it with what calms the swelling, then go back to it and do the operation again until it clears up, and likewise act similarly with the excess flesh that protrudes in the eye of this kind.
Unless it is fitting for you to avoid treating any weak eye either by nature or exposure with ironwork and not insert your hand in anything of this type of work until you see that the organ is capable of that operation.
The 18th Chapter.
In cutting away threads from the eye.
Threads are red blood vessels that weave on the eye of whoever is prevented from seeing, and weaken the eye with the passing days. It is fitting for you to look first; if the eye in which there are threads is strong and there is no other disease except the threads.
So then, the laceration; that is to say, order the patient to place his head in your lap. Then tie these veins together with a single or double forceps as you see fit. The forceps will be gentle in curvature like this:
Or they may be two double forceps in one body like this:
Then catch those veins with a gentle pincer, gently and wipe out the blood little by little until you see that the eye has gone of them and the bleeding has stopped. Be careful not to harm the eye with the ends of the pincer. May your work be half the day in front of the sun.
And be very careful in your work so that you do not cut other than those veins. When you are finished, insert into the eye a green or red blade to eat up whatever is left of the blood vessels. If you cannot cut them all in that time, compress the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye.
And leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and the warm swelling goes away. Then repeat the same operation on it with the same eye until the marks of the pincer are erased from it.
And leave it [and the patient's head will be in the apprentice's lap and the other one wiping away tears and examining the anterior and posterior part of the eye]. The original intention in this work is to open the eye with openings that are stable or triangular which the apprentice holds.
Hold and the patient's head will be in the apprentice's lap and the other one wiping away tears and examining the anterior and posterior part of the eye. By choice start the laceration from the top or bottom of the eye, and the first is to have two forceps in the upper eyelid, one at the end and the other at the beginning.
And hold them between the eyebrows and the bridge of the nose, then tie forceps under them, then hold them between the canthi and the plica and pull your hand gently until you see all the vessels have risen. Cut the smaller vessel on the side if it has been caught by the pincer or the gentle probe.
A patient should be sewn up on the eyebrow and all paths cleared so that he may be raised above the lint. But do not cut the bandage for, the tears and blood will become sticky on it.
Then cut with scissors from above and below what is in excess of the lint, so that there will not remain anything but on the gauze. If you can raise him up on the gauze, sew with the meht that it is better, and it may be easier for some people.
If you have to cut him, let him stay for a few days to bleed and rest from the swelling, then return to work on him.
The 19th Chapter.
For the removal of an arrow from the nose.
Physicians call the arrow "Nasura" if it is treated with the strongest or hottest medicine as previously described, and it does not clear up. Then one should cut through the swelling when it becomes hardened and remove all moisture inside or filth.
Until the bone is revealed, if the bone is revealed and you see in it decay or discoloration then remove it with an instrument such as this shape:.
And it is called the "Kashn" (or) head of the skull, made from Indian iron, its head being twisted like a vessel, on which you have engraved the engraving or scraping of the file or scullery in fine script. You put it on the place of decay from the bone then turn it between your fingers and you rub your hand slightly until you know that the decay has been removed.
And you do this several times then strengthen the place with dried and adhesive medicines. If the place is sealed, flesh has grown on it and the wound has healed after forty days without any repetition or ulceration or new event happening in it.
Therefore know that he has been cured, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the arrow to its original hole in this manner: by exposing the bone again with iron or hot medicine. If the bone is exposed then take a wick on this shape:.
The edge of the instrument will be triangular and its handle cone-shaped, curved towards the end as you see. Then place it on the bone itself; this is near the middle and a little further from the eye than your hand. Move your hand with the reamer until it penetrates the bone and you feel it with your sense.
So if the pus comes out of it when he holds his hand on its nostril, then at that time press the place with sticking and dried medicines as I have taught you. If the flesh grows back and the place hardens, then the material which was directed outside will return to the nostril and that will be lighter for the patient if Allah wishes.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In the root of the eyelid.
If the eyelid becomes swollen with its whole part and does not cause any defect or loss in the sight, it is necessary that the instrument be smoothed out then separated from the calotte. Then put a compress on the socket without any condition and moisten it with a thin bandage.
Then put on the eye a poultice made from vinegar, myrrh, and galbanum, and saffron. Then pull the eye upwards on the poultice with great benefit. The recipe for the compress is to take many linen cloths and fold each one into four folds to make many of them.
Then put them one on top of the other as much as the eye needs, then pull a firm cloth tightly over it with a strong draw. Then repeat the compress with a bandage without any condition. Then remove the compress and leave the eye pulled upwards for a day and night.
If the bandage relaxes during that time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see the eye has returned to its place, otherwise redo the poultice, compress, tightening, and bandage until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In cutting the tendons.
If a hernia appears in the tendon layer, and it bulges out outside the abdomen like a walnut and its appearance is like that of a human, because of which you wish to cut it, then do as I have described.
And you enter a needle from below to above into the core of the walnut, and then another needle with a doubled thread from the incision site, and pass it through while leaving the first needle in place.
Then cut the place of bending of the doubled thread, and tie some of the walnut around the needle, and pull it tight then bring out the needle and put a wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and leave it until the threads fall with the walnut, then treat the eye with what will strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, and you may tie the walnut from all sides with a bandage in a circle so that the eye becomes very swollen, then bathe it with a thin cotton swab reaching into the depths of the eye so that the egg white liquid flows down and the eye becomes calm then tighten it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating cataracts.
This disease which is called cataracts, is a liquid that gathers in the eye, similar to pouring water without any, and the work in this case is that you sit the patient on a chair elevated then take their head with your hands from both sides.
And move it until you see the liquid descend below with your eye, then fix it and it does not go away, and the light passes and the patient sees things as he used to see them, and if it did not descend below as we mentioned, know that it is water, and if it was not ready for descent as we mentioned.
And if not, then sit the patient in front of you, and take a thin probe and cut it with it slightly above the corneal membrane at the point where the crystalline lens meets the corneal membrane in the pupil until the liquid comes out.
If only water has been emitted in the eye, hot water mixed with aloe or water that has been heated with opium and aloe is used to treat it until it clears up.
Chapter Twenty-Third.
We have mentioned the kinds of water in the classification, and which one is suitable for the hollow with a detailed explanation so that it is taken from there on health. Therefore, when this happens, the patient should sit facing you, raised up near the light near the sun.
She ties the healthy eye with a clean cloth and tightens it tightly, then she raises the eyelid of the affected eye with her left hand if the affected eye is the left one or with her right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
Then she places the tip of the hollow near the conjunctiva with a blunt forceps in the same plane as the eye, from the side of the smaller pupil. Then she pushes the hollow strongly while turning it with her hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye and she feels that the hollow has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the hollow should go as far as the depth of the eye from the surface to the black part, which is the conjunctiva of the eye, because copper is seen by the observer in the same plane as the white of the eye due to the transparency of the corneal membrane. Then the hollow goes up towards the place where the water is.
Then she holds it down a few times, if the water has come out of its container then the patient sees what is opened in front of her with her sight and the hollow in her eye, then she sits quietly. If the water rises again, then let it go down again without taking the hollow out.
If it settles and does not rise, then take out the hollow gently while you are relaxing your hand a little bit at a time. Then dissolve some pure salt powder in the water and wash the eye from inside with it. Then put all of the surrounding area around the eye soaked or woolen.
A white and smooth vein, which is tied up with a healthy eye. As for us and the people of our time, we place on it a well-pressed poultice along with the whiteness of the egg. If the cup does not enter into the eye due to its hardness because there are people whose eyes are very hard. It is necessary that you take the scraper which is called the "braid" whose shape is this:.
You should puncture with it the conjunctiva itself only, and do not be precise about the puncture, rather just reach the cupping vessel to a soft place then enter the cup as we have mentioned. And when you have finished your task prepare for sleep lying down firmly on your back in a dark room.
He will abstain from all movements and coughing, and let his food be what naturally softens it, and do not let him move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage will remain in its state until the third day, then remove him to that dark room and try his sight.
She will try to see things, then return the bandage until the seventh day, and it is not desirable that you do this during the treatment or after cupping from your time, but rather should avoid doing so before the water rises quickly with a severe look.
If there is a red and hot lump, then you should uncover the eye before the seventh day and correct that with what soothes the lump until it subsides, if it subsides, then release his sight and put a cloth on his face to gradually acclimate him to seeing through it for some days while he is in that dark room then.
He will go out of the house gradually and behave in his affairs, and know that cupping is not accomplished without the student seeing it some times, then he proceeds to work, and I have been informed about some Iraqis that they mentioned making a cupped vessel which is inflated to absorb water.
I have not seen anyone in our land who has made this, nor read it in any of the first books. It may be an innovation, and these are images of types of catheters so that one may stand on them due to their ignorance:.
It is made from copper specifically and its tip has this very texture, triangular with a sharp end.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
For the treatment of flesh that grows in the nose.
It may grow in the nose different kinds of flesh, some resembling scorpions with many legs, and some being a cancerous flesh that is hardened in color, and from it some being a fatty flesh not hardened in color.
As for the flesh that is fatty and not malignant or cancerous, you should sit in front of a window facing the sun, open your nostril and insert the forceps into that flesh, then pull it out and cut with a sharp thin lancet from one side what you have reached of it.
Until you know that all the flesh has been removed, if there remains something that you could not cut it, then scrape it with one of the gentle instruments gently until nothing is left. If blood or a hot abscess breaks out.
Then meet it with what is appropriate, or if it is from the malignant ulcers, then be quick and insert until the blood is cut off and all the flesh goes away, then insert into the nose after cutting a powder of vinegar or water or a liquid, for if the nose opens up and moisture flows to the throat.
Then know that he has been cured, if the moisture does not pass as it should then know that inside him is a growing flesh in the hollowed bones which the tool did not reach by cutting to it. So now you should take a cord of cotton with some thickness.
And make knots in it many times and put between each knot a length of a finger or less. The surgeon will insert the end of one cord into his nose with a probe or whatever he can, after having made it like threads and draw out its breath until it reaches the pharynx.
He comes out on his nose and many times does like this boy's action, which is easy for one who wants it, then the ends of the thread are gathered, the end which came out in the mouth and the other that remained in the nostril.
Then the flesh is spread with the knot that is in the thread until you know that the flesh has been cut by the thread's knot, then the thread is removed and it is inserted into the nostril after wiping away the blood a string that I have absorbed in the Arabic ointment, you do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment is eaten all that remains of the flesh, then the last thing in the nostril becomes a lead tube for some days until it heals. If needed to be treated, I dried and used it.
And this is the image of the catheter with which the pomades and medicines are poured into the nostril:.
He places a small candle-shaped thing made of brass or copper, open at one end and having a channel likewise.
And if you wanted, make the tube closed like a trumpet and grease the catheter smooth.
It has a handle at its end as you see, holding it if you grease with fat or any of the strings or things that are elastic.
The 25th chapter.
In nasal polyps that grow on the tip of the nose.
Many times a polyp grows at the end of the nose, it becomes large and increases with time until its appearance is ugly.
Therefore, it should be cut in its first appearance and all of it removed, then carry either the caustic or the burning medicine which acts as a caustic on the place. If its cutting is late until it becomes large, look if it is hardened stiff like burnt skin with little sensation.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor; and I have often seen that when this tumor has been cut out from him, a large abscess has returned on his owner. And if the tumor is soft in texture and pale in color, as I have observed, then cutting can be done entirely. Let the physician drain it and cut it out without caution or delay, and treat the site with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
In stitching the nose, cheek and ear. If the connection of its parts is loosened due to an injury or something similar, know that when this loosening has occurred in one of these cavities, few are those from whom successful treatment can be achieved except for some people.
When one of these things is presented, look and see if the wound is bloody; then gather the edges of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals. And if the loosening has caused the two sides to separate and each side is healthy in itself, then you should scrape off the surface of each side with a skin scraper until it bleeds.
Then gather the two sides with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle on it the zinc and linseed powder mixed together. And put over it a plaster of the thin ointment or some other adhesive ointment and leave it tightened for two or three days then remove it.
And replace the treatment and leave it until the threads come out by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The recipe for suturing is to gather the loosening of connection either with needles as we have described in stitching the abdomen or with thread as I have explained to you there.
Chapter Twenty-Seventh.
On removing the abscess that appears in the lips.
Many people have small hard nodules in the inside of their cheeks, some similar to a wooden splinter and some smaller or larger. The cheek should be turned and a suture placed on each nodule and attached to the bandage.
She cuts it from all sides then fills the place after cutting with powdered alum until the bleeding stops, and compresses with vinegar and salt and treats the places as for burns until the wounds heal.
The 28th chapter.
For cutting excess flesh in the mouth.
Often a redundant flesh grows on the gum, which the ancients called Abalus. It should be tied with a bandage or held with tweezers and cut at its root; then the bleeding stops and powdered alum is placed on the place.
Or any of the dry and hard growths; if that flesh returns after treatment, it often comes back again. So cut it a second time and eat it, for it will not return after being eaten.
The 29th chapter.
For extracting teeth with iron.
There may form on the surfaces of the teeth from within and without, and between the gums rough and foul scabs which may rot and turn yellow and green until their decay reaches the gum and spoils the teeth.
So sit the dentist in front of you, with his head in your lap and extract the molar and tooth from which the scabs and things resembling dust have appeared until nothing remains. And also do this with the yellow and green and other colors until it is purified.
If what is extracted from the first extraction is gone, then re-extract it again and again for a second and third time until your goal is reached. And know that a molar often needs different types of extractions with many shapes according to what suits your work.
In order that the tooth which is cleaned from within by the cleanser may be cleaned differently than the one which is cleaned from without, and different than the ones which are between teeth in another shape. These many cleansers should all be prepared with you:.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
In the removal of teeth.
You should treat the tooth from its cause with every trick and delay its removal, for it is a noble substance, even if its removal is necessary.
So when the practitioner decides to remove the tooth, it should be steady until the pain of the tooth has subsided. For often the practitioner is deceived by the pain and thinks it to be in a healthy tooth, so he removes it then the pain does not go until the diseased tooth is removed, as we have seen that done many times by the barber-surgeons.
If the pain of the tooth is in a healthy state with it, then it should be surrounded around the gum with a forceps that has some strength until the gums are relieved from all sides, then move it gently at first a little bit, a little bit, so as to loosen it.
Then the forceps can grasp it strongly, and the practitioner's head between his knees has been set down not to move then pull out the tooth straight so that it is not cracked. If it does not come out, or else take one of those instruments and insert it under him from all sides gently and a motion in moving it as was done at first.
And if the tooth is perforated or loose, it should be filled with a cloth and sealed well with a thin end of a thread so that it does not come out in when you grasp it with forceps and you should investigate by probing around the gum from all sides.
Be careful with your effort, lest it be wasted and some of it rebound on the patient in a more severe way than his original condition. And beware of doing what ignorant manipulators do in their bridges and approaches to it, without using what we have described.
For often they cause great hurts on people that are easier to heal if the tooth had broken and its roots remained all or some of them. Or that he extracts with some of the jawbone, as we have seen many times, then he stuffs it afterwards with a drink or a concoction of vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs from the place, it often happens that it ceases after having taken something from the pus and filled with it the place.
And if the poultice did not benefit you, then take an ivory file, like these smooth calabashes which move the tooth first. Its shape will be long in the branches, short in the handle, thick so that it does not bend when you grip with it on the tooth. And this is the shape of the large files:.
It will be as you see, thick in the handles so that if you grip them firmly they do not slip and do not bend. And it should be of Indian steel or of carefully tempered iron, with the branches well-forged at their ends, each one entering into the other; and then grasp them tightly and securely.
And the branches can be made like the shape of a file so that they are also strong in gripping.
The 83rd Chapter.
On the extraction of tooth roots and removal of broken jawbones.
If the root of the tooth remains, having been cracked during its extraction, it is necessary to put on the place a poultice with grease for a day or two until the place relaxes, then enter into it the file or calabash. The one that resembles its parts is the mouth of the bird called Balurja and this is an image of the Kullaib.
It is made like a rasp from the inside or like an Eskefaj, and if it does not give you relief to exit with this Kullaib then you should drill on the axis and expose all the flesh with a probe, then insert the instrument that resembles the handle of a small flute, which is its image.
Short and thick at the end, it should not be sharpened lest it break. If the axis is removed with that then otherwise take the other instrument whose image is this, the first one is triangular at the end with some thickness.
A gentle-looking image of a triangular one.
And we also make use of this instrument with two horns, whose image is also this.
And other instruments and flasks that have been mentioned in the inventory of abscesses, and we also make use of this instrument which resembles a large pincers, whose image is this.
Triangular at the end, with some thickness little by little lest it break, and not be sharpened. And know that instruments of abscesses are many as well as all other instruments which cannot be counted, and the skilled craftsman with his cleverness may invent for himself instruments according to what the work and diseases themselves indicate.
Because among the diseases, that which was not mentioned by the ancients is an instrument for its different kinds, then if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth has broken or rotted, you search for it in its place with any of these instruments and Kullaib that were mentioned in removing axes.
And we make use of this instrument, whose image is shaped like a scoop.
There is some thickness in it little by little so that the bone is adjusted with it, lest the bone escapes until the bone comes out, and we treat the place with the suitable medicines for that. If the bone has a slight decay then strip it of its decay and rust until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-fourth.
In the treatment of suppurating swellings that have developed elsewhere.
The swellings, if they have erupted in an unnatural way, become ugly and are especially so when this occurs in women or servants; one should take a look, and if the swelling has appeared behind another tooth.
And it is not possible to drain or to stop it, then tie him up; and if it is adhering to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument whose shape is this:.
It resembles a small pointed beak and should be made of an Indian steel, very sharp at the end; it is best to cut with it for many days so that the tooth becomes hard and so that other teeth are not disturbed. And if it is erupting and has been drained, then drain it by means of a file from Indian steel will have this shape.
It is all from Indian steel, and the engraving on it is very fine, resembling a file with which needles are made; it cools the tooth little by little over many days with great gentleness so that the tooth does not become dislodged and fall out, then grasp it again and scrape it off with some forceps.
And if a tooth has cracked off some of it and is painful when speaking, then one should cool it as well so that the pain of the crack will go away, and become even and smooth, so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter Thirty-third.
In wiring moving teeth with threads of silver or threads of gold.
If the front teeth become loose and move with a blow or fall, and the patient cannot grasp anything to eat lest they fall out, and having treated them with adhesive remedies did not cure in that.
The trick is to tie with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and becomes rotten after some days, while gold remains unchanged always. The thread should be of medium thickness on the softness and thickness according to what fits between the teeth.
The picture of welding, that you take the thread and insert its bend between the two healthy molars then sew with the ends of the thread between the mobile teeth one or more until the sewing reaches the other molar from the other side.
Then return the sewing to the side from which you started and hold your hand gently and wisely until it does not move at all, and your thread should be tight at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose, then cut the ends of the thread with pincers and join them together and twist them and hide them between the healthy molar and the mobile tooth.
So that the tongue is not irritated, then leave it like this stretched as long as it remains, if it comes undone or breaks its stitches, redouble them with another thread and you will enjoy them like this for all eternity, and this is the picture of the teeth and the condition of the welding in two healthy molars and two mobile molars as you see:.
And the single molar or both may fall into their place and be welded as we have described and remain, but this is done by a skilled craftsman, and he may carve a bone from cattle bones to make it in the shape of the tooth and put it in the place where the tooth has fallen. And he sews as we said and it remains and he enjoys that.
The Thirty-fourth Chapter.
For cutting the ligament which is exposed under the tongue in those who prevent speech.
It may be that this ligament which is exposed under the tongue is either natural born with man or it may be an accidental one from a wound that has healed.
And the procedure for it is that you open the patient's mouth and his head in your lap, then lift up his tongue and cut that nervous ligament with a lancet until the tongue is released from its grasp. If there is some hardness and complexity within it and that was from a wound having healed, then insert a drill into it and cut it with a lancet until the ligament becomes loose and the knot unravels.
Beware that the incision be in depth of the flesh so as to cut vessels there, and thus cause bleeding; then apply compress in effect of the cut with rosewater or vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a thread of linen which the barber holds every night.
Lest it become sealed over again, for if there be bleeding of blood, then place on the spot Zaja crushed; and if the blood overwhelms you, bind the place with a lens-shaped compress suited to that. Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
For the removal of the toad born under the tongue.
It may occur under the tongue a swelling resembling the small toad which prevents the tongue from performing its natural act and perhaps becomes as large as to fill the mouth; and the treatment is that the barber opens his mouth opposite the sun and looks at the swelling.
If he sees it swollen, of a black or dark colour, hard and having no sensation for the barber, do not handle him; for it is cancer. But if it inclines to whiteness and contains moisture, then insert in it the forceps and cut it with a sharp knife, freeing him from all sides.
If the blood overwhelms you in the time of your treatment, place on it crushed Zaja until the bleeding ceases, then go back to your treatment until you remove it completely, and then apply compress with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with the rest of the suitable treatment until he recovers.
The Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
For the treatment of swelling of the tonsils.
And whatever grows in the throat from other tumours may expose within the throat glands resembling the glands which are exposed from outside called tonsils if they were treated with what I mentioned in the section, but they did not recover.
If it is a hard tumor, its color is pale and unresponsive to touch, do not treat it with iron. If it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not treat it with iron either, lest you cause bleeding. Rather, leave it until it ripens; it will either become soft or burst of itself.
If it is white in color and curved, and its origin is thin, this is what should be cut. The procedure for this is to look before operating, whether the tumor has calmed its heat completely or decreased somewhat in intensity.
So then sit the patient in a place exposed to the sun, with his head near you. Open his mouth and take a stick between your hands and compress his tongue downwards with it (as is shown).
You make it from copper or iron, thin like a razor. If you compress the tongue with it and the tumor becomes clear to you and falls upon it with your sight, then take a forceps and insert it into the stone and draw it outwards as much as possible without drawing any of the serous membranes with it.
Then cut it with a tool like this one, resembling scissors but with both ends curved and very sharp. It is made from Indian steel or Damascus iron.
If you do not have this instrument then cut it with a razor like this one, (its shape is) shown.
A sharp one from one side and not sharp from the other. After cutting one stone, cut the other in this same type of cut itself. Then after cutting, have the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding appears, have him gargle with water that has been steeped in the shells of walnuts or the leaves of mulberry trees or something like that from the galls until the bleeding stops. Then treat him until he recovers. And sometimes growths other than the two stones appear in the throat, so cut them as I mentioned in cutting the stones themselves, whether it is one thing or the other.
A woman was treated for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, causing numbness and potentially blocking the airway. She was unable to eat or drink water because of it.
And she was on the verge of death if she had stayed for a day or two, and the tumor had grown branches that poked out through her nostrils. She quickly used an awl to pierce one of them, then pulled it out with the awl, pulling out a suitable piece.
Then she cut it where she had caught hold of it from the nostril, and did that with what poked out from the other nostril. She then opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down, then inserted the awl into the tumor itself, and cut some of it off, and only a little bleeding occurred.
Then the woman's throat cleared, and from that moment on she began to drink water, then ate food. And I have not seen any recurrence of that tumor for a long time, and the tumor would leave behind another in its place until it passed away with her.
And the tumor inside her throat was alleviated and it stopped increasing, then it migrated to another location and I do not know what God did with her afterwards.
The Thirty-seventh Chapter.
Concerning the cutting of a tumor on the neck.
The one that is called a plexus if its nodule has descended to the neck and become inflamed, and was white and rectangular; it is then called a column. And if it was thick at the bottom and rounded, it is then called an obelisk. If it was treated with what we mentioned in the division, the treatment would not be effective.
And I have seen the hot tumor to subside from her, and it was thin, so it is necessary to cut it. And if some of it was united and rounded, and did not have length, and its color was bloody or black or had no sensation, then it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
There is a blemish on the face, so if you see it as described in terms of its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit in the sun's shadow and compress his tongue with the instrument whose description has been mentioned before, then insert the awl into the nub.
And pull it down and cut it with one of the instruments mentioned in cutting the two tonsils, and you should not cut more than what increased the natural condition without excess because if you cut more you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after cutting, you should use what we described in cutting the two tonsils to treat it until it heals. If the patient is shy about cutting it, you should employ a trick on him without fear or caution and the trick is that the patient puts his head into your lap.
Then compress his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take from the hot water mentioned in the chapter of cautery a handful that is not lukewarm and make it neither thick nor thin and fill this mixture into the cauterizer and its shape is: .
Its end where you put the medicine has a cauterizer like a spoonful of syrup, and place the instrument with the medicine on the same nub and the patient lies on his side so that saliva flows from inside his throat lest anything descend into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine and press it on the nub for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and been stilled by the bite of the medicine. And if you want to take a thread then wrap it on the tip of the instrument and have the thread become soaked in the medicine.
And insert the instrument with the thread into the tube from above until the thread sticks to the nub, do that repeatedly until you reach the desired level of cauterization then leave it alone because it will soften and fall off after three or four days. And if you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it.
After the application of the medication, wash around the boil with a compress soaked in fat and dry it with what is around it from the medicine. Then take a drink of cold water and be treated externally by bandages and internally by poultices until you are cured. This type of treatment is more secure than cutting and far removed from fear.
And the boil can also be treated in a softer way than with cauterization and cutting, it is treated by steam. Take fungi, zufa, sa'atar, citron, marjoram, rue and similar herbs. Gather all of them or some of them together in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And it is boiled and the pot is sealed with a covering of clay, and there is a hole left in the lid, through which the steaming vessel is placed, which is made from silver or copper.
The end containing the aromatics is inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam rises up through the tube until it satisfies the boil, then more can be added to it several times until it softens. And beware of making this treatment at first appearance of the boil.
For it often increases in the boil and it is desirable to do this when its hot boil subsides. And if you do not have this instrument, take a reed and attach a coating of an eggshell to its end so that the mouth of the patient does not burn.
Because the coating of the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth and this is one of the good treatments with its safety.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
For the extraction of thorns and what arises in the throat other than that.
Very often a bone or thick thorn arises in the throat, or something else; it is necessary to remove what appears and falls into sight after compressing the tongue with an instrument at sunrise.
Let it be known to you what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you that hides in the throat; you should induce the patient to vomit before his food gets digested in his stomach, for perhaps the thing emerging will come out with the vomit or the patient will swallow a piece of lettuce leaf or the root of parsley.
or he will swallow a crust of dry bread or take a piece of soft sea sponge then tie it to a thread and swallow it; if the thread reaches the place of the hook, pull it quickly, do that several times.
Often times the hook or bone gets stuck in there and comes out; if it doesn't come out as mentioned, then use an instrument of lead like this:.
It will be thicker than a probe slightly and at its tip there is a constriction that the patient puts in his loop gently while he raises his head upwards and guards against touching his larynx lest it cause him to cough, and pushes with the lead or bone, or the physician enters it with his hand,.
And entering the probe into it is better for his knowledge of the place of the emerging thing, and he pushes down or pulls with the instrument to upwards, all that as much as he prepares himself until it comes out,.
The 39th Chapter.
In the removal of the phlegm that has emerged in the throat.
If you have treated the phlegm as mentioned in the treatment with medicine and it did not work, then look at the throat of the patient when the sun is out after you compress his tongue with the instrument which I described to you.
If your sight falls on the phlegm, then grasp it with a small forceps or with a soft and firm spatula; if you are not able to do so, then take an irrigated tube and insert it into the throat of the patient near the phlegm, then insert a cauterized needle inside the tube.
He performs the treatment several times and has the patient abstain from water for a whole day. Then he takes permission, filled with cold water, and opens his mouth in it and rinses it with it without swallowing even a drop of it and moves the water here and there with his hand sometimes after another.
If the quinsy feels the water, it will drop to its place. If it does not come out as we described, clear the throat with urine and with a spittle instrument which I mentioned in the treatment of the boil. Do this several times; it will come out.
The method of the treatment by boiling is to take a vessel and put it in front of a flame until it is hot, then cover the vessel with a cloth which has an opening in its centre. The instrument will be placed through this opening and the vessel will be thrown into the boiling water, then the patient will have his mouth on the end of the instrument and close his mouth so that he knows that the boiling substance has reached his throat.
If the quinsy drops, if not, then boil it several times. The patient should endure thirst and eat salted foods and garlic but not drink water; it must come out with this treatment. This is a picture of an instrument which attracts the quinsy from the throat if sight falls on it.
And it is like a calabash as you see, except that it has this groove which enters the throat and its end is like the beak of a bird with the roughness of the file if it bites something without leaving it.
And another instrument which presses the tongue, and it is a wide iron ring that fits in the mouth above the tongue. It enters the mouth standing upright on its side and keeps the mouth open without the patient's will and he cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
The description of the instrument which opens the mouth to this size exactly.
Chapter Forty-four.
Make an incision in the tumor and excise it.
The tumours are of many kinds, specified one by one in this book, and they differ in their incision and excision from two aspects: the nature of the tumour itself and what it contains of moist substances.
And the second type is according to the places where they occur in the body, because the tumour occurring in the head is not like the tumour occurring in the buttocks and the tumour occurring in a place of fat is not like the tumour occurring at a joint; each has its own ruling.
And among the tumours there are those which should not be incised except after fermentation has occurred in them and they have become complete, and there are those which should be excised while still fresh and unfermented, like the tumours that occur near the joints.
For the tumour, if it occurs near a joint and its matter becomes putrid for a long time, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerve of that joint, so it will become a cause of atrophy of that limb, or it is near a main organ.
For if you delay incising it until it ferments, you will damage the main organ or it is near the buttocks, so you cut it fresh and not completely fermented like the tumour which occurs near the buttocks lest the pus ferments and spreads inside the buttocks and becomes gangrenous.
And you must learn the time to excise tumours which have completely fermented, and that is when there is calmness and pain in the tumour, and the fever has subsided, and the redness and pulse have decreased, and the head of the tumour becomes threatening and other symptoms.
And you should aim to incise the tumour below its place if possible, so that it is easier for the pus to drain down or in a more prominent and harder area of the tumour. And the incision should run along the length of the body if the tumours are on the hands and feet.
Places of muscles and tendons and nerves and vessels in general in all places which do not bend, and as for those that bend he goes with the poultice according to that place, and if the swelling is in the places of flesh then it is better to leave it without the poultice.
Until his swelling settles as we mentioned, you should not apply a poultice to him before that time, for it would cause an excessive discharge of pus from it and much dirt and filth, and perhaps it would harden his lips and nostrils, and some tumors would be applied on the surface of the body when necessary or according to what the member needs.
It is to be used in small tumors a single poultice, and in large tumors a wide poultice or many incisions as much as the size of the swelling, and there may be tumors which it is necessary to scrape the skin from them and cut if they have become like a rag.
And it was to the extent that it had died like what is exposed in many ulcers and abscesses, some of which cut a slit with three angles and some of them cut out from them like the shape of a paper plane or a cornaline.
And some of them are used with a circular incision and a crescent-shaped cut and similar ones from the incisions, and as for what does not have a head like smooth flat tumors then it is to be treated with a simple poultice only, and it is necessary if the swelling is large and has collected pus in several times and has been poulticed that one should not hasten lest all the discharge comes out at that time.
Rather he would take some of it out then tie the swelling until another day then take some of the pus also, doing that gradually until all of it comes out.
And especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a small child or an elderly person, for the vital spirit often dissolves with the discharge coming out suddenly and the patient may die without you feeling it, so be wary of this matter extremely.
After you have pounded on these growths, it is necessary to clean the wound and look; if the wound of the growth is small or there was only one simple slit, then use lint from flax or cotton wool. If the growth is large and there were many slits in the growth.
You should then insert a thread into each slit until they meet one another; and if the growth has been cut off from the skin or pared it, you should pack it with dry cotton wool or lint from flax without moisture and tie it up for three days.
Then remove it and treat it with whatever ointments are necessary until it heals; if there is bleeding on the site of your work, then use cold water and vinegar after you have soaked a flax cloth in them and placed it on the bleeding site several times.
If the bleeding continues, you should use the treatment, therapy and remedies that we have mentioned in many places of this book and in the chapters; if it is winter time and the site of the growth has many nerves, then soak the poultice with wine and hot oil.
And place it on the site, and if you are in summer time and the sites have a lot of blood vessels then carry the poultice soaked with water and oil or wine and oil, all of that cold, until if the third day as we said it is necessary to have the growth heal and be removed.
And use in its treatment what is mentioned until it heals, this is what you need to know about the treatment of growths in general and as for the specific method I have mentioned how to treat each growth briefly.
The forty-first chapter.
In the cut on the boils that appear on the scalp of the head.
There are small growths on the scalp of the head, which are types of scabs that contain pustules, they have a condition like a chicken's coop, and their kinds are many; some are fatty and others contain moisture resembling pus.
Among them is what contains moisture similar to broth and the like, among them is what is hard and frozen. All of them are harmless in cutting and removing them as long as nothing prevents you when cutting them a vessel.
And the procedure in cutting it is to probe it first with a tool that resembles this one called the meds which comes after this, until you know what it contains. If what it contains is moisture then cut it with a longitudinal incision and a simple incision on this pattern:
And start by cutting from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and if the moisture is released then cut the sac that contained that moisture and cut it completely, leaving nothing behind. For often it recures if something remains.
Then dip a thread in the resinous ointment, if it is available and not, then in saltwater, fill with it the wound and leave it until another day comes. For it will eat what remains of the sac, then redo on it the thread with the resin again and again as needed.
Until you are certain that there is nothing left of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the swelling contains fatty material then cut it along this pattern:
Make a longitudinal incision and spread the edges of the wound, and cut it out from all sides, and exert your effort in removing the peritoneum that contains it. If a vessel opposes you then do what I have described to you afterwards. And also do this for the swelling if it is hardened from the incision.
And the treatment of it as I have mentioned, and the incision on the hardened swelling is easier because it has little blood and moisture. And some of these swellings in the head of some people may not have any moisture with them at all, that being why I made an incision on a swelling that was in someone.
Head of an elderly woman, I have made the lump as hard as solid stone, with a white skin that could not be crushed and if thrown would break a beam. And this is different from other lumps which occur on the head like those which appear in the heads of children.
And when the ears have roots, split them all with a simple incision and make the opening from below so that the substance may flow down easily then treat it with what is suitable for it.
The 24th Chapter.
These lumps are often found in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and they can occur all over the body. Sometimes a single one is found in the neck and sometimes many are found there. Some of them originate from others.
And every pig from this kind is in a special sack inside it, as are the growths and lumps of the head which we have described. And there are many kinds of these pigs, some of them hardened, some of them filled with moisture, and some of them are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen one of them in good condition by touch, and it was close to the color of the skin, moving in all directions, neither attached to the nerve of the neck nor to a tendon or artery, nor swollen. It should be split with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape from line J to line B.
You should scrape it all around and stretch the skin with a scalpel or two or many scalps as we said about the lumps of the head, and bring it out little by little, so that it does not cut off a vein or a tendon, but the knife must not be very sharp.
Lest your hand gets cut or the patient becomes anxious and you cut what does not need to be cut, if you cut a vein or an artery and you are prevented from working, put powdered ze'z in the wound or some of the powders that stop bleeding.
Allow the wound to heal and leave it until the inflammation subsides and the wound relaxes as it begins to decay. Then, cut off any remaining blood clot with your index finger and take out any small pieces of flesh or membrane that remain.
If a large vein remains in the piglet, you should not cut it from its source, but rather tie it with a thread as thin as possible and leave it until it falls out on its own without causing any harm. Then fill the wound with cotton that has been soaked in the medicated ointment and treat it.
And if you cut the piglet all up, gather its edges together and sew it from side to side once you have made sure that there is no longer any bleeding. If you find that there has been considerable bleeding due to the size of the piglet.
It is advisable to cut near its root and base, then use suturing and what we have mentioned. And if the piglet contains moisture, bind it with a thin cloth where you see that it has become firm, placing the cloth below as we said.
Then use a poultice after the cloth is removed, made with the medicated ointment and similar substances so that it may consume what remains of the decay. Until you see that the wound has purified, then treat it with the emollient ointments for flesh until it heals.
The 43rd Chapter.
For an incision in the throat due to a swelling inside the esophagus.
The ancients have mentioned this incision in the throat, and I have not seen anyone in our country who has done it. And as for those suffering from strangulation of the esophagus, they should avoid making an incision in the throat, as it does them no good.
In order that all the bronchi and lungs be empty, but as for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no affliction in the trachea, then an incision in the throat should be used to escape from the trouble which will result from suffocation.
If we wish to do so, then the larynx should be incised under three circles of the trachea's circles or four small cuts in breadth between two circles as much as the cut would be in the peritoneum not in the pleura and this place is suitable for the cut.
Because it is lean of flesh and its blood vessels are distant, if the doctor is cowardly then he should cover the throat skin with an iron instrument then cut the skin until reaching the trachea avoiding the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should cut the peritoneum which we have described and he should feel the incision of the trachea from the sputum that comes out from it along with what is ruptured and the cessation of voice, and he should leave the wound open for a time until the fear of choking goes away. Then he should gather together the lips of the wound from the skin.
And he should make an incision alone without the pleura, then use medicines that promote flesh healing until it heals. He who wrote this book said: The explanation of these words which we have mentioned is if they see the ulcer has closed his throat one of those tumors which they mentioned.
And the patient was near death and he himself thought that his breathing would stop, so they went to incise the larynx in order for the patient to breathe on the place of the wound some breaths and be saved from death. And they were ordered to leave the wound open until the crisis is over and its period becomes three days and so on.
So then they were ordered to sew up the wound and treat it until it heals. And what I have seen with my own eyes that a servant took a knife and sent her on her throat cut some part of the bronchus, so I was called to treat her, but she was as bad as one who is slaughtered, so I uncovered the wound.
I found the blood that came out of the wound to be little, and I became certain that it had not cut a vein nor an artery. The breath was coming from the wound, so I stitched the wound until it healed, and nothing but a murmur in the voice was presented to the servant.
And she returned after some days to her best state, so from here we say that cutting the trachea is not hazardous.
The Fourth Chapter Forty-fourth.
In cutting on the swelling that appears from outside in the bronchi.
This swelling which is called the tumor of the bronchi is a large swelling on the color of the body and it is common in women and there are two types.
It is either natural or a complication, so as for the natural one there is no remedy for it and as for the complicated one it will be of two kinds, one resembling fatty goods and the other resembling the tumor which forms from a twisted artery and in its incision there is danger. It should not be attempted with iron at all, except if a small part of it is probed and searched with the probe and I found that it resembled fatty goods and was not connected to anything of the vessels, so I cut it as one cuts on fatty goods. It should be taken out along with what it contains in the sac if it is in a sac, otherwise all of it should be investigated and then treated as needed.
The Fifth Chapter Forty-fourth.
In cutting on types of fatty goods.
Fatty goods are many in kind and I have mentioned all their kinds in the classification, and it is necessary to inform here of the difference between fatty goods and abscesses, for they are complications. So I say that an abscess will be with heat and fever and severe pains until the pus subsides. When the purulence has been completed, then fever and rigor seize it; and neither heat nor fever nor pains remain with it. It is contained in a membrane which is its special envelope and which is of the colour of the body. Its beginning is like that of an abscess and it becomes larger or smaller.
It is of two kinds; either it is fatty, or it contains moisture. The colours of the moisture are many, as I have mentioned in the classification. Therefore, if you come to treat the purulence, you must first probe and investigate it with the instrument called the medissah, in the form that appears in the chapter which comes after this one.
Measure the size of the swelling, then withdraw the medissah and look at what comes out in its place. If a watery discharge comes out, whatever its colour may be, incise it with a small incision, as I have mentioned for all swellings. And if no discharge comes out after removing the medissah, know that it is fatty.
Incise it with a sutured incision in the form I have shown you, and tie it up with ligatures. Then remove the skin from all sides gently, and preserve it in a sac if possible so that you can take it out correctly with the purulence.
If the sac bursts during the operation and you cannot remove it correctly, that occurs often. Then take it out bit by bit until nothing remains. For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the purulence is likely to do what happens most of the time.
If it prevails over you and only a small part remains, then sew up the wound with some sharp lancets when you have finished. Cover it with something to calm the hot swelling and treat it with all other treatments until it heals. And if the purulence is large, cut along its edge and treat it as I have mentioned for what requires suturing.
If a bleeding or non-bleeding vein obstructs you, take the powdered alum and apply it to the wound in abundance. Leave it closed for two or three days until the wound dries up and the bleeding stops, then return to cut what remains of the fabric.
Chapter Forty-Sixth.
Tools for various purposes.
The instruments that are used in cutting and splitting the flesh, which are three types; large ones, medium ones, and small ones.
A picture of a large reamer:.
A picture of a medium reamer:.
A picture of a small reamer:.
It is made of iron or steel, square in shape and firmly constructed to quickly enter the tumors. And these are pictures of drills which are also called awls and they are three types; large ones, medium ones, and small ones. A picture of a large drill:.
A picture of a medium drill:.
A picture of a small drill:.
It is suitable for searching with it the tumors, wounds, excrescences and accumulations from what is inside them of bones and other things. It is made smooth, polished like silver or arsenic or copper or iron or brass and the best of them is what was made from arsenic.
And drills can also be made from black lead and it is suitable to search with it the excrescences that have a twisting inside them which makes them turn straight, despite this twisting. And they are three types; long ones, medium ones, and short ones.
According to the depth of each excrescence, making its thickness according to the size and narrowness of the excrescence. A picture of a large lead drill:.
A picture of a medium lead drill:.
A picture of a small lead drill:.
Images of forceps, which are very varied; for there is the simple type with one hook and it has three types: large, intermediate, and small. And there is the type of forceps for the blind person, and it has three types. And there is the type of forceps that is scalded, which has two hooks. And there are three types, and one of them is forceps with three hooks, and it has three types. And all these instruments need each one in its place. Image of a simple large forceps. Image of a simple medium-sized forceps. Image of a small simple forceps.
Image of large blind forceps. Image of medium-sized blind forceps.
Image of small blind forceps.
Image of large forceps with two hooks. Image of medium-sized forceps with two hooks. Image of small forceps with two hooks.
Image of large forceps with three hooks.
Image of medium-sized forceps with three hooks. Image of small forceps with three hooks.
And these are the images of the scrapers which are used to cut and scrape the goods and tumors, and they have three types; for there is large, intermediate, and small. Image of a large scraper.
Image of an intermediate scraper.
Image of a small scraper.
Its blades, which it uses to cut, are limited and the other parts are unlimited, but rather made so that they may be used in scraping a commodity when fear of cutting a vein or nerve exists lest there be bleeding into the wound and relief is found a little from the pain that he finds when scraping the tumor.
And these are images of the extractors, and they have three types; for there is large, intermediate, and small. Image of a large extractor.
It is made from a copper instrument resembling an awl that has a handle and at one end a broad spoon-shaped piece, two-layered, in the head of which there is a hidden knife like a bird's tongue, running inside and outside as you wish.
Pictures of the dissectors which are placed between the fingers when cutting out tumors, the patient does not feel them, and they are three kinds because there is a large one, a medium one and a small one. A picture of a large dissector.
Pictures of the hemostats by which bleeding is cut off, and they are three kinds because there is a large one, a medium one and a small one. A picture of a large hemostat.
It is made from copper or tin, rolled into a length as you see, and it should be attached to the finger. You should have these types of hemostats in large and small sizes so that you can cut the blood quickly when needed, and if a medicine is not available.
But it should not be used to cut blood in all places of the body, rather it is used in bloody areas such as the thigh muscle and the buttock and the arm and the breast and the abdomen and similar moist fatty organs.
And instruments are made from it smaller, resembling walnut shells, like this picture.
It cuts the blood if it bleeds from a place of venipuncture or when cutting an artery or vein, and instruments are made from it rolled like this picture.
The Seventh Chapter Forty-Nine.
The swelling in the breast of men.
What resembles the breast of women; it inflates in some people when they reach puberty, so that it becomes similar to that of women and remains warm and ugly. Whoever dislikes this should cut through the breast with a curved incision as shown below.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~:. Then I excise the fat entirely, then fill the wound with medicated plaster, then sew up the edges of the wound and treat him until he heals. If the breast tilts downwards and relaxes into its bone as it does in women.
So it is necessary to cut into its upper parts with two incisions resembling the shape of a holly leaf. Each one of them should be connected at their ends so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one in this figure. From line ~b~ to line ~j~. Then peel the skin in between the incisions, remove the fat and use what we have mentioned of stitching, dressings and whatever treatment is needed until he heals.
If what needs to be cut does not fit in with you because of the fear of the surgeon or because of bleeding, it is necessary for you to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in the thick ointment and leave it until it eats away what remains of the fat then treat him until he heals.
Chapter forty-eight.
In tumours which appear under the armpit.
This tumour which appears under the armpit is of a type of hard pigmented cyst containing liquids, from it what contains liquids should be cut with a curved incision as shown below.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, if it has drained all that is inside the tumour, then stuff it with wool and leave it until another day, then remove the wool.
Treat with the appropriate poultice until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of a hog's knot, incise it as we mentioned in the incision on a pig, whether the cut extends to the point that it lets out pus, apply the cataplasm as we mentioned previously.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In the incision of the tumor which is exposed by an artery or a vein and is called aneurisma.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it becomes adherent, a tumor is often exposed from that and also a swelling can occur in the vein.
And the signs by which it can be known that the swelling and puffing are from an artery or a vein, if the swelling is from an artery it will be flatulent and accumulated in the depth of the body, and if you push the swelling with your finger you will feel as though there is a crust.
And if it is from a vein, the swelling will be curved in front of the body, and the incision on these swellings is hazardous, especially in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other places in the body, and they are very large; one should avoid treating them with iron.
And also, if it is in the limbs or the head, one should avoid treating them. As for that which is from a swelling of an artery, incise it on the skin with a long cut, then widen the cut with lancets, then remove the artery and free it from adhesions.
Until it is revealed, then insert a needle under it and push it through to the other side and bind the artery with a thread tied in two places as I have described binding the arteries in the groins, then wash out the place between the ligatures until all the blood that is there comes out.
A boil will heal, then treatment is used which causes purulence until the strings come out. Then it is treated with ointments that are suitable for this until it clears up.
If the boil has split a vein, it should be held with your hand as much of the boil as possible along with the skin then an instrument (needle) is inserted below the place that was held by the hand and a thread passed through it until it comes out on the other side. Then a good knot is tied to the boil as I mentioned in binding an abscess from both sides with one end of the thread, if you fear that the threads will come undone, then another needle with another thread is inserted under the whole boil where the first needles intersect.
Tie your threads in four places then cut the boil in the middle until what is inside comes out, then cut off the dead skin and leave the remaining tissue tied, then put on a compress which has been soaked in wine and oil. Then treatment is used with salves and plasters until it clears up.
The 50th chapter.
In the boil which appears due to a nerve plexus.
As the boil is exposed in an artery and a vein, likewise it is exposed in a nerve if there is a blow or excessive fatigue has occurred in it, or something similar and that is more so in places of the elbows and armpits.
And in every place where the joints move, a boil forms which is a bad one and its colour resembles that of the rest of the body and it is usually without pain, but if pressed hard with force it feels like numbness and the boil is not accumulated in depth inside the body.
But it is under the skin and it moves in every direction without going forward or backward, so whatever of that occurs in the joints should not be exposed with iron for it may cause inflammation, and whatever of that occurs on the head or forehead.
Cut the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small grasp it with a forceps and cut its base, and if it is large remove it with a saw and then take out the tumor. Close the wound by stitching and treat him until he recovers.
Chapter Fifty-One.
In cutting out ulcers which are exposed in the abdomen.
Many people are exposed to ulcers in their bellies and elsewhere, which are called fungal ulcers because of their resemblance to fungi, its origin is thin and its head is thick. Its edges may be transformed and some may become very large.
And I have seen a man with two ulcers in his belly, they resembled fungi more than anything else, their colour was white and thin at its base which had transformed into edges and become rough. Moisture always flowed from them. I cut them out and they weighed about 18 drachmas on one scale, and around 6 drachmas on the other.
And the operation in cutting them is that you observe, if the ulcer is moist and the colour of the tumour is white, moist and thin at its base then cut it out with a wide scalpel, and have vinegar nearby to heat over the fire, for often much blood spurts when cutting into them.
So you take a lead thread and tie it around the tumour which has this shape, leave it for two days then add more tightness to the lead thread so that it stays tied.
The more you intervene in the tumour until it is cut off and falls away from itself without any harm, if the tumour has a thick base then there is some fear and risk when cutting into it, especially when it is in the belly but sometimes half of it or part of it can be cut.
Then you cauterize it so that it does not return, and then treat the wound until it heals. And beware of cutting a tumour which is pale in colour, insensitive to touch, with an unpleasant appearance, for it is a cancerous tumour, and we will come to mentioning cancer after this.
Chapter the Second and Fifty-second.
In the treatment of a serpent's sting.
It is caused by a rupture of the peritoneum in the abdomen, from which there comes out an intestine or bladder, or it is a burst blood vessel, as mentioned before, or it is pus that has accumulated.
If it is caused by a rupture of the peritoneum and an intestine has come out, then the colour of the swelling will be similar to that of the body and there will be a lot of fluid without any pain, and the position will be obvious. And if it is caused by the bursting of a bladder, its position will be very different from what we have described. If you press on it with your fingers, it will disappear then return, and sometimes there may be a lump with it, and it will become very swollen when bathing and great fatigue sets in. And if it is caused by dampness, it will be fluid.
It does not disappear when pressed with the hand, nor does it increase or decrease. And if it is caused by blood, then in addition to these signs, the swelling will show blackness. And if it is caused by a tumour that has grown from fat, then the swelling will be swollen and hard, and will remain firm on one side.
If it is caused by pus, its touch will be fluid. The treatment for that is to observe. If the serpent's sting is caused by blood from a vessel or vein or pus, then you should abstain from treating it, for there is fear and confusion in doing so, as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned tumours caused by vessels and veins.
If the serpent's sting is caused by a burst intestine or intestine, then the practitioner should order him to hold himself and stand upright with his legs straight, then he should apply the medicated resin all around the swelling. Then order him to lie down in front of you on his back, then grasp the swelling with a broad lancet all around it at the place where you applied the medicated resin, then insert a large needle into the centre of the swelling upwards, then bind the place of the ligature tightly with a strong thread or a wet silk string.
The knot of the ligature will be tightened, then opened in the middle above the ligated mass. Insert your index finger into it and look for a bladder. If you find it, the ligature has taken hold of it. Loosen the knot and push the bladder back into the abdomen. If you find an intestine, draw it back with forceps.
Cut the hernia, and if an artery or vein blocks you, tie it off. Then go back to your work and take two needles with strong thread. Put the threads into the ligature that you made around the mass from four sides that you have passed through them, then pull the mass on the threads.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the adhered flesh rots and falls away or is cut off if it becomes rotten. Then treat it as needed with ointments until it heals. If there was a cyst in the inflamed flesh.
Or if there is dampness, you should compress the tumor as we said and take out the blood or dampness that you find in it, then treat it with what cures the place.
Chapter 53.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat them with medicine and warned against treating them with iron so that they do not ulcerate, and we have mentioned the cancer that originates in the uterus and warned about its treatment.
And the ancients mentioned that when cancer is in a place where it can be removed entirely, such as cancer in the breast or in the groin and similar developed parts to remove it with its stem especially if it was initial and small. But if it has grown large then it should not be approached.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, and I did not see any other before me who reached that point. And the procedure for it, if it is in a developed place as we said, is to go ahead slowly until the tumor comes out once or twice then separate it if it was in the veins or full clearly.
Then the patient is placed on a block that enables him to work, and he receives from the surgeon the instruments which are suitable for him. Then his body is covered with cloth all around until nothing of his original skin remains, allowing the blood to flow without cutting it quickly.
Make a pressure on the places and release all the thick blood with your hand or whatever instruments you can, if in your work you are obstructed by great bleeding from cutting an artery or vein, then bind it until the bleeding stops, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
In the treatment of an abscess.
We have previously informed in the classification of dropsy and how water accumulates, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines. The type that is treated with iron is only the edematous one and does not approach the scirrhous nor the fleshly ones at all.
If you have treated this type of edematous abscess with medicines and your treatment did not work, then look. If the patient had indeed weakened excessively or was afflicted with another disease besides the abscess, such as being...
Beware not to treat him with iron if he has a disease such as cough or diarrhea, and so on. If you see the patient having great strength and is not afflicted with any other disease besides the abscess, and is neither young nor old, then direct the treatment towards standing the patient upright in front of you. And a servant behind him compresses his abdomen with both hands and pushes the water down towards the back, then take a pointed lancet like this:.
Having a groove on both sides, long and sharp like a lancet except for some slight curve so that it does not slip out when working near the intestines and causing harm, then check if the abscess is from the direction of the intestines.
It should be cut with the knife from the navel three fingerbreadths downwards over the hip. If the inflammation was caused by a liver disease, then your incision should be shorter than this, three fingerbreadths long. If it is caused by spleen disease, then your incision should be on the right side, three fingerbreadths deep.
And also the incision should not be on the side where the patient wants to lie down, lest the intestines flow into that weak place. Then make a hole in all the skin with the instrument and enter the instrument in this incision and raise your hand.
With the clyster, between the skin and the peritoneum as if you are stripping it off, until the amount that you strip is like the nail or similar. Then puncture the peritoneum until the clyster reaches an empty place which is the place of water, then take it out and enter into this hole the instrument that looks like this.
And it is like a tube from thin rod, made of silver or copper or smooth and polished cane, having at its lower part a small hole and on its sides three holes, two of them from one side and the third from the other as you see.
And he may place its tip with a holder like a reed pen on this shape.
On its upper end is a ring. So the instrument if it reaches the water then its handle drops on the instrument, and thus sucks from the water in that time an intermediate amount because if you suck from it more than what is due in that time then perhaps the patient will die with the dissolution of his vital spirits.
Or he exposes him to a cloth which brings near death, but sucks from it according to his strength and the condition of the patient indicates by his pulse and his good colour, then take out the instrument and retain the water for that is what is retained in its handle.
Because of the skin that holds the perforation on the peritoneum which I mentioned, that you should treat it in this manner. Then return the instrument another day if you see the wound likely to do so.
And also from water, a small amount do this for some days while on the neck and beware of errors until there is no longer much water. If it weakens on the wound and leaves much water active, treat him with burying in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and sun and pour it on thirst and treat him with dried medicines until he is healed, and apply to the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of water as I described above.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
In the treatment of children who are born and their urinary openings are not perforated or the hole is narrow or in an incorrect place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb and without being circumcised in the penis, it is necessary to cut him from the moment he is born.
With a very fine blade on this shape:
Then put a fine small nail of lead in the hole and tie it and keep it for three or four days. Then when he wants to urinate, push it away with a stick and then return it, and if you do not make the lead, it may be that the urine which flows on the place does not leave him to close.
And as for the one whose hole is narrow, treat him with lead as we said for many days until it widens. And those of them whose hole is in an incorrect place, that some are born and the hole is at the end of the penis so he cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the penis with his hand up and before that, the sperm cannot reach the womb on straightness and this is a very bad disease. And the way to do with that is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then extend the catheter with your left hand firmly and clean the head of the urethra with a knife or a sharp forceps as large as a pen nib, so that it resembles a catheter tube, and let the hole be in the middle where it should.
And beware of bleeding while you are doing this, for it is common; and answer with what cuts the blood and cures the wound until it heals.
The Fifty-sixth Chapter.
In the prolapse which is exposed in the vagina and the catheter and the soot and the corruption and the adhesion of the covering to the catheter.
This prolapse often occurs in the urethra and it is a growth of foul-smelling flesh, which may be good or bad; if it is not bad, you should tie it with a gentle ligature.
And cut it until you purify all of it, then place a thread soaked in Egyptian ointment on it, and then treat it with the aloeswood ointment until it heals; and if the prolapse is bad and foul-smelling, you should use the caustic after cutting and cleaning it.
If the prolapse is in an uncauterized vulva and some of it is inside and some outside, you should first remove the part that is inside until it heals, then treat the rest from the outside.
Because you cannot be sure that the vulva will not tear if you treat them both together; and it may also occur in women and in the vulva, soot and corruption, and you should cut out all of what has turned black as if it is going to corrupt or has already corrupted.
Then smear it with honey, along with the crushed and pounded camphor and the caraway seeds, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals; if bleeding occurs, use the caustic with a luted crescent on it in this manner:
For a wound which is bleeding and has become foul, the application of the pessary will be beneficial for both. If the poultice dries up quickly, it should be inserted into the penis with a lead tube so that the fluid may flow out onto it; as for adhesions between the membrane and the poultice.
And this adhesion occurs in those whose membrane has become healthy and did not heal after circumcision, and it may be exposed by an injury or a swelling; the poultice should then be peeled off with a moist sponge until the bond is dissolved and the poultice is freed from every direction.
If it becomes difficult to distinguish between them during examination, the poultice and membrane should be peeled off a little; for the membrane is thin so that it may rupture easily because of its thinness, then separate the membrane from the poultice with a thin cotton cloth which has been steeped in cold water lest they become stuck also.
Then he should treat it with a styptic concoction so that it may congeal.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
Concerning the purification of infants and the treatment of what afflicts them.
Circumcision is nothing but the separation of connection like other wounds except that it was a thing done by our will and its use in infants in particular necessitates that we set about the best treatment for it.
And the easier path leading to safety, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not practiced among them and we have acquired it.
Through experience, and as I have found the majority of artisans and barbers using purification with a razor and scissors and using threads and bandages and cutting with a knife, and I have tried all these methods.
I did not find a better cleansing than with the razor and sewing with thread; because cleansing with a cloth is often escaped by the skin, because the skin of the covering has two layers, so it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower one.
He is forced to cut again and the pain is resumed; and cleansing with a catheter does not guarantee cutting off the end of the urethra, because it may enter its hole; and as for cleansing with an awl, perhaps the skin will burst and your work will be spoiled or the skin of the child is short by nature...
Many of them are born like that and do not need cleansing, which I have seen; and as for cleansing with a razor and sewing with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the cut is proportional so that the blade from above is similar to the one from below.
So, when you have stretched your hand to match the two blades cut on one measure and at the same time so that the string becomes a barrier for the skin of the urethra from all sides without any mistake, and the first aim is to deceive the child.
And especially if it is one of those who understand a little, that you are only tying the thread in his urethra and leaving him until another day then calming him down with every face you can show him, then stopping him in front of you standing upright.
And he should not be sitting and hide the razor in your cloak or under your foot so that the child's eye does not fall on it at all, nor on anything of the instruments; then put your hand into his urethra and blow on the skin to stretch it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then clean out what accumulates in it from dirt, then tie the place that is shown with a thread of two twists then tie below it a second ligature slightly, then grasp with your thumb and pinky finger the place of the lower ligature firmly and cut between them. Then lift the skin upwards quickly and take out the head of the hydatic vessel, then let a little blood flow from it for it is better and less painful for the hydatid than the other ways. Then clean it with a damp cloth and sprinkle on it burnt dry ash of the quince fruit, for this is the best remedy tried or the most accurate cautery also.
Then lift the skin upwards quickly and take out the head of the hydatic vessel, then let a little blood flow from it for it is better and less painful for the hydatid than the other ways. Then clean it with a damp cloth and sprinkle on it burnt dry ash of the quince fruit, for this is the best remedy tried or the most accurate cautery also. Then apply to it a plaster made from above with a cloth, mixed with cooked egg in rose water and rosewater jelly, and leave it on until the next day. Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
And this is a picture of the instrument used for cleaning:.
It will be a straight-bladed cutter with no curve, threaded and the length of the blades as long as the handles. And as for mistakes that occur in cleaning, perhaps all or part of the inner skin is turned over when cutting, so it should be spread out with your finger before the place becomes swollen.
It is cut straight, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then grasp it with forceps and cut it. If after three days the part beneath the head of the hydatic vessel remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling settles down and then remove it gently.
Cut it according to what is ready for you, and keep away from the head of the hydatic vessel. For if a part of the head of the hydatic vessel is cut off, that does not harm. Heal the wound with the remedies that we have mentioned in the chapter on remedies.
And if a part of the skin above is cut and shrunk up, that will not also harm. Heal it with what we have mentioned until it cures,.
The 48th chapter.
In the treatment of obstructed urine in the bladder.
Urine retained in the bladder is due to a stone, or dried blood, or filth, or flesh that has grown and the like. If you treat this as mentioned, then the varieties of treatment prescribed are to be followed.
And if the urine does not pass and you see that its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should sit on his haunches, a man will ride on his back and stretch his belly against his back, and he should grasp himself as much as possible.
So the neck of the bladder is then forced to push the stone behind, and the urine will pass. And if it does not pass as mentioned and the patient's condition becomes worse, a device called catheter, which is its shape:, should be used.
It is made from thin, smooth and polished silver tube, narrow like a bird's quill, long about one finger-breadth and half. It has a small spout at its head, and the outlet of urine with it should take a twisted thread and tie it tightly on one end with wool or cotton.
And the thread is inserted into the lower end of the catheter, and it is moistened with oil or fat or egg white. Then the patient sits on a chair.
Then the bladder and urethra are squeezed with moistened liniment or oil and warm water. Then the catheter is inserted gently into the urethra until it reaches its root, then the urethra is bent upwards towards the belly button and then the catheter is pushed inside.
Until if the urethra is bent then the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches close to the prostate, the man leans down and the catheter is inside him, then he is pushed forward until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that something has been reached empty.
He makes a catheter of this rank because the flow channel in which the urine flows is bent, then he pulls out the thread with the soft wool tightly, for the urine follows the soft wool; then he takes it out and lets the urine drain, and repeats the procedure.
She continues to do that until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
How to Catheterize the Bladder with a Reed.
How to Catheterize the Bladder with a Reed. Instruments suitable for this are made from gilded bronze or ivory which have a long tube on one side, and wanted to squirt water and medicine into it, so that would be called the reed and here is its picture:.
It is made from gilded bronze or ivory with a long tube on a curved surface, polished all over except for one end which is closed. There are three holes in it, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
And the hollow place in which the catheters are placed is as much as fills it without any excess, so if you pull something with it from the moistures, it will be pulled and if you push it, it will move forward like what is made for throwing oil in naval battles.
If you wanted to drain the moistures into the bladder, then you would insert the tip of the reed into the moisture and pull with the catheter upwards, so that the moisture will be attracted into the hollow of the reed. Then you would enter its end into the urethra as we described in the catheters, and then push the moisture with the catheter.
For that moisture will reach the bladder as it should until the patient feels it, and here is a picture of another catheter which also drains the bladder.
It is made from bronze or ivory, its top resembles a small funnel and below it is a pouch in which the strap is placed. Then you take a bladder of a young camel and put into it the moisture that you want to catheterize with, then tie it tightly between the two pouches with a doubled thread.
Warm the moisture slightly over the fire. Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra, and pull your hand on the bladder with the warmth tightly until the patient feels that the warmth has reached the bladder.
If the bladder does not contract, take a piece of linen and make a circle from it. Puncture it from all its sides, then insert a thick thread into that puncture as it turns around. Then gather the circle as one gathers cloth after putting what you want of moistures, paints and water in it.
Then tie it in the device and do with it as you did with the bladder, moving your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Removal of Stones.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medications, and we have mentioned the differences between the stones that are formed in the kidney and those formed in the bladder, and their signs; and we have also mentioned the stone in which surgical intervention by hand or incision takes place.
And that is the stone formed in the bladder especially and that attaches itself to the urethra. I am describing it clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone formed in the bladder is more often seen in children, and one of its signs is that the urine comes out of the bladder with a thin, watery texture.
And it shows sand in it, and its presence is felt and tampered with, and it often hangs down and spreads out. The rectum also appears in many of them along with it. And the removal from children becomes easier until they reach fourteen years old, but it becomes difficult for the elderly. As for young men, it is moderate between that.
And what is more, the treatment of its stone becomes easier and what is smaller is the opposite. So if we are to treat it, then first the patient should be catheterized with a catheter that extracts all the sediment from his bladder, for it may prevent the presence of the stone when examined.
Then the patient is lifted up with a rod; he shakes and moves downwards so that the stone falls into the bladder neck or is thrown from a high place several times. Then you make him sit in front of you, erect, his hands under his thighs, so that the entire bladder tilts downwards, then you probe him.
And you probe him from the outside; if you feel the stone in the space, then rush to cut it; and if it doesn't fall down, leave it for a moment. It is necessary that you wipe the index finger of the left hand with grease if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If he is completely a boy, you put your finger into his penis and search for the stone until it falls under your finger; then you move it a little bit by a little bit towards the bladder neck and compress it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you want to cut it.
And order a servant to compress the bladder with his hand and another servant to extend his right hand towards the top and with the other hand to extend the skin underneath towards the place where the cut is. Then take the curved instrument whose picture is this:.
And you cut between the scrotum and the penis, not in the middle but beside the left groove; the cut is on the same place as the stone and your finger in the penis while you are pressing it outwards, so that the cut is wide from outside and narrow from inside to the extent that the stone can come out of it.
Not larger, perhaps you pressed the stone with the finger in the penis at the cut and it came out without difficulty; know that there may be angles and branches to the stone which make its exit difficult.
And among them is smooth like walnut and curved, so its exit is easy; but what has angles and branches to it, you increase the cut a little more; if it does not come out that way, then you need to hold onto it firmly with a grip that is sharp like a razor.
Correct the stone so that it does not slip from your hand. Then, either enter under it a gentle instrument with a blunted end, or if you cannot manage it, widen the incision slightly. And if something of blood overpowers you, cut it off with cauterization.
If there are more than one, first push the largest into the bladder then make an incision on it, then push the smaller ones after that. Do likewise if there are more than two. And if they are extremely large, it is ignorance to make a large incision on them, because either of two things will result from it.
Either he will die, or a constant dripping of urine will occur from him because the wound will not heal at all. But try to push it until it comes out, or turn it in its fracture with the calipers until it comes out definitely.
If you have finished your work, then close the wound with a compress and bandage, and tighten it. Then pour over it an infusion of oil or drink mixed with rose water and cold water to calm the hot swelling. The patient should lie on his back without having the bandage changed until the third day.
If it becomes suppurated, uncover the place with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with the resinous ointment and the ointment of saponaria until it heals. And if there is an excessive hot swelling in the wound, or inflammation and similar things such as blood freezing in the bladder and urine not flowing from it, this will be known by the blood coming out along with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it will call to the corruption of the bladder and its stones. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply all kinds of treatment as it has been described until it heals.
And it is advisable during all the time of treatment to bind the thighs together and tie them up in order to keep the remedies that are placed on the place, in a firm position. If the stone was small and became lodged in the urethra and urine did not come out from it, treat it as I have described before it becomes incised.
I frequently resort to this treatment in place of cutting, where one takes a piece of iron from the metal of a forge which has this shape:.
Like a triangle at the end, sharp and hooked on an end. Then one takes a thread and binds it to the catheter under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder; then one inserts the iron into the urethra gently until the instrument reaches the same stone.
And one turns the instrument with your hand in the stone a little, a little, while you try to pierce it until you pass it from the other side; then urine flows out of its opening. Then you grasp what remains of the stone from outside the catheter; it crumbles and comes out with the urine and the lesion is cured.
If this treatment is not available to you due to an obstacle that prevents you from doing so, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread over the stone; then cut on the stone in the same catheter between the two threads and it will come out.
Then the ligature will cover and clean the coagulated blood that has remained in the wound. And it was necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other one above, so that if the thread comes loose after the stone is removed, the skin will go back into place and cover the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to raise the skin upwards if you tied the upper thread so that it goes back into place and covers the wound as we said.
The Fifty-first Chapter.
For extracting stones from women.
Stones are rarely formed in women; if one of them presents with a stone, its treatment is difficult and refused by many reasons, one that the woman may be a virgin, and another that you will not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If it is a virgin or one of the prohibited degrees and the third that you do not find a woman who excels in this craft, especially the work with the hand, and the fourth that the place of incision on the stone is far from the place of the stone, therefore you need to cut deep.
And in that there is a risk, if necessity calls for it, you should take a virtuous woman doctor, and little do they exist; if none are available, ask an innocent and trustworthy physician or a virtuous midwife who has knowledge in the affairs of women, or a woman experienced in this craft with some indication.
Have her prepare and command her to do all that she commands her to do in inspecting the stone first, this is that she look if the woman is a virgin, then let her insert her finger into her backside and inspect the stone; if she finds it and presses it under her finger.
Then command her to cut into her; if she is not a virgin and was married, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and inspect the stone after that she put her left hand on the bladder and squeeze it well.
If she finds it, then have her guide it from the mouth of the bladder downwards to the extent of her ability until it reaches the root of the thigh, then cut into her at the meeting point of the middle of the vagina near the root of the thigh from whichever side is convenient for her and felt the stone in that direction.
And her finger does not move from the stone compressed under it, and let the incision be small at first then insert the rod into that small incision; if she feels the stone, she should increase the incision as much as she knows the stone comes out of it, and know that types of stones are many.
Among them are small and large, rough and hairy, long and turned, with branches; know their kinds so you can deduce what you want from it; if blood overpowers you, leave in the place of powder sprinkled on it and hold it for a moment until the blood stops then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, work with yourself in mind to count among the instruments I mentioned for the removal of stones from men to help you in your job. If bleeding prevails over you and you have learned that the pulse of blood is from a cut artery then place sutures on the site.
And bind him with the strong bandages tightly and leave it, do not touch it and leave the stone, do not remove it. Perhaps the vein had died then treat the wound. If the intensity of the blood had calmed after days and the site had softened then go back to your work until you take out the stone.
Chapter Two and Fifty.
In the incision on the urinary bladder.
The urinary bladder is the gathering of moisture in the white omentum that is under the skin of the testicle surrounding the ovary, and it is called the scrotum. It may be enclosed in a special membrane, provided by nature on one side of the ovary.
Until he thinks it is another ovary and it will be between the skin of the testicle and the white omentum that we mentioned, but that will not happen except in rarity. This urinary bladder is produced from weakness that exposes to women so this matter is assigned to it and sometimes it is exposed because of a blow on the women.
And this moisture has many colors, sometimes its color is yellowish, sometimes it is reddish like blood, sometimes it is blackish, and sometimes it is whitish like water, and that is what it usually is. And the signs by which one recognizes it.
Where the water is gathered, if it is in the white omentum that we mentioned, then the swelling will be rounded a little to length like an ovary shape and the testicle will not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a separate membrane for it, then the swelling will be rounded on one side of the ovary.
Because of this, man will imagine it to be another egg, and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white spermatic cord then it falls under the sense, but if you want to know the color of the moisture sprinkle the tumor with a rectangular lint which has been previously shown, what comes out in its effect I have ruled upon it according to what is inside.
If we are going to treat with iron, it should be that the healer orders to let blood if possible and you see his body is full then he lies on his back on a slightly raised thing and put many hot pads under him and you sit on his left side.
And you order a servant to sit on his right side and to stretch his penis towards one of your sides of the scrotum and toward the direction of looking at the belly, then take a broad lancet and cut the skin of the testicle from the middle lengthwise near the anus.
And the cut becomes on a straight line parallel to the line that divides the skin of the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white spermatic cord and you scrape it off and be careful not to cut it, and your scraping should be from the side that sticks more with the egg and you take out as much of the scraped part as you can.
Then you sew the sac filled with water with a wide needle and thread and take out all the water, then you spread between the edges of the cut with stitches and stretch the sac upwards without touching the skin that contains it and you cut the sac as much as you can cut it, either in one piece or cutting by pieces.
And especially its thin part, for if you do not take out all of it then the water may come back in, and if the egg protrudes to outside from its skin while you are doing your work, when you finish cutting the sac turn it over then gather together both sides of the scrotum with stitching.
Then the treatment is that of other wounds until it heals. If the ovary has been damaged, it may have been spoiled by another disease; therefore, one must ligate the vessels in the groin out of fear of bleeding then cut off the testicle from the groin and remove the ovary and treat it as we mentioned.
If the water has collected on both sides, know that they have united; cut the other side as you did the first one whether it was your intention to do one operation or two, then wipe away the blood.
She enters into the incisions with a wool that has been dipped in oil or rosewater and it becomes from the outside another wool that has been dipped in wine and oil, she spreads it on the testicles and touches the belly then puts over it a folded cloth called the "rafid". And she ties it from above with a bandage that has six ends like this:.
Then two cloths are taken to be sewn and stuffed with the fluffy wool on this model, and the ends are made from wet cotton or wool that are tied together by pulling it tight in a belt of trousers, and one end is taken to the seat as far back as the back.
And the second one is taken as far down as the anus, and the ends are on the thighs from below and the remaining ends are on the bandages and all the pulling together in a belt of trousers, and this device can also be made with linen instead of cutting with iron.
And it is that you take a soft and thin iron instrument, with which you cut the skin of the testicles as we described until the white membrane containing water is exposed, then take another iron instrument like this:.
And it is like the Greek eye, then press with it that membrane until all the moisture comes out, then spread the membrane with clamps and scrape with an iron instrument the layer containing them and cut them as much as you can so that you eliminate all of them and preserve the ovary from the fire.
Know that this operation is more valid and safer than hemostasis, and better than the incision method; if you encounter in cutting or in ligating a hot embers or bleeding blood or something else it should be treated each time you encounter of that by treatment correct for it as mentioned above.
If the wound is stubborn and the patient did not tolerate this operation because of its severity, use a caustic as I have described it, which, if you apply to it according to the evidence we have mentioned earlier.
Know that the caustic is watery; sit the patient on a high chair, then squeeze the lump at its base with a wide spatula and put the caustic along the length of the body, and make the opening widely so that all the water flows out, then place on the spot cotton and bind it.
Leave him to sweat out the remaining water, then treat him until the wound is cured; if the bleeding occurs when you put it on him and it is because the white membrane obstructs in the mouth of the wound preventing the water from coming out.
So then it is necessary to enter into the wound a bird's feather or the instrument by which the water of emetics comes out, as its form has been mentioned before, or widen the opening of the wound slightly.
Know that the water may return and gather after six months or so; if it gathers, apply a poultice to him with the same condition and defend the patient for his days.
The 63rd Chapter.
On the incision into the bloody caustic and its treatment.
Know that the incision into this caustic is from the evil ways leading to destruction in most cases; therefore, we see leaving it and safety from it. And I am reminding you of working with it and types of ulcers.
I say that many ulcers occur in the bodies of which are composed for the females, and this is from many causes either because of a passionate temperament directed towards females or due to an injury; and the colour of the ulcer will be like the colour of the body and there will not be any water in it.
A tumor is in the groin and perhaps the tumor has become indurated its color like inflammation and it has no feeling. It may be from complications of blood vessels and their swelling as previously mentioned or from a dilation of veins; if it was due to a complication of blood vessels, this will be known by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers and it should not be exposed in the least. As for what is from a dilation of veins; it does not disappear from being pressed by the fingers, and this kind can sometimes cut into him and all the flesh.
And that is to cut the skin of the testicle then insert the egg above and take it out from the white membrane and free the spermatic cord from the vessels and tie the vessels and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides from the egg, if the egg has become attached to those budding flesh.
It should then be taken out and cut, and if there is adhesion between something of the membranes or in what is between the vessels it should be freed from all that adhesion and cut round.
If the budding flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, it should be cut all together and the egg taken out as we said. If you have done your task, then dress the wound with wet wool dipped in rosewater and drink, then treat him with other treatments until he recovers.
The 64th Chapter.
In the treatment of hernia which has a swelling.
The swelling is a twisted mass resembling an unripe bunch of grapes with relaxation of the skin and difficulty in movement, physical activity and walking; and the treatment of this disease from the groin is similar to what has been mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the operation done in this on what was done by the ancients; I say that the patient should sit on a high chair then push the spermatic cord down, then hold the skin of the testicle with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
A servant holds it for you and gives it a strong push, then cuts with a wide and sharp lancet a curved incision in accordance with the vessels until they are revealed, then peel off from every side as I mentioned to you regarding peeling the membranes that are in the sinewy tendons, then insert a needle with a doubled thread into it.
You bind it in the first positions that I showed you for the dressing, and you also bind it at its end. Then cut through the middle a straight incision along the length of the body and let out what has accumulated inside from foul corrupt moisture.
Then treat the hernia with the treatment of all wounds in which you want a period to develop so that the vessels that feed one testicle may fall, there is no harm in this. For if the dressing has been shown to all the vessels it is necessary that one testicle comes out with the vessels lest the egg be deprived of its food. In order that it may atrophy by cutting the vessels so that it may perish and not benefit from it.
The Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
In the treatment of intestinal abscesses.
This abscess occurs from a rent that opens in the omentum spread on the belly about the twelfth of an inch above the navel so that the intestine falls out through this rupture to one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from a tear in the omentum or its extension, and this type of abscess occurs due to many causes, such as being hit or thrown with something heavy and so on. And its sign if it is from the extension of the omentum that it develops gradually over time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the abscess is flattened towards a depth before the omentum compresses the intestine. Its sign if it is from a tear in the omentum that it occurs from its beginning with great pain at once and the abscess is different appearing under the skin nearby.
This is done by the evacuation of the intestines and their exit to the outside of the peritoneum. It may come out with the intestine, it being called intestinal and purulent, or there may be an impaction in the intestine, which will lead to the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and spasm, especially if he has an attack of diarrhea. The treatment by iron is a hazardous procedure that one should be wary of; the mode of action is to have the patient insert his hand into his belly to return the intestines back inside.
Then he lies on his back between your hands, raises his legs, and you stretch the skin that follows the pubic bone upwards. You make a cut in all of the scrotal skin by its length, then insert probes into the opening as much as is needed to open it with them.
The cut will be as much as the testicles can come out of it, then you peel away the peritoneal layers that are under the scrotal skin until the white dense peritoneum is exposed on all sides. Then insert your index finger into what follows the testicles.
Between the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle and the second peritoneum, you loosen the adhesion behind the testicle. Then bend with your right hand towards the inside of the scrotal skin, while extending the white peritoneum upwards with your left hand and raising the testicle with the peritoneum towards the incision.
Order the servant to extend the testicle upwards, and you yourself loosen completely the adhesion that is behind it. You then inspect with your finger so that there is nothing of twisted intestine in the dense white peritoneum; if you find something, push it down into the lower part of the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread which has been twisted from ten threads, and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin that is next to the incision. Then cut off the ends of the twisted thread until there are four threads. Then some of it is wrapped around each other in a sutured manner and tied with the omentum which we said was under the skin of the testicles, tightly bound from two sides. Then also tie the ends of the threads together, tightly until nothing from the vessels that nourish them can reach it. So that it is not exposed and a hot swelling forms, and the second suture also becomes outside of the first one far from it less than two fingers, and after these two sutures take out from the omentum under the skin of the testicles as much as the length of a finger.
So that it is not exposed and a hot swelling forms, and the second suture also becomes outside of the first one far from it less than two fingers, and after these two sutures take out from the omentum under the skin of the testicles as much as the length of a finger. And the rest is all cut on a curvature and it is taken out with it along with the ovary, then an incision is made below the skin of the testicle, a bleeding cut as we described in what has preceded, then the wool soaked in oil is put into the wound and the suture which we have described is used.
And the omentum is often exposed after cutting it with caution from bleeding, and the suture is left until it falls off itself, if its fall is delayed then water is poured over it and something is placed on it to make it wet until it falls.
Then the wound is treated with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
The 67th Chapter.
In the urinary bladder this bladder we have not seen anyone dare to treat with iron and we have mentioned that the ancients should make as we described in the bladder with a stone, so that they are tied to the vessels after incision on them gently below.
Then an incision is made in the middle and the swelling is treated so that it opens up until the vessels are removed and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
The 72nd Chapter.
In the case where there is an ulcer in the abdomen.
It may expose the ulcer in the abdomen as we have mentioned, and nothing of the intestines descends into it and if something had descended it was slight and returns at all times.
But if the time becomes prolonged the tear in the peritoneum increases until the intestines and bladder descend into the cavity of the abdomen and are exposed from the extent of the peritoneum that is in the abdomen as we have mentioned. That it extends then becomes slack and ruptures in that place and it bursts, and its treatment with the cauter as I have mentioned.
And it may be treated with iron in this manner, that the patient lies on his back between your legs then you cut the place of the warm ulcer with a cut from front to back for as much as three fingers and you press the peritoneum under the skin.
Until the white peritoneum that is under it is exposed then you take a thread and place it on the place coming out of the peritoneum and bind it to the depth of the belly then you sew the two places that are coming out at the end of the thread from the peritoneum and tie with sewing one to the other.
Then you loosen the end of the thread and do not cut the peritoneum at all nor touch the intestines or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernia then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
If the threads are cut and the wound is cleaned until it heals then the peritoneum tightens and the ulceration of the tear does not increase.
And cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
The eighth and seventy chapter.
In the slackening of the skin of the testicles.
Often the skin of the testicles becomes slack in some people without the meat inside becoming slack and it is ugly to look at, so he who wishes to treat it should make the patient sleep on his back.
He cuts all the skin that has relaxed on thick skin. Then he gathers the lips, and if you wish to suture first a small piece of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches, and secure from the stitch then cut what is between the stitches.
Then he treats it with the treatment of all wounds until it heals and the threads fall out.
The Seventieth Chapter.
In castration.
Castration is prohibited in our religion.
So it should be for me not to mention this in my book, but I have mentioned it for two reasons. One is that the physician may know its treatment if asked about it and learn how to cure him who has been castrated. The other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Like camels, donkeys and cats and the like of animals, I say that castration can be done in two ways: either by burning or cutting. If it is by burning, then its method is that we sit the animal in hot water until the female parts relax and soften and become loose.
Then you burn it with your hand until it dissolves and does not become apparent upon touch. As for castration by cutting, it is necessary to catch the animal and press the skin of its scrotum with the left hand then bind the testicles and cut on each testicle a single cut.
Until if the testicles protrude, cut them after they have been flayed and do not leave on them anything but the thin peritoneum that is on the vessels. And this type of castration is better than the one by burning.
Because the burn may have left something of the female parts and the animal has lust for copulation, then treat the wound until it heals.
The Seventieth Chapter.
In the treatment of the hermaphrodite.
The hermaphrodite occurs in men of two kinds: one is that which appears below the pubes or on the skin of the testicles among women in shape like a woman's vulva with hair, and urine may flow from it which is found on the skin of the testicles.
And as for women, one kind occurs above the vulva on the perineum similar to small male genitals however born outside one of them like a man's penis and the other two like those of a woman, treatment of all three kinds.
The two kinds of men and the one kind of woman should have those excessive flesh cut off until its effect is removed, then be treated with the treatment of broken bones in order to heal, and as for the second kind of man from whom urine comes out that is on the skin of the testicles there is no treatment nor cure.
The Seventy-first Chapter.
In cutting clitorises and the flesh coming from vulvas of women.
The clitoris may have increased in size beyond the natural amount until it becomes ugly and its appearance is repulsive, and in some women it may become large like men's penises to the point of intercourse.
You should grasp the clitoris with your hand or a forceps and cut it off, and do not take much time in cutting nor especially deep at its root so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the treatment of broken bones until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows, it is a flesh that grows in the mouth of the uterus until it fills it.
And perhaps it comes out outside like an example of the womb. And because of this, some of the ancients call it a disease called the "dhambiy" so you should cut it like cutting the clitoris and treat it until it heals.
The second seventy chapter.
For the treatment of retention.
Retention is when the vagina is not fully opened or its opening is small, and this can be either natural at birth or a defect that has arisen; the defect being sometimes due to an overgrowth of flesh.
Or a thin or thick membrane, sometimes in the depth of the womb, sometimes on its sides, sometimes above it or below it; preventing coitus and childbirth and possibly menstruation. And this is known by looking at the woman's vulva.
If the membrane is visible, then if it is not visible, one must probe it with her fingers or a rod. If the membrane is thin and close to the vulva lips, she should begin to cut it by placing an object resembling a thread on the vulva lips then putting both of her thumbs on top of it.
And the woman is on her back, legs apart, then she extends the vulva lips with force until the thin membrane is torn and the membrane opens. Then she takes a cotton thread and dips it in oil and puts it on the place and tightens the woman every day so that the place does not stick together again.
If the membrane is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide lancet resembling an aloe leaf. And if the membrane is from a growth of flesh, then one must remove it by means of thin forceps and sever it. And have remedies to stop the bleeding without haste, such as al-qaqia, ash-shayan, and al-laban mixed with egg whites.
Then she uses a large lead tube to prevent the wound from healing quickly, holding it for days and using flax seeds afterwards and then treating with the remedies for adhesion until it heals. And sometimes another growth of flesh may appear in the womb, which should be cut off in this manner.
If it is not a cancerous tumor, then the cancerous tumour which exists in the womb should not be exposed to iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, anal fistulas and red blisters that occur in the vagina of women.
As for hemorrhoids, it is an enlargement of the orifices of the veins until much blood flows from them constantly. If the hemorrhoids are presented they became anal fistulas, and we have mentioned their types and signs in the classification, and we will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated from them, I say that hemorrhoids and anal fistulas if they are in the depth of the womb and have not appeared to touch then there is no treatment with iron, and as for that which falls on it the sense then it is the one that can be treated.
It is necessary that the woman enters a cold house, then insert the anal fistula with a file or a rough cloth and cut it from its roots, then tie on it when bleeding stops from one of the arteries cutting the blood without ligature.
Like pomegranate peel and almonds and similar things, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then lower them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, place her on a decoction of rhubarb, quince skins, and saffron and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And plaster it on her back with it. If the bleeding stops, then bind a poultice of beaten plantain or the pulp of the birthwort plant or the juice of elderberry branches with saffron drink and seal the place.
If the tumour subsides, treat the place with ointment until it heals. And as for the red blisters, they are like the heads of henna, rough to look at. It is necessary to cut what appears from them according to what I mentioned in anal fistulas, whether it be or not, and treat it until it heals.
The 74th Chapter.
Concerning the swelling of an abscess which appears in the womb.
There appear in the womb many kinds of tumours, such as cancer and hardened growths, ulcers, fistulas, devouring sores, carbuncles, buboes, fissures, fistulae, and hot swellings. I have described all these diseases and their signs in the classification.
It should be mentioned in this chapter the hot swelling that appears in the womb if it is one of the tumours which gather duration, how its excision with iron should be done. It should be observed; for if the pain of the swelling was sharp at first with two blows and inflammation and fever.
And I have seen it red, if the pulse fell on him, do not hurry with its excision and treat it as helps to maturation until these symptoms subside; then when they have subsided, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats, leaning on her back.
And she gathers her legs to the lower part of the abdomen, and her thighs are spread wide apart, and her arms are under her knees and they are bound with a bandage that is suitable.
Then the attendant sits on the right side and uses the instrument which opens the cervix, whose shape will be shown later. It is necessary if you want to use this instrument that you estimate by a ruler the depth of the womb of the woman so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the womb.
If the instrument is too deep, harm will be done to the uterus; and if the instrument was more than the depth, it should be placed a guard on the cervix of the womb to prevent the entrance of all the instrument into the depth of the womb, and the loop that is drawn in the instrument from the upper side.
And you hold the instrument and the servant turns the loop until it opens the cervix; if the abscess appears and is felt by hand and is soft like a thread, then it should be cut at its head with a wide lancet when the moment has been exhausted.
The dressing for a wound should be a greenish oil with some gall in it, or rosewater. It should become wet at the opening of the perineum so that it may go outside through it into the vagina and behind on the vulva, and to sew with clean wool that has been boiled in water.
Then treat after two days with the ointment which is suitable for this until it heals.
And the vagina and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water that has boiled in it asafoetida or long rue, then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden inside the vagina.
It is necessary that he abstain from treatment with iron, but he should be treated as we have mentioned in the classification.
The seventy-fifth chapter.
In the instruction of women, how they treat living foetuses if they come out in an unnatural shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the natural shape of birth, and among its signs if she sees the woman move down and stretch to breathe in air and loosen what she has from flux.
And the birth of the child is hastened, know that this birth will be in its natural shape and his exit on his head with the placenta or attached to his navel cord, if you see these signs then it is necessary for you to tighten her belly so that the child may come out quickly.
But if it comes out on its head, the placenta comes with it and cleans out those clutters in a good way. And as for any birth other than this one, it is not natural, condemned because sometimes the child may come out on its feet, with its hands coming out before its head and feet.
And its single hand or foot comes out, or its head and one hand come out, or it may come out folded up, or it may be turned over on its back like this and other condemned forms. It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and gentle with all of these things and beware of error and mistake.
And I am describing every shape of it and how the trick is in it so you can learn from that and rely on it. If the baby comes out with its head coming out naturally, but becomes stuck on the woman and causes her difficulty in giving birth and I see that she has become weakened because of it, then I have her sit down on a chair and order the women to hold her back.
And I have her compress her womb with cooked poultice and wet leather, then the midwife inserts a small instrument between her fingers to tear it open or tears it with her fingernail until what is inside it seeps out and moistens the woman's belly so that the baby comes down.
If it does not come out, then the woman should be given a draught of saliva from the poultice with oil to lubricate her vagina, and I have her after the injection that she vomits and sneezes in its direction with a handful of wool, and she grasps her mouth and nose, for the baby will come out from its fist. If the baby's hands come out first, it should be gently pushed back into the womb little by little.
If they do not come out to enter, then have the woman sit on a stepladder and raise her legs up high, then shake the ladder on the ground and the woman should hold onto something so that she does not fall down when it is shaken. If the hands still do not come out and the baby has died, cut off its hands and pull out the rest of the baby.
Or tie its hands with a cloth and pull them out gently, for the baby will come out. If the baby comes out on its legs, then you should push them up high and turn the baby a little at a time until it is straightened, then take one of its legs and push it forward a little at a time.
If they come out to the thighs, then I have her vomit and sneeze in its direction with a handful of wool, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we have described and otherwise, turn the baby back a little at a time until it is straightened naturally, for it will come out smoothly then. If all that we have described refuses to happen.
Take from the sputum of the tracheotomy and the phlegm of the lung and fatty ointment for the throat and dissolved gum, and strike them all in a mortar with a good pounding. Then put it on the woman's vagina and lower abdomen. Then sit her in warm water until the poultices reach.
If you see that it has begun to flow downwards, make a pessary from mustard and have her bear it. If you hold the pessary for an hour then sit her on a chair, let her breathe, stop her mouth and nose, and press her lower abdomen gently; then the fetus will come out of its sac. The fetus comes out on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, occupy yourself with putting your hands into it a little by little. Then the woman lies on her back and stretches her legs downwards while she is resting on a bed and clasps her hands together. Then press above her abdomen gently by gentle pressure. Then take out what is under her feet from the pillows until it is lowered. If the fetus does not come out, take both her legs together and move them with a strong movement. Then press above the poultices gently by gentle pressure until the fetus ascends. Then the midwife will put in her hand and cover the fetus little by little.
And order the woman to get up until the fetus comes out. The fetus will come out with its hands and feet cramped, lying over one of its hands. Occupy yourself in retrieving her hand, if you are not able to retrieve it, then make the woman walk. If you are not able to make her walk, then have her lie down.
Then make her bedstead shake with strong shaking of her legs. Then use the instrument which I have mentioned from the devices, if she takes it, then sit her on a chair and treat in retrieving the hand and putting the fetus right on its natural shape. Let the woman breathe and order her to get up until it comes out.
The birth of the child on his mother's back with his arms extended and face towards her back, it is recommended that the attendant hold the child's hand then turn him little by little and swaddle him gently. When he is level, carry him on his mother's chest as we have described from ointments and clamps.
Then move her a little, if you do that sit her on the stool and order her to lean to the right side then have her undress and she should sneeze with the dust, as it exits, the birth of the child standing up on his side.
If it goes into the uterus mouth in this manner with the placenta, tear the placenta with your nails until it is free from moisture. If it has adhered to the baby's face and neck then cut them off from the sac so that it does not suffocate and die. Then push the baby back inside until you put it on what is required.
And order the woman to sneeze again, as it exits it comes out easily. The birth of twins or many fetuses, know that twins are often born and three or four may be born and live except that this is rare. And as for five, it is a thing outside of nature which do not live at all.
And surround them, and if they are many one placenta, and they separate by a ligature barrier between them attached in a sac each of them. And they may come out as the single child comes out naturally easy and they come out as we have described abnormally.
If some of them become difficult during birth and became as we have said in the forms that are not natural, treat them as we have described. And let the attendant be gentle and do what she does gently, patiently and considerate on every shape with whatever trick leads to safety.
Describing what appears in the womb to be fetuses, which they drop. Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or more than ten will appear in it. I was told that a woman dropped fifteen of them all at once, all of them seen as such.
By the wise, all-knowing God, it is fitting that the woman know this, for perhaps such a thing will happen to her at some point, so she may receive it as is proper.
The 77th chapter.
In the delivery of a dead fetus.
If the treatment I mentioned in the section is applied to the dead fetus and it does not come out, and you are forced to intervene with your hand, then it is advisable that you look. If the woman is strong and there are no symptoms on her that she fears might be damaged by this, then the woman should lie down on a bed on her back.
And her head should be tilted downwards and her legs raised high, and a servant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that she does not move when you push the fetus.
Then she moistens the woman's vulva with wet ointments along with sputum and a poultice and linseed oil. Then she applies these ointments and poultices to the woman's hands, and then inserts them into the womb gently. She then searches for a place where the fetuses can be inserted.
Look, if the fetuses are coming down to his head then insert the instruments into his eyes or his neck or his mouth or his nose or under his chin or move them up or in places close to the shoulders or below the shoulder blades.
And as for if his descent is on his legs, then in the groin and middle ribs. It is advisable that you grasp the instrument with your right hand and bend it between the fingers of your left hand and enter the hand gently and insert the instrument into some of those places which we mentioned.
Until you reach something hollow then insert into it a second or third drill if needed so that the traction is uniform and does not tilt towards one side, then extend steadily without being only straight but moving in every direction.
To facilitate its removal, as is done with a tooth that has been cemented and needs to be extracted. It should be loosened in between, then the traction should be relaxed. If it becomes stuck in one direction, some of the operator's fingers should be greased with wax and inserted from that side so that they turn it back towards itself. When some of the fetus emerges, the forceps are moved to other places.
It is raised a little to do this until the fetus comes out altogether. If one hand comes out before the other and cannot be returned because of being jammed, it should have a cloth wrapped around it then pulled out until everything has come out, and when it has been cut.
Either in the wrist joint or in the elbow, and so should be done with the other hand and legs. If the head of the fetus is large and pressure is applied to facilitate its exit, or there is a mass of water in it, then a spiked probe should be inserted between the fingers.
And it cuts with it the head so that water comes out or compresses it with the device called mashdakh, whose shape appears along with the shapes of other devices in the chapter which follows this.
Likewise, do this if the fetus has a large head naturally. It is necessary to split the skull or compress it with the mashdakh as we said before, then take out the bones with calipers. If the head comes out and presses against the thorax, it should be cut until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
If it joins the chest then, if not, cut on what you can. If it is below the belly and warm or has pus in it, then stop it until moisture comes out from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, then drawing it out is easy and bringing it into the womb is simple. If pressure is applied to the belly or chest, it should be drawn out with a cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and the belly or chest opened so that what is inside them will flow out.
If the rest of the organs have been removed and the head has been returned and placed, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the womb is open, then insert the hand into the neck of the womb and look for the head and draw it out with your fingers into the mouth of the womb. Then insert a forceps or two forceps and draw it out with them.
If the mouth of the womb has adhered to a hot tumour over it, then do not press on it, but rather in such a case use pouring wet thick things and apply poultices and sit in water that has been warmed and moistened.
And as for the fetus being on its side, if it is possible to place it straight, then apply what we mentioned concerning the living fetus. But if this cannot be done, then cut it into pieces and remove it. And it should not be left that anything of the afterbirth enters inside at all. If you have finished treating it, then apply what we mentioned concerning the treatment of the hot tumours that are exposed in the wombs.
If a hemorrhage appears, then sit down in warm water and apply the rest of the treatment. And I have seen a woman who was pregnant; her fetus died inside her, then she became pregnant again with him.
Then the other fetus also died and after a long time an ulcer appeared in her womb and swelled until it opened and made her discharge. Then I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time but the wound did not close, so I placed some strong adhesive unguents on it.
Then a bone came out from the place, then some days passed and another bone came out. I was amazed at that because the belly is a place where there are no bones in it. So I feared that it was from the bones of the dead fetus, so I searched the wound and took out many bones from the head of the fetus.
I did not cease following that until I extracted many bones from her and the woman was in her best conditions. And she lived for a long time, several months, from the place where the discharge is slight. It was only after arriving here that this rare thing happened to me.
Because in it there is knowledge and aid for what the healing physician endeavors with his hand from treatment,.
The Seventieth Chapter.
There are images of the instruments that he needs for extracting the fetus.
A picture of a bellows which is opened at the mouth of the uterus:.
This is the instrument which books are written in its price, whether it has two bellows at both ends of the boards or not, except that this bellows should be softer than the first one and it should be either from ivory or from willow wood and each board is a little over an inch wide.
And the shape of both is like a finger and their length is half a span and a little more, and in the middle of the boards two rods are placed from the same wood which have been sharpened into them. The length of each rod is half a span or a little more, and their width is about a finger or a little more.
They are the two which enter into the womb to open it with them when you apply the bellows, A picture of another instrument like that but softer and lighter:.
It is made from willow or ivory wood in the shape of a calabash, except that it has two rods at its end as you see. The length of each rod of them is about a span and their width is two fingers. If you want to open the womb with it,.
Then sit the woman on a bed with her legs spread apart, insert these two rods gently into the womb and you holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs then open your hand with the instrument like you do with calabashes, as much as you want to open the womb. Until you make what is desired, the form of another cast that was mentioned by the ancients:.
The image of the device with which the fetus is expelled:.
The image of the forceps by which the head of the fetus is compressed:.
It resembles the scissors for it has teeth at one end as you see, and it can be made curved like a cast in this shape as you see, with teeth like the teeth of pincers to cut through and grasp:.
The image also of an instrument (medfa' which means "device" or "instrument" not specifically known as a "gun"):.
The image of a drill:.
This drill is made slightly thick so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, The image of a drill with handles:.
The image of wide retractors to cut the fetus:.
All these instruments, the more their types multiplied and were made by the craftsman the faster his work became and higher in people's opinion was he that had need of them, so do not scorn any instrument if you have need for it.
Chapter Seventy-eight.
On the delivery of the placenta.
If the placenta has become stuck after delivery, it is necessary to order the woman to take a breath then spit into it and grasp your hand on her mouth and nose, if it comes out in this manner, otherwise take a quantity.
And pierce a hole in the cover, place a medicine bag filled with an open poultice for the mouth of the uterus like fumitory and gentian and absinthe and papaya and myrrh and senna and cantorion, all these medicines or some of them, immerse it in water and carry it to the fire then put a silver tube on the hole of the cover and one end into the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus then spit as we said, and the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in a uterine salve or the sputum of the neck.
Then you enter it into the womb and search with it until it reaches the placenta. If it touches it, take hold of it and extend it a little at a time until it comes out. And if it is stuck in depth, insert your hand as we described until you find the placenta, then grasp it a little at a time being cautious.
So that the womb does not fall with a strong grasp, but rather it should be turned gently to the right and left sides. Then the amount of grasping is increased; thus it will loosen and get rid of the adhesion. And if the vulva was closed, we have described its treatment with fumigation, treatment of the fundament and the growths.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware of being forceful on her in the re-grasping; but rather bind what has come out from it to the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, then apply ointment to it. For it will rot after a few days.
It will be resolved and come out, unless it has rotted; for then it will emit a foul odor into the stomach and head. And that affliction is unpleasant; so appropriate fumigation should be used.
Therefore, and some of the first have tried burning aloeswood and dried dates. The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated when her menses and placenta are retained, and things like that.
It is made of lead resembling a pipe, or it is made from copper with the thin end being placed in the womb and the wide end on fire. The smoldering incense is held until it burns out and then another one is put on.
The seventy-ninth chapter.
In the treatment of an unbroken fundament.
Many male infants are born and their fundament is not perforated, rather it has been blocked by a thin membrane. The nurse should puncture that membrane with her finger, otherwise she should use a sharp spoon to cut it and be careful of the muscles lest they be damaged.
Then place on it a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If you feared it would close up, put a lead tube into the opening for several days and remove when the child wants to have a bowel movement.
And the seat may also be exposed to an ulcer or a tumor, so that opening should be cut and then treated with what we have mentioned of treatment and cautery.
The Eightieth Chapter.
In the treatment of boils that occur below.
The boils that occur below is an abscess and thickening that occurs near the anus from outside or in the rectum from one side and the boil is one or more.
If the abscess is lanced, it will open and a white or purulent watery secretion will flow from it. Some of these boils may be infected to the rectum and the intestines and will not be, and the ones that are infected can be recognized by what comes out of them in the feces and flatulence when using the enema.
And perhaps worms will come out of it. And some of them may be boils if they are infected in the rectum to the bladder and the urethra, or if they are infected to the hip joint and the anus, and what is known as the boil that is infected to the anus also from not being infected.
That you insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe in the boil from copper or iron if there is no ulceration. If there is ulceration, then insert into it a lead probe or a hair of horse hair.
Until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening from the feces or flatulence or worms as we said then know that it is not infected so hasten to treat it.
If the abscess is directed towards the bladder or the urinary tract then its sign is the urination of pus from it and the inability of the place to unite with medicines. And if it is directed towards the hip joint or the sacrum, then its sign is the reaching of the probe to there.
If there is no direction towards the bone and there is pain in a similar side and purulent discharge from it constantly, and no healing occurs in it nor does it unite with an ointment; all abscesses that are directed into the body are like this.
And its treatment is a hardship that is useless to those who take it upon themselves from the ignorant physicians. But if the abscess is not directed and not chronic, then one should hope for its healing with iron as I have described and tried, which is that you place the cauterizing instrument between your feet on his back.
You should pull his legs up and lean his thighs towards his belly, then insert a probe made of copper or lead into the abscess until you know where it ends. If the patient feels the probe towards the buttocks, then you should insert your index finger in the buttocks.
If you feel with your finger that the probe has proceeded uncovered, without feeling between it and him with flesh or fat, then know certainly that it is directed outwards, so do not tire in treating it because it will not heal as we said.
And they have said that it heals in some people rarely. And one of the treatments which hope for its benefit is to put a thin layer on top of the abscess, as mentioned above, and insert camphor into it until it reaches towards the buttocks, then return it two or three times.
Until you know that all those excess fleshes have been burned which are like a feather's tube then treat it with a moist poultice in lard until they come out, then treat it with medicinal ointments. If he heals.
And if not, then he will never recover with anything else. But if you had inserted the catheter, it did not reach your finger that was in the middle of the pelvis and between it and the catheter there was a thick veil of flesh or from fat, and you saw the navel on what followed the skin's surface then cut at once the skin from the beginning of the navel. And you pass through the incision with the catheter while it is in the navel until you reach by the incision where the end of the catheter came to an end and the catheter gets rid of itself and falls, then clean that flesh which resembles a tube of bird's feathers so nothing remains from it.
Then treat him with the medicinal ointments until he recovers. And if bleeding overpowers you and comes between you and your work, because of cutting that flesh then do the best you can and make the most benefit by burning it or with a strong drug since burning it gathers two good states: the burning of the excess flesh.
And cut the blood and ventilate the moisture, then treat him with the ointment saturated in fat or with sulphur mixed with oil until it infects the place and that burned flesh comes out in the infection. Then treat the wound at that time with the medicinal ointments planted for solid flesh.
And it is the medicines that contain opium and ventilate, for if it is suppurated then he is healed and there will be no relapse. And if the navel had reached to the depth of the pelvis and far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger in the pelvis and search with it.
For if you felt the catheter and there was a veil of fat or flesh between you and it, and it was close to coming out, then the work in that is only through greed and hope, that being that you try one of three things, either that you press him as we said.
If the anorectal fistula is split until its crater, in order to be able to introduce a tampon and treat it from close up. Do not proceed with splitting excessively lest the surrounding muscle of the rectum becomes cut off, causing involuntary defecation. Then treat it as we mentioned. It may perhaps heal like we said.
Either perform the closing of the fistula and scrape it after splitting it to near the rectum, as we said, either with a reamer or with another sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse all the clots in the split, wherever you can, by probing.
Then drain the discharge from all of the wound, along with the split and upper opening, until it is closed. Leave the lower aperture open inside the rectum so that it becomes easier on the patient, and sometimes the catheter will come out in this condition.
And if you have inserted the reamer into the catheter and it is on one side of the rectum towards the surface of the skin with a band around the rectum, then take at that time a hollow-tipped reamer like an Eskaf needle in this shape:.
And insert into it an open thread of five threads or about that much, then insert the reamer with the thread into the catheter until it reaches its crater. If it is found to be flowing out in the margin of the rectum from inside close by.
Then take out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the rectum and taking out the end of the thread. Gather both ends together, pull them tight and leave it for a day or two. Every time the thread cuts through the flesh tighten it well until those clots between the ends of the threads are cut off and fall away. Then treat the wound until it closes and heals.
If the mouth of the catheter is not draining, then drain it however you can, but do not make it deep so that it cuts the muscle, for then you will have to make a different treatment with it until it heals.
A picture of the sharp trephine by which one makes a cutting in the skull; its other side should not be sharp, lest it cut what is not to be cut as you see:.
The eighty-first chapter.
Regarding hemorrhoids from which blood flows, and cutting them, and the treatment of fissures.
Haemorrhoids will be on two kinds, either they are inside the anus resembling red pustules or like clusters of grapes and they will be small or large and blood will flow from them always.
And it will be one, and many, and will be outside the anus on its edges, except that those which are from outside the anus will be in most cases few in moisture and yellow or slightly red water will flow from them always, and they will have the colour of the body.
And the treatment of that which is from inside the anus, order the surgeon to defecate and become constipated until the anus comes out and the haemorrhoids appear to you, then hurry and grasp them with trephines or hold onto them with your fingers, then cut them at their roots. If the trephines do not stick in them due to their moisture and looseness.
Then rub it with a rough cloth or a piece of dry dung or pull on it with your fingers, then cut it, then apply some sharp cauteries to it so that they take the place of ligatures, or follow what has been mentioned in the chapter of ligatures.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals, if the anus does not come out for you then have the surgeon inject a syringe containing a little hot water to clean inside the anus and to make it go out quickly when the patient becomes constipated, then tie the haemorrhoids that are outside the anus and order them lightly.
And it is that you take hold of it with your fingernails or tie it with trephines and cut it, then treat it as we mentioned until it heals, and if one dislikes cutting with iron, then it is advisable to use its cord in this manner: take a loose thread and insert it into the syringe.
Then bring the boil up and push it out with a needle from the opposite side. Bend the ends of the thread below the needle and tie the boil tightly, then coil the thread and pull out the needle. Do this to all boils except one that is not ripe for lancing.
So let the liquid blood drain, then put a cloth soaked in rose oil or violet on the boil and instruct the patient to be still. Then leave it until the boils drop off. If they drop off, treat them with ointments and all treatment until they heal.
And as for the treatment of ulcers, they are often exposed and held captive by the skin folds. If it has been cleaned and a medicine has not been effective in it, then it should be scraped with a lancet or your finger until it becomes soft and the top crust is removed that prevents it from healing.
Then treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, repeat the procedure with a stronger scraping than the first one until it becomes necrotic and peels off. Then treat it and it will heal.
The Second Section Eighty-Nine.
In the treatment of bent nails, whether bent or not bent, and dry boils and scabies.
The nail is a round knot on the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, found in all parts of the body, especially in the lower legs and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the nail and grasp with a knife or pincers and remove it from its root, then treat it. And if desired, purify it as has been mentioned in its chapter. As for dry boils, one of them is a small, rough, stuck, rounded knot on the surface of the body.
Often it is exposed in the hands of children, and its treatment may be to pull the boil and cut or cauterize it with a silk thread or hair until it falls. If you want to clean it as mentioned earlier by fire or quick remedy.
And the boils, whether turned inward or outward, can be pulled out with a device that I have described in treating the scabies. And as for scabies, it is also a small, thick blister on the surface of the body that goes deep and if it catches cold one feels something like the sting of ants within it.
And it will be in the whole body, and most of it is in the hands. And its treatment is to take a tube from the strong feather of a goose or an eagle and make that tube on the scabies until a circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides. Then turn your hand with the tube until it cuts around the scabies.
And it will go into the depth of the flesh and the scabies will come out from its roots. And if you want to do that with a copper or iron tube like this:.
Its top will be closed and movable, so that the fingers can grasp it easily. And if you want to clean the scabies as mentioned earlier with a cauterizer for boils in the book of cauterizers.
The Third and Eightieth Chapter.
In the images of devices that are used for injection in seated ulcers and diarrhea and cholera.
The syringe may be made from silver or tin or hammered or struck copper. And this device can be made small and large according to its users. So the one used to treat young children will be small and those with narrow seats or that are congested will have syringes that are very fine. The image of a large syringe:.
The top part of the syringe which connects to the tube is wide, like this shape, and has a barrier where the tube is connected as you see. The lower end of the syringe which enters the seated ulcer is closed and smooth up to the skin, with two holes on one side and one hole on the other side.
The size of the hole should be as thick as the rod or a little thicker. The tube in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal or from the gut of a goat is made in the shape of a small vessel and its diameter is one finger's breadth.
He makes many holes in it as it rotates, and after each hole is a thickness of a finger. Then he inserts a thin thread made from twisted yarn from ten strings or the like, and ties the tube together like a small vessel. If he places the medicine in it, then tightens the head of the syringe between the stones tightly and then injects with it. And this is the shape of the tube and the holes:.
The way to inject it is that the gut or bladder is filled with medicine while it is warmed up as much as possible for the patient, and beware that it should not be very hot or very cold, then the patient lies on his back and has his legs elevated upwards.
A cushion or mattress is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is greased with fat or egg white or saliva from a camel's mouth or something similar. Then it is entered into the rectum gently, and the servant holds the tube with both hands and squeezes it strongly until everything in the syringe enters the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are elevated to the wall, if he feels the urge of the medicine to come out then let him hold on as long as he can, but if he sleeps through the whole night then that is the best remedy. If he was injected for diarrhea and hastened his excretion then let the injections be repeated until he recovers.
If he is in the rectum with hemorrhoids or painful ulcers, then the syringe should be very gentle and smooth like the syringes used for children. And this is an image of a soft syringe that has its skin stretched over it:.
The Fourth and Eightieth Chapter.
For the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification of the treatment of some ulcers that I am here reminding their treatment by hand and with medicine perfectly, so I say that wounds differ according to what thing is the wound and according to the place where it falls.
The things that the wounds are with are many such as a stone splinter or cuts of sword or knife or a spear stab or stick or arrow and like that from many things.
And as for the wounds according to the places of the body, such as a wound on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and like them from the organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds to make them a measure and law for all the other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds especially because complicated ones will be mentioned in the first part of the third chapter of this book.
And I say that if a simple wound happened in the head and there was no bone fracture, then look at it; if it was from a stone splinter or like it and the skin had been only pulled back and the wound was large and I feared the formation of an abscess, then quickly apply the poultice to the place. Do not delay doing that and bleed him according to his strength if he is prevented from being bled by an obstacle, especially if the bleeding from the wound is slight; let the bleeding be from against the injured side.
And warn the patient against filling and drinking and coarse food, for if he is prevented from being bled by an obstacle let him reduce his food and not approach meats or drinks; apply a compress to the wound if it happens that there is a hot abscess. It should be made of lint soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink containing opium.
If you have cooled the boil then bring him to the wound if it is fluid with his blood and has not been changed by the hot air which I will describe to you shortly, and as for if it has been changed by the hot air, then put some ointments on it.
Until it discharges pus then treat him until he recovers, if the wound is large and was caused by a sword or the like and its edges have not joined together with the skin then sew it up in the way I described for sewing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been torn away from the bone and is hanging and it was not stuck except in a small place, then cut it off then treat the wound with remedies that cause hard flesh to form in its place instead of the skin and order the patient to eat nutritious foods like heads and shoulders and similar things.
If a decay occurs in the skin and it does not stick to the bone, then cut out all that is rotten and burn it up then treat him. And if there is an artery or vein bleeding blood from it and the bleeding has not stopped with medicines then search for the artery.
If it bleeds and does not stop then cut him with the forceps and tie him. And if necessity dictates and what we have mentioned does not benefit, then fill him up until the blood stops. And if these wounds are small and shallow then they are easy to treat by applying this powder on them while they are bleeding with their own blood.
Before the air changes it, the recipe of the powder is that you take a part from the opium and two parts from the aloeswood and three parts from extinguished or unextinguished clay, all crushed together, sifted and filled into the wound and tied tightly until it sticks on him with good glue.
And it is tied with the blood then bound from above with a cloth and left without being unwound as long as it does not become swollen, for indeed the treatment will not come out of him until he recovers. And the clay itself may do that if the opium and aloeswood are not available to you.
And he can also do this act on the lint in many large incisions, if he is skilled in placing and tightening it, and as long as the incisions are moist with blood without the air having changed them. But if the air has caused some change to them, especially during the summer months.
So there is no meaning in placing this lint that we mentioned, on top of it carrying some ointments or a paste made from barley flour with water and honey so as to make the pus come out then treating it with other treatments until it heals.
But if the fracture occurred with the wound, being a simple one, he should take hold of it with the lint. I have already mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in what is to be resumed about neck surgery. If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between this and a simple head wound.
And if a vertebra or artery has been cut, then there is no trick in it except that he should avoid treating it with a tight compress like the rope and the cord and similar things because they irritate the nerve and displace it.
And nothing cold should be put on the wound at all because of the cold nature of the nerve and its connection with the brain, which is the most noble of organs. And what he should treat it with from the oily medicines like the washed and dissolved powder in sweet water or oil or rose and vetch resin.
If it is also washed with sweet water and the other metal stones in this manner, and moist ointments. And if the wound is large, he should use suturing or bind his lips with lint then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a depth and an abscess has formed at its bottom which has accumulated pus, he should tie it in the lowest part of it. And if an artery is cut off in the wound and its blood flows out, he should ligate it or bind it or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the wound has cut some or all of the ligaments of the neck and the arteries have been severed, gather the edges of the skin with a stitch on the trachea. Do not touch the trachea but rather suture it and shape it to its natural form and then tighten it tightly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with poultices that contain papyrus and drying until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, clean out the bone. If there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them or as much of them as possible, and if you cannot do so then leave it alone until the wound heals and dries up and becomes easy to remove.
If the wound is suppurating, place on it the ointments which we have described. If a bone becomes encrusted in the wound and becomes as hard as a rock, treat it with what will be mentioned in its chapter, in thoracic surgery and between the shoulders.
If the wound is from a spear or dagger and you see it has an entrance but no exit, look; if air comes out of it when the patient breathes, know that it is a fighting wound. If it does not have an exit and was flowing with blood, do not place any poultice in it at first and do not tighten it lest the blood become trapped inside its depths.
It will lead to the heart and kill the patient, but place in it a wet poultice and apply it during the day twice. If you do not have a poultice, place in the mouth of the wound a thick cotton cloth so that it absorbs the moisture coming out of it, and make the patient sleep on top of the wound.
The pus that accumulates in it will drain, and if the wound has been three days or more since its occurrence and the patient's pulse has returned to normal and there is no fever or difficulty breathing and you see their condition good then know that the wound is safe. Treat it with honey and treat the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If the sight is obstructed and a probe is extended constantly, know that it has become dislodged from its place. The physician should let out what accumulates in the wound; if the chest or back wound has passed to where one has stitched as mentioned earlier.
If it is large or has purulent discharge, if it is small, the wound should be searched and act quickly to remove those fragments if they are septic; if they are not septic then leave them alone until.
The wound should heal; then it will be easier to remove them, and as for the other wounds occurring in other organs let their treatment be like what we have mentioned.
Chapter 84.
On a wound of the abdomen and evacuation of faeces and its suturing.
The rupture which exposes the abdomen may be large, small or middle-sized. The large one may discharge faeces or several intestines, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and harder.
And the small rupture also may be difficult in another way, requiring its return to be more difficult. And if faeces do not hurry to insert it into its place at its time it will swell and thicken, making it harder to insert. Therefore, the best ruptures are the medium-sized ones, because their return does not become as difficult as in these two types.
Know that suturing the abdomen is on four sides, two general types are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other wounds of the body, and the last two special types are specifically for suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation. So, I say if the wound is small and something from the faeces has come out of it and its return is difficult then that is for one of two reasons, either because of the smallness of the rupture as we said or because the intestine has been exposed to inflation by the cold air.
If so, then it is necessary to soften it by dipping a sponge or wet cloth into warm water alone, or by boiling in theriac and saffron and citron, and then pouring the decoction onto it until the gas escapes.
And he can do this with a drink that has aloes, and it is better than water alone in breaking the gas. If you see the gas has dissipated, then pour into the container water that has been boiled with licorice or baker's yeast, because it becomes calm on entry by easier passage.
And if it is difficult to return to it after this treatment, then slightly cut through the cloth with a tool that cuts leather flasks. The first treatment, if successful, is better than cutting and it is only necessary to cut when necessity requires and the device fails, and here is the picture of the tool.
Its single bend is limited and the other direction is unlimited, and the thin end will not be as sharp as the scalpel but rather a little thicker. It is a tool similar to the small cauter in appearance, as you see. If the wound becomes swollen and the container enters, then its return should be on its natural shape.
And its proper place for it, if you can, is better. But if the wound is wide and in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back and let his legs be higher than his head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, he should have his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And also, if the wound is in one side of the abdomen, then always keep that side higher than the other. And so it should be used in great wounds and middle-sized ones.
And as for small wounds, then place it as you are able to, and then prepare a skilled assistant to take hold of the cloth entirely with his hands and gather its edges. Then he should expose bit by bit to the seamstress.
This is the description of general suturing and it is that one takes a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leaves on one side of the incision as thick as the thickness of the forceps, and inserts a single thread without threading a suture in the edges of the skin. With the edges of the peritoneum which is under the skin from inside until they are pierced from that side and I have joined the two layers of skin and the two layers of the peritoneum and it became four folds, then draw with a doubled thread around the needle in all sides several times until the edges of the wound meet firmly.
Then leave also as thick as the finger and insert another needle then entwine it with the thread as was done with the first needle so continue doing that as many needles as needed until you have finished all of the wound and let the needles be moderate between thickness and thinness.
Because the thin needles are very quick to cut through flesh and thick ones have difficulty entering the skin, therefore it should be moderate in thickness and fineness. And it is not suitable that the needle penetrates into the edge of the skin closely.
So that the flesh does not quickly tear and the wound opens before it is sewn together, nor does it stretch too far with sewing so that the wound will refuse to heal. Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the surgeon when he sleeps and make for him a pad of linen rags from each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until he knows that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds because it may be sufficient to sew them with one or two needles or something similar.
Or if the suture of general type is second, then gather with stitching the four folds, namely the two layers of skin and the two layers of peritoneum at once with a needle containing a moderately twisted thread in thickness and fineness, then when they were penetrated by this needle pull back the needle from the side where it started.
The thread is tied from above the wound so that the stitching is as per the stitch of a pouch which holds an object and one stitch is placed between each pair of stitches after thickening with the small finger, this stitch is well-known to all people.
With this stitch, an operation was performed on a man who had cut in his abdomen with a knife, the wound was more than a span and had exited from its pouch by about two spans of the middle pouch and the hole was in the middle of the abdomen.
Then I took him after keeping his pouches outside the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound closed in about fifteen days and I treated him until he was completely cured and lived many years afterwards managing all his affairs, and the doctors used to give judgment on him that he would not be cured at all.
And it was amazing that I did not treat him with a dressing because I was in a place where there was no medicine, so I used to put on the wound two balls of cotton during the day and promise him to wash it with honey water until he recovered.
And as for one of the types of stitching which is particular to me, I mention it according to a literal statement by Galen that you start with the stitch from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside, so if the needle has been carried out through the skin and through the muscle going in straightness throughout the whole abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum in the side where I inserted the needle and carried out the needle in its other edge from inside to outside on the other edge of the fold, so if I carried it out then I carried it out again in this same edge itself from the fold from outside to inside.
And I left the edge of the peritoneum in this side and carried out the needle in its other edge from inside to outside, and I carried it out with carrying it into the peritoneum as far as the fold in his side until it is all carried out in it.
Then I also began from this side with it and drew the needle with the suture which is in the other side of the peritoneum, extracted the needle from the skin next to it, then returned it into that skin, drew a suture of the peritoneum which is on the other side together with this suture of the marker.
And I extracted it from the skin on his side, and I did this again another time and I did it once after another until all of the wound was sewn up in that way, the whole description of this suturing is to suture the seams of the furriers for the fur.
That the peritoneum should be sewn once from one side with the edge of the skin and that it should be left once from the other side until it is empty, and as for the second type of suturing which Galen also mentioned this is his word exactly.
And it is that they are sewn as the people of treatment sew them by gathering every part to its counterpart which has problems with it, so they bring together the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the marker to its other edge, this will be as I have described to you.
It is necessary that the needle should be pierced in the edge of the marker which is near you from outside and it should be done inside alone and leave the edges of the peritoneum then return the needle and pierce it from outside to inside in both edges of the peritoneum then also return it.
And it should be done from inside to outside in the edge of the other marker which is in the opposite side, and this type of suturing is better than the general easy suturing which I mentioned earlier, and this is the word of Galen exactly, and some of them said that the peritoneum may heal with two needles. And that is to put one thread in it and start by putting the needle from you and doing it through to the other side, and put another needle from the opposite side so that it comes out from you just like the suturing of the shoemakers.
Know that the incision in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to suture than any other area of the belly. As for treating the wound, its treatment is like that of all wounds, namely: if you encounter the wound fresh with blood before the air changes it and you take the spoon, draw a line and tighten it firmly then apply the sticky resin.
If the wound has changed by the air, place some prepared poultice on it so that it becomes septic and the threads fall apart and the omentum and the peritoneum unite, then treat it like treating your other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have the necessary remedies, place on it since it becomes septic the absorbent cotton wool and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals. For in most cases if the wounds are simple, you will not need any other treatment; but if you fear that the wound may affect the main organs with pain.
It is necessary to soak linen wool in lukewarm oil or rose oil and place it around the places between the armpit and the groin. If you feel pain or decay in the abscess, often that one will discharge; rinse it with black cold tea drink.
And especially if the decay has reached in the abscess and become an open wound to its depth. Know that what was thick from the intestines is easier to heal and what was thin from them is harder to heal.
And as for the abscess known as Al-Sa'im, it does not accept healing from any surgery that touches it at all because of its many and thick veins and its softness and proximity to the nature of the nerve. But if what protruded from the wound was a purulent liquid and you received it fresh, return it like your returning the abscess.
If a period has passed and it has turned green or black, one should tie a thread above the place where it turned black so that bleeding is not exposed. For in the wound there are vessels and sinews; then cut what is below this bandage.
And make the ends of the thread hanging from below the incision outside so that it is easy for you to pull and remove when the crust falls off and the wound becomes foul. Mentioning a wound which shows in the anus, if a small tear appears in the anus.
For it is possible that in some people it may become gangrened because of a spear thrust which I saw, so that a man had become gangrened in his belly and there was an incision on the right side of the stomach. I treated him by cauterizing the wound and it became purulent with stool and gas coming out of it, so I treated him accordingly as I did not have hopes for his recovery. I did not stop cauterizing it until he healed and the place closed up. When I saw that the place had closed, I was afraid that a worse accident might occur inside him but no such bad accident happened to him at all and he remained in his best state. True, he eats and drinks and copulates and enters the bath and serves him, and some people of experience have mentioned that if a small tear appears in the anus, it is to be cauterized like this.
And it is that the large ants with red heads are taken, then the edges of the wound are brought together, and an ant is placed on them, with its mouth open, on the edges of the wound. If it closes its jaws tightly, cut off its head and it will adhere without coming apart; then another ant is placed close to the first one.
And it still does that with many ants as much as the wound, then turn it over and sew the wound. For those red heads will stick to the anus until it heals and becomes clear without any further harm to the anal region. And it is also possible for the anus itself to be sutured with fine thread.
What is taken from the sinew of an animal that is glued to it after it enters into a needle, is yes; this end of the thread is taken and attached to it a very thin and twisted flaxen thread, then that thread is entered into the needle. There is a thread of sinew which is sewn with the intestines and then returned to the body, and this kind of sewing with beeswax and sinew is only for hope and desire.
And if the rent is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the rectum-like intestines, there is no remedy for it at all.
Chapter 88.
For the treatment of fever and colic.
Know that every ulcer or tumor, if it heals and ages and becomes a carbuncle, and the pus constantly flows without stopping, is called in general a colic wherever it was located, and we call it fever.
It is a hard white abscess with no pain in it, having a cavity like the cavity of bird's down.
And for this reason, some of them called it "bird's down", and it can be a liquid that constantly discharges pus, and sometimes the liquid may stop, and the amount of this liquid can be much or little, thick or thin.
And I mentioned in the classification when talking about wounds, that every carbuncle which does not heal and does not form healthy flesh within it, is for one of nine reasons: either because there is a lack of blood in the body, or because it is encased, or because there is hardened flesh inside it and on its edges preventing good flesh from growing. Or because it is many and dirty, or because the carbuncle itself has badness and the material that fills it is of poor quality, or because the treatment does not agree in its cure, or because there was corruption in the city from the kind of plague, or because of a peculiarity in the city.
Or because it is many and dirty, or because the carbuncle itself has badness and the material that fills it is of poor quality, or because the treatment does not agree in its cure, or because there was corruption in the city from the kind of plague, or because of a peculiarity in the city. In the city of Zaragoza, where diseases take a long time to mature and ulcers heal slowly by nature; either because there is a single bone or several bones. I have mentioned all these causes, their signs and treatments with medicines in the classification.
And here I have to inform you about the treatment of abscesses and catarrhs which occur by the hand, know that abscesses occur in all parts of the body; some of them reach large ulcers and veins or nerves.
Or to a sac or to the bladder or to the urinary tract or to a rib among ribs or to a vertebra among the vertebrae of the back or to a joint from the composite joints such as the hand and foot; and some lead to a nearby main organ in this manner.
And whatever of these abscesses is in this condition it is a difficult disease to treat which does not accept treatment and intervention because of its difficulty and ignorance. If one of the abscesses has not reached the places I mentioned, wished and hoped for its treatment.
And I wanted you to know that, take a probe of copper or iron if the abscess passes straight, and probe it with it; and if the abscess is tortuous, probe it with a leaden probe because lead makes its body soft.
So it will be discharged upon entering and will turn towards the tortuosity; if the abscess has many openings which you cannot probe with a probe, inject one of its mouths and one of them, because the moisture that you inject into it will flow towards the other openings and discharge.
Then again investigate the probing in any way you can to know if there is a bone or nerve; or was the abscess deep or close, or were there several abscesses with many openings and be aware of all that within your ability to perceive through the pain when you press with your finger on the place.
You look at all the signs and causes of the tumor, so if you have looked at everything with certainty, then trust in the treatment, which is to look.
The abscess is apparent, near or in a healthy place, far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the places mentioned to you. Cut the abscess as described above and remove what is inside it of pus, bad meat and excessive meat.
And what grows in his mouth from flesh or boil and similar things, treat it until it heals. If the abscess is deep-seated and was straight then you should cut it deeply as much as possible and then clean him of all bad flesh.
Then use the rotten poultice in sharp medicines and pour it into the bottom of the abscess which you reach with an iron, do that until it eats that sharp medicine all what remains in the bottom of the abscess from corruption.
Then force him with the ointments that cause flesh to grow correctly until he heals. And if he doesn't heal with that, then do it as its description was mentioned above. And if the reason for the abscess is a bone and you knew this, then excise it and cut it as I informed you, unless something prevents you.
Bone or nerve or main organ as we said, and if the bone is revealed to you and it has some corruption and blackness then take it out until its corruption goes away, then treat him with what will cover his flesh until he heals. And if he doesn't heal and the pus accumulates as it used to.
And know that you have not reached the complete removal of corruption, so cut all what is on him again and take out his contents thoroughly with your utmost effort then force him. And if he heals, otherwise know that this corruption is deep inside from the other corruption, so cut all what is on him again.
Examine his leg thoroughly and carefully. If the bone is rotten, treat it as a small piece of bone and if possible to remove it then take it out with soft calabashes suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones then examine their extraction carefully and do not leave any of them; if some ligaments hinder you from taking it out, and cutting into them is not dangerous, cut those ligaments and the flesh that may be over it and clear the bones.
If you cannot extract the bones within your time, load onto the wound what will cleanse it and leave it for a few days until the flesh and ligaments surrounding those bones decay; preserve the wound so that the cut which you made during your work does not close up.
Place on it some linen dipped in sulphur powder with oil or some linen dipped in the Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments; then when those ligaments decay and the bones are softened, it will be easy to remove and extract them.
If there is one big bone, such as the tibia or femur and the like, which has decayed from only one side, scrape it thoroughly so that the blackness and decay go away then close the wound; if what has decayed from it is a large part and the decay has reached inside the bone, its removal is necessary.
And cut it all the way to where the decay ends; then treat it until it heals, and I inform you of an ulcer that was shown to a young man in his leg as an example and guidance for your treatment. This man was young.
For a man near thirty years, an inflammation appeared in his leg because of movement inside the body until the materials adhered to the leg and swelled with a large abscess which was not caused by something from outside; then time passed along with the mistakes of the physicians until the abscess burst open.
Materials were extracted from it in abundance, but its treatment was so poor that the leg became gangrenous and numerous openings appeared on it, all discharging pus and bodily secretions. Many physicians struggled with it for two years, but none among them was skilled with manual work.
Until I decided to look at it, and I saw his leg, and the materials were flowing from those openings in great quantity; the man had eaten away a part of his body and turned yellow. So I inserted the instrument into one of the openings, and the instrument went through to the bone, then I searched all the openings.
I found that some of them were connected to each other from all parts of the leg. I probed and incised one of those openings until I exposed some bone, and I found it to be putrid, having clotted, turned black and rotten until the hole went through to the brain; then I drained what was revealed to me.
I was able to remove the putrid bone, and I think that there is no bone except for the putrid one which I cut and drained. Then I made him apply a dressing of strong medicines over the wound for a longer period so it wouldn't heal; then I went back and uncovered the bone again, above the first incision.
I found that the putridness was connected to the bone, so I drained what appeared to me also from that putridness. Then I made him reapply a dressing and it didn't heal nor cover; then I uncovered him also and it didn't close. So I kept cutting away parts of the bone little by little and making him apply dressings but it wouldn't heal until I cut out about a palm's width from the bone.
And I extracted it with his brain, then I made him apply dressings and he healed quickly and was cured. But this repetition in the operation and incision was because of the weakness of the patient's constitution and his inability to withstand, and my fear that he would die on me because of vomiting too much, a very weak red liquid that became clear completely.
A lump of dense flesh has formed in the place of the bone. Its condition had improved, its power had decreased and it had been behaving abnormally without being exposed to a condition that would harm it, but if there is a fractured bone in some part of the body.
It should be spread over this condition and it should take a bandage and pull it to the fractured bone end and order someone to hold it upwards and make another bandage from thicker wool than the first one.
Then tie it on the flesh under the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is pulled down and you expose the flesh to the place where you want to spread it, lest the file harm the flesh. And put a wooden wedge or board firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do that, the file will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone. And it is necessary for the spread to be a little above the place of decay so that the decay inside the bone does not show in its surface for the sense, so you are forced to spread again.
If the bone is rotten but not fractured, rather it connects some of its parts to each other and there is decay in the middle or in some of its parts, then you remove the flesh from all sides, then put the wooden wedge below, then spread him on the first side where the decay is.
If you have finished spreading it, then spread him from the other side and let the spread be a little away from the decay as we said. If there is decay in a joint, cut out the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy for it. If the decay is in the palm or sole of the foot, the matter of its treatment is very difficult but you should scrape off the decay as soon as it appears to you and clean it out and wash it however you can.
When you are to set a bone, if the skin or nerve does not interfere with you, and know that splints and bandages are used for cutting these bones in accordance with the position of the bones, their setting and thickening, roughness, size, suppleness, and disjointedness. Therefore, it is necessary that you provide an instrument for each type of work.
Know that the works themselves will guide you to the type of instrument that you need if you have a long mallet and knowledge of the art of this craft because whoever is skilled in the craft has seen types of diseases. So you can deduce for yourself what instruments he should use for each illness and I have illustrated in the end of this chapter several instruments.
It makes them examples to follow, and measurements with which to measure others if God wills. Image of a saw:.
Image of another saw:.
Image of a small saw:.
Image of a large saw:.
Its head is in the shape of a compressed rivet and its tip is in the shape of an antelope's horn and it is suitable to rub with the heads of joints if they have decayed or are very wide, Image of another small rasp:.
Image of a wide rasp:.
Its bow and blade are made from iron, and its handle is a strong curved stem. Image of a rasp with a cavity:.
Image of another delicate rasp:.
Image of another rasp with the end narrowed.
Image of a small rasp resembling a file.
Image of another small cut-off saw:.
A piece of cloth like a shirt is used in many places of bone wrapping, an unadorned figure is sufficient for the wrapping of what has been perforated from the bones:.
A three-edged pointed piece of steel, Indian iron, is made, and all what we mentioned from the bone saws and pieces should be like this, unadorned:.
Chapter Seventy-eight.
In cutting limbs and spreading bones.
The limbs may decay either from a cause outside or from a cause inside, so if you treated that decay with the treatment of medicine and the treatment did not cure it and you saw the decay spreading in the member without being stopped by anything.
So you should cut that member to where the decay has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death or a great calamity which is greater than losing the member; and a sign that it has been shown to him is that the member becomes blackened until you think fire has burned it.
Or it may decay after becoming black until the decay spreads to what is behind that member and takes possession of the body altogether, so hasten to cut it; similarly if the cause of the decay was due to being bitten by some venomous creatures such as the scorpion or snake or lizard etc.
If the decay or bite is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger and do not wait for the decay to spread to the hand; similarly if it has taken possession of the hand, cut it from the wrist without waiting for the decay to spread until it takes possession of the arm.
And similarly if it has taken possession of the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow in the joint itself; and if the decay spreads and you see it reaching towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all because that would be the death of the patient, and use instead another treatment according to his strength.
Also do the same with a man if the corruption took place in the finger, cut off the finger at one of the joints, and if it took place in the male's comb, cut off the leg entirely. If it rose to the knee, cut the thigh at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and let the cause of corruption lead to death. The formula for cutting off a member or releasing it is that you draw a bandage at the bottom of the place which you want to cut off and tie another bandage above the place.
A servant holds the lower bandage down and another servant holds the upper bandage up, while you strip off the meat in between with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed then cut or release, and it should be placed from all sides khatan gauze.
So that the knife doesn't touch the correct place and cause additional pain and inflammation, if there is bleeding in your work, take the place quickly or put some cutting pads on it then go back to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the injured member with a bandage that is suitable for it and treat it until it heals, and I am telling you an example presented to a man in his leg, this remedy with its eye which I have described to you, and it happened to him in his leg blackness with heat like fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen in his finger until he took all of it, and when the man saw the corruption seeking in the member with intensity of what he found from pain and heat, he cut it off at the joint so it healed.
When a long time had passed, the corruption presented itself to him with its eye in his other hand's pinky finger, so he came to me and I applied the remedy that I had brought to him on his body after cleaning it. But the corruption did not stop and started seeking in the other finger.
Until I took him by the hand with ulcers and begged me to cut off his hand, I refused on my behalf to conceal this fault, and I also feared for him at the time of cutting his hand death, because the man's strength was about falling over, so when I gave up hope he departed to his country.
It was told to me that he was able only after cutting his hand completely was cleared, and I only mentioned this story as a help for what happens from the kind of this disease and as an example which is relied on and worked upon.
The Eighth and Eighty Chapter.
In the treatment of ulcers and how to inject them with medicines.
If an abscess occurs in some of the venous organs and its duration prolonged until its duration accumulated then it burst or ruptured and all that was in it of pus remained and the place became empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin over it like a cloth had rotated and was not very rotten that it affected bone or nerve or tendon, hence it deserved to be called an abscess and not ulcers unless its duration prolonged until the corruption affects something of these organs.
So then it is called ulcers or zekama, and its treatment is to cut off that skin completely as it rotates, and especially if it has rotated and become like a cloth and it was certain that it does not adhere to the place due to its rottenness.
So if I hoped that the skin would adhere and it was not rotten to that degree, and there was a thickness of flesh in the skin which activates its treatment with an injection, which is that you look at the abscess, if it is large and the pus emanating from it has a strong odor, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
Which is kohl and oil and honey and zingiber, in equal parts gathered together in a vessel and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to be like a thickness of honey, then take from it what you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess and close its mouth and leave the medicine in it for as long as two hours.
Then take it out at dawn. It will come out after a few days until the cavity is cleaned and the impurity has gone, and if this medicine is not available to you, moisten it with ash water. Take the ashes of grapevine or walnut wood and mix them with water.
Then arrange it and irrigate with it until you are certain that the cavity has been cleaned, if there is no hope for the Egyptian medicine or ash water then irrigate it with honeyed water in which a thing of ground galena has been mixed.
Or plug it with honey and drink mixed together because the honey can purify and clean, and the drink closes the cavity, especially if the drink contains a sediment that has thickened and congealed. If you do this several times and have confirmed that the impurity of the cavity has gone, then irrigate it with what brings growth to the flesh.
Such as taking from the simple ointment and mixing it with rose honey and a constricting drink or plugging it with some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have mentioned in the treatise on ointments. If the mouth of the cavity is narrow and does not fit with the irrigating tube.
So bind it with a little iron or place in him a powder that has been mixed in the Egyptian ointment or the srigon ointment until it is widened. And also if the mouth is too wide bring his lips together by stitching and leave from it as much as the irrigating tube enters without excess.
And also if the mouth through which the pus is flowing is raised upwards then cut it in a lower place so that the pus may flow out downwards, because if the pus becomes congealed in the depth of the cavity prevents flesh from growing in it.
And if you are unable to cut the cavity towards its lower part as you wish then construct a support for the organ so that the pus may flow out easily from it, and do not let any of the pus remain in it whatever.
As for the medicinal pastes which are put on the hidden place from outside and how to put them on it, take a paste of your choice and apply it to a linen cloth so that the whole thing is covered by it. Then cut it with scissors opposite to the mouth of the abscess a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the abscess. Then take some of the soft paste and apply it to another cloth on the size of the hole, then place it over it in a different position from the mouth of the abscess so that it may be easy for the pus to come out and do not remove the large cloth except afterwards.
A number of days, and as for the one on the mouth of the abscess it is to be taken off at all times so that what has accumulated in it from pus may come out and you may know how much liquid or thick or bloody or not bloody there is.
And also examine the place of the abscess itself whether its owner feels pain in it or not and whether there is a swelling or not in it. If your treatment has reached this point and you have seen that the matter which comes out on the mouth of the abscess is slight.
Then know that the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere. So dissolve it with vinegar on the third day or tomorrow and when you have cleansed the wound, replace the cloth with a new one and renew the ointment. If matter comes out from the abscess after a long time being liquid, do not despair that it will coagulate.
The recovery will be near because there are people whose flesh takes a long time to heal in their wounds and others who are the opposite of that. If matter comes out from the abscess after many days being not bloody pus, then know that the abscess has not coagulated, for if the coagulation of the abscess is delayed.
And if the matter takes a long time, add moisture to the drying of the remedies and let them be in a consistency that is wet and in strength dry like the ointment of aloes resin, if it has been increased in it. And among the most effective treatments is to take the ointment of aloes resin.
He cures with a concoction of rose and sprinkles over it the old wine in moderation. He mixes them together and uses it, and he may do this act if he does not have the ointment made from the resin of acacia tree honey, if he has cooked it until it is well combined and used it. Or he takes a mixture of myrrh, storax, and aloeswood, crushes all of them together and sprinkles over it on the honey that is on fire. Then he applies it to a cloth and binds him to the hiding place or anoints with the honey that he has cooked until it thickens, sprinkles over it medicines and puts on a cloth and binds him.
And he may use in the same manner long zirahwand, and the root of esfand and angelica, and the powder of kerseneh and the isolated or grouped quintarine that has been crushed, sieved and sprinkled on the honey that I have described and used. If the affair of the hideout is prolonged and it does not recover with this treatment then know that in its depths there is corruption.
And it may affect the bones or any of the hard nerves or tendons a treatment with aloes as mentioned previously.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the treatment of tetanus and infected abscess, cutting the excess finger and splitting the fingers that are stuck together.
Tetanus is a thick flesh that grows under the thumb nail of the hand or foot and perhaps in other fingers, if its affair is prolonged and it is neglected, it becomes swollen and hot.
Or it becomes rotten and gangrenous until the base of the nail is eaten away and perhaps all of it becomes rotten and the decay reaches the bone so that it has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color changes to blue. If you treat him with what we mentioned in the classification and he does not recover from your treatment.
It is necessary to cut with iron all the pustules that sprout from the nail, and then to cauterize the wound after that. For cauterizing in this case is very beneficial. But if the bone was sound and also the nail was sound.
And if the angle that contains the nail had constricted the flesh towards the inside and made it become necrotic, then it is necessary to put a thin probe under the angle of the nail that has constricted the flesh and lift it up and cut that flesh gently.
And she puts on the remaining flesh from the incendiary medicines that are effective until it all goes away, and then treats him with ointments until he recovers. And if corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut out that bone and remove it because it will not recover as long as there is a corrupt bone in it.
If you see the inflammation and corruption moving in the finger, cut it off at one of its joints as was mentioned earlier and treat it until it recovers. And if the nail is struck by a blow or hurt and severe pain occurs in it, then relieve the pressure first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp lancet an oblique incision from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach with the cut to the flesh under the nail because you will cause severe pain in the pressure point and it will be a reason for the growth of excessive flesh in the place then treat the place with what calms the pains.
And as for the extra finger that is formed in some people's hands, it may be all flesh, or in some of it there may be bones, and sometimes it may have a nail, and some of it may grow from the joint of some fingers.
Or its growth may be in some joints of the fingers and those that grow in some joints of the fingers do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger perhaps it moved. So cut what is of flesh only it will come out easily, and this by cutting it at its root with a blunt lancet.
As for the one that grows in the joint's origin, its treatment is difficult; therefore, refrain from cutting it. But as for the one that grows in the finger at the level of a joint, it should first be cut with a curved incision into the bone, then have the bone spread apart with one of those instruments suitable for this purpose.
Then treat it until it heals. And as for the adhesion that brings fingers together with each other, often this occurs in a person who is born with it or due to damage of a wound or burning by fire and the like; therefore, you should cut through this adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a piece of cloth or netting soaked in rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly; or separate them and put a thin sheet of tinplate between them until the place heals as it should.
And also if the adhesion is exposed to some of the fingers by the palm, cut through that adhesion as it becomes suitable and suitable for the shape of the member.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting Tumors.
The doulai are twisted blood vessels filled with clotted black blood which occur in most parts of the body and most often occur in the legs, especially in those who have a tendency to fatigue and weakness. It is necessary first that the body be washed with the black soap several times vigorously.
Then bleed the owner of it, and as for treating them with iron there are two ways: one is to cut and let out the black blood, and the other is to have the vein release and come out entirely. As for cutting, first warm the leg with hot water.
Until the thick black blood liquefies, then pull up the leg of the afflicted from above his knee to below it with a bandage, then cut the vein in one place or two places or three cuts wide.
Then you will let out the black blood with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until it comes out of the blood what seems sufficient or as much force the instrument can then tie it and order it to abstain from foods produced for the black bile. Then repeat suction and leeching.
When the veins become full and harm the instrument, as for its cure it is to shave the leg of the instrument if it has much hair then immerse its leg in hot water until it reddens or there is a strong sweating.
If it does not become warm with the bath until the part becomes hot, then cut the skin over the sweat longitudinally either at its end near the knee or below at the ankle, then open the skin with scalpels and scrape off the sweat from all sides until it appears to the touch.
And when it appears, you will see it red and swollen, if it is freed from the skin then you will also see it like a cord, then insert under it an instrument until it rises and comes out of the skin, tie it with a blind and smooth instrument, then cut another incision about that incision by three fingers.
Then scrape the skin off from over the cord until it appears, then lift it up with the instrument as you did and tie it with another instrument just like you did first, then cut another incision or many incisions if you need that.
Then pull it and cut it at the end of the incision near the ankle, then pull it and let it out until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it to the incision above it and do that until you pull it from the third incision above all the incisions together, when they all come out then cut it.
If it does not yield to a probe with strong double thread and pulling, then insert an iron stylus under the skin and rotate your hand in all directions until it emerges. Take care that it does not break off; if it breaks off, it will be very difficult for you to extract it.
It enters into the wound an inflammation. If you have made him bleed all, put on place of the cuts a wool moistened in rose water or red oil or fat and treat him until he heals. If the sinew is twisted with folds and a knot to one side.
But it was not straight as we said, you must cut on each of its folds and places of twisting, then tie them with thread until they are all aligned. Take care when cutting into it that you do not cut the tendon or bruise it; for if you do, it will be difficult for you to extract it and you will exhaust yourself.
Picture of the instrument with which one cuts the sinew:.
Picture of the blind sewing needle:.
It should not have a hook like the other sewing needles, nor be sharp at the end lest it cut the tendon and bruise it. It should be thick in the bend smooth so that if it is thin it cuts the tendon with its roughness; but let its thickness be as we said.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
For the extraction of the tendon that is slack.
This tendon is generated in the legs in hot countries such as Hijaz and the lands of the Arabs, and in the hot temperate regions with little rainfall. It may also be generated in other places on the body besides the legs and it is generated due to an inflammation that occurs under the skin.
As it occurs in the living bodies, the worm, and the tapeworm, and the flea and the worm that is generated between the skin and flesh. A sign of the beginning of this tendon's occurrence is that there is severe inflammation in one leg then it subsides, then the tendon begins to come out from that place of inflammation.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, if its end appears, one should wrap it on a small piece of lead whose thickness is from half a dirham to a dirhem and tie it up. Then leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it lasts long, cut some of it off and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before all of it has come out, for if you do so, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing a bad ulcer and inflammation at the site and an ugly wound.
For that reason, it should be pulled out and pulled little by little until all of it has come out, without anything remaining inside the body. And in some people, what comes out from this abscess may reach a length of five ells and ten.
And it has been reported to me that in a man, twenty spans came out. If the abscess breaks off for you during your treatment of him, insert a rod into its cavity and insert a cloth, a long one with the body, so that all the matter contained within it is evacuated. Then try to clean the site with medicines for a few days.
Then treat it with the treatment of boils. This abscess may have many ramifications, especially if it appears in a joint of the leg or in the leg itself; it will then develop many mouths and each mouth will discharge a branch that causes it pain, as we mentioned in the classification and what has been said before.
Chapter Ninety-Two.
Concerning the cut for worms that come forth under the skin and is called the sickness of cattle.
This disease is called in some of our countries the sickness of cattle, because it often affects cows; it is a small worm that is generated between the skin and flesh and moves up and down throughout the body.
The abscess becomes apparent to the touch when it is punctured from one member to another until it bursts whereever it burst in the skin, coming out and forming pus from some of the humors as it is exposed to maggots and living creatures and love's boil in the belly.
And the consequence of her damage is that if she boils in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open there and come out and destroy the eye; this often occurs. If you want to treat her and have her come out, this happens only when she is punctured and becomes apparent to the touch.
You should tie tight a bandage over what is above her and below her, then cut into her and take it out; if she burrows into the flesh and you do not find it, carry hot coals to the place until they burn her. And more than what we said is feared, that she will corrupt the eye.
If you see it in the head close to the eye, tie under it a tight bandage on the forehead then cut into her and take it out. It is advisable for the doctor to cleanse his body with easy remedies for the foul humors and abstain from nutrient-giving foods that foster corruption.
Chapter Ninety-Three.
In the incision for the disease known as the abscess-maker.
This disease which is known in our land as the abscess-maker is a pain that appears in some organs then moves from organ to organ and I have seen it as I described to you.
I was called to an old woman in some villages, I uncovered her arm and inflated it with a small puff of air through the vein of the arm. As soon as a minute passed I saw that puff moving along with the bandage like a worm advancing upward towards her armpit as quickly as possible.
If it moves from one place to another, the pain leaves that spot and settles in the shoulder. Then I sat for an hour while he moved through the entire body until he reached the other arm. Then she told me that her whole body was spinning as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed of his movement from limb to limb, and I had never seen this disease so clearly before. Except that I saw a group of people who found the pain moving from limb to limb but I didn't see it like I did in this woman.
And I didn't consider it (a normal movement of the pain) except that the woman was a Bedouin, her body rough and her veins exposed. So the heat of the disease moved in this way, and it should not appear like this on people who are well-nourished and have soft bodies with hidden veins.
If you wanted to treat him and he felt pain, then it would appear to you clearly as we have mentioned. So bind the wooden roller above and below him and pass over him until that congested heat comes out and the place is cleared.
And if you didn't see it clearly, then treat him by sprinkling his body with the body-rubbing agents which expel and drive out the heat, such as mint paste and similar medicines.
The Fourth Section Ninety.
In Removing Arrows.
Arrows can vary according to their kinds and the places they are lodged in the body. As for their difference according to their kinds, there are big ones and small ones, some with transparent glass tips and some with blunt glass tips, some with three corners and some with four corners.
And some of them have tongues, and some of them have shreds. And as for those that are according to the organs they are lodged in, they are two kinds: either the organs are major organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, stomach, bladder and similar ones. If a spear has hit one of these organs and symptoms of death which I have described to you appear, it is advisable to avoid extracting the spear from it, for death usually befalls its owner in most cases. And if these bad symptoms have not appeared to you and the spear has not been hidden in the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if a spear has hit it and perforated the bone and wounded the membrane over the brain is that severe headache, confusion and dizziness result from this.
And if these bad symptoms have not appeared to you and the spear has not been hidden in the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if a spear has hit it and perforated the bone and wounded the membrane over the brain is that severe headache, confusion and dizziness result from this. And redness in the eyes and red tongue, tremors and disorientation of mind and vomiting once perhaps or maybe bleeding comes out from the nostrils or ears and maybe speech is cut off and voice gone and liquid white like porridge comes out from the place of the wound and a discharge like serum flows from it.
So if these symptoms appear to you, then stop treating the patient and extracting the spear if it has not come out, and as for the signs of a spear that has pierced the heart and was close to the left breast and felt by you as if it had sunk into something hard and not in an empty space.
And maybe the spear had a movement like the pulse and blood, black as tar, would flow from the wound, followed by coldness of the limbs and chilliness and shivering, so know that death is inevitable. And a sign of the spear if it has wounded the lung is that blackish blood comes out from the wound.
And the vessels near the neck will swell and the colour of the wound will change and he will breathe with a high breathing and ask for cold air inhalation. And if the spear has pierced the membrane inside the chest then it is close to the small ribs and there will be great difficulty in breathing with severe pain.
And he will strain and move all the members of the neck, and if the spear has pierced the liver then severe pain will follow and blood will come out from the wound that is similar in colour to the liver. And if the spear has pierced the stomach then maybe something undigested will come out from the wound.
He is to be exposed, and if the arrowhead has pierced his belly and something comes out of him from the wound or discharge or abscess that has burst, then there is no hope for his treatment nor for removing the arrow. If the arrow has entered his bladder and urine has come out.
And if something protrudes from it and pain intensifies on the patient, then know that he is doomed to die. As for the other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, elbow, back, ribcage, thigh, leg and similar organs, assume the worst in this case.
When the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve, and the arrow itself is not poisoned, and I am telling you some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you can use it as a guide for your treatment, that an arrow had pierced a man in his cheek into the beginning of the nose.
So I extracted it from him on the other side under his earlobe and he recovered without any harm to his eye. And I extracted another arrow that had pierced a Jew in the corner of his eye beneath the lower eyelid, and the arrowhead itself had disappeared except for its small tip which was lodged in the bone.
And it was a large arrow from the composite arrows made of hardened iron, square in shape and smooth, without any head to it. The Jew recovered and no harm occurred to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat, and the arrow was Arab-made.
And he had two heads, so I cut him in half between the vertebrae and he had gone into his throat. I twisted him until I extracted it and the Christian was saved and recovered. And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been pierced in the abdomen, and we had estimated that he would die from it.
So when a period of thirty days or more had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I cut the arrow off from him and extracted it and he recovered without any further harm. And I saw a man who had been pierced by an arrow in his back, so the wound healed over it.
When seven years had passed, the arrowhead emerged from its tip, and I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been lodged in her belly. The wound became inflamed, but the arrow remained unchanged and caused no harm in anything of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had been lodged in his face, and the wound became inflamed. But he felt little pain from it, as was similar with many others. And I extracted an arrow from a knight of the Sultan that had struck him in the middle of his nose which had slightly tilted to the right side.
And the arrow was extracted entirely. I was summoned to treat him three days after the arrow had been removed. And I found that the wound from the arrow was very narrow, so I searched it with a fine probe and did not feel anything. But he felt numbness and pain under his ear on the right side.
And I suspected that the numbness was from one end of the arrow, so I applied a strong adhesive to the site and let it dry in order for the area to become inflamed and show a sign of the arrow. Then I incised him, but nothing happened in the site indicating that the tip of the arrow had reached it.
And I continued applying the adhesive to him for many days, but nothing happened. Then I closed up the wound and left the arrow inside until he felt it one day in his nose. And I was informed of this news. So I placed a hot and sharp medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it was opened and I probed him, and I felt the thin tip of the arrow which had stuck in the wooden part. Then I continued to open up the wound with that hot medicine until we saw with our eyes the end of the arrow, and he went on for a period of time around four months.
Then, when the wound had expanded and I was able to insert forceps into it, I grasped it and moved it. But it did not respond by coming out, so I did not leave off applying various instruments to him until one day I caught hold of it with forceps in a firm grasp as shown in the picture at the end of this chapter.
And the physicians would judge that his nasal cartilage could not be stitched, so I stitched it and the wound closed and the patient was completely healed without any problem. And I will tell you how I removed some arrows to make this a measure and a guide for what I did not mention.
For the details of this craft and its intricacies are not comprehensible by description nor can they be contained in a book. Rather, it is the ingenious craftsman who measures little against much and deduces what is lacking from what has been done; and creates a new action and a new tool for strange and unfamiliar emergencies.
If I were to descend from this craft, then I would say that arrows come out of the organs in which they have penetrated in two types; either by being pulled out from the place where they entered or by being extracted on the opposite side of the wound.
Either the arrow is prominent in a place of fat, and it is pulled out; or if it has been lodged for too long in its time, then it should be left for some days until the fat surrounding it becomes putrid, making it easy to pull out and remove; similarly when it has penetrated bone.
And if it does not come out, then leave it also for some days and pull and move it every day, and it will come out; but if it still does not come out after a few days, then drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine drill until the space is widened to allow the arrow to be pulled out. Then pull it out.
And if the arrow that has penetrated into the skull bone has become sharp in one of the ventricles of the brain and some of those symptoms I have mentioned have appeared from the wound, then refrain from pulling out the arrow and leave it until it becomes clear after a few days.
Take a thread and pull the arrow out, if it is deeply lodged and does not yield to pulling, use a probe around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the area until it clears up. And as for the arrow having disappeared in some part of the body. and he has lost feeling for it, probe him with a catheter, if you feel the arrow, then pull it out with some instruments that are suitable to extract it. And if you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow in the organ, and there is no bone, nerve or vessel.
then cut him open until the wound expands and you are able to extract the arrow. And if he has ears, hold onto them, then remove the lodged flesh from all around with any means you can manage to do so. And occupy yourself with it, even if you cannot manage to clear the flesh from the cracked ears, loosen them until you are rid of it.
And if you try to remove the arrow in any place, then use your hand with linens all around until you clear it and be gentle so that the arrow does not break and it will be difficult for you to pull it out. And if you are unable to do so within a timely manner.
Then leave it for a few days until the flesh around it rots, then try again and it will be easy. And if bleeding occurs, treat it with what we have mentioned in its section, and conserve your effort from cutting a vessel or nerve or tendon and use cunning.
You can free the arrow with any means, and it may be that by being gentle and cautious, you cut into it firmly as I have described to you. And it is necessary for you when pulling out the arrow to make the wound similar in shape to what it was like at the time of the injury, this is more suitable.
If you cannot do that, use what can be done from the shapes. And as for the arrow which comes out on the other side, either something has come out of it to the outside or you will find the tip of the arrow by touch from above the skin, close and coming out.
Split it open and let the incision be as much as can fit the calipers, then pull him out. If he is stuck in a bone, bend your hand until the arrowhead works into the bone and opens itself, then pull him out.
Otherwise, leave him for a few days until it recedes and comes out. If the string of the arrow is in it, push him with it. And if the string has fallen and you want to use the pushing, insert into it the bent tool so that it enters its cavity into the hollow of the shaft then push him with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push him with a tool that enters into that cavity because the arrow becomes easy to come out from it. And if the arrow has poison in it, you should remove all of the flesh which has been poisoned, if possible, then treat him as what suits this.
If the arrow is in the chest or in the abdomen or in the bladder or in the rib and it was close to what can be felt by touch with the fingers and you could make an incision on him, then make an incision and guard against cutting a nerve or artery and take him out.
Then sew the wound if it needed sewing then treat him until he heals. Picture of calipers which attract arrows:.
Its ends will be like the bird's beak, made as a file if you grasp the arrow or something you did not leave. And it can be made in large and small and medium sizes according to the size of the arrow, its thickness and the width or narrowness of the wound.
Picture of the purged cannon: .
Picture of the sealed purging vessel:.
This is a seal for the tip like a cork so that it may be easily inserted into the cleansed arrow and driven in.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the section on draining of veins.
The veins which are usually accustomed to being drained in the body are thirty; among them are sixteen in the head, namely the two carotids behind the ears known as the husasain and the two jugulars in the temples known as the zhaahrans and the two nasals in the corners of the eyes known as the nazaarians.
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead and the vein at the tip of the nose and the two jugular veins in the neck and the two facial veins in the upper lip and the two facial veins in the lower lip and these veins are known as the jaharik and the two veins under the tongue.
And as for the veins which are drained in the arm and hand, they are five; one of them is the cephalic, which is on the fleshy side and which the common people call vein of the head, and the basilic which is the middle one, which is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch from it and which the common people call body vein.
And the basilic which is on the anterior side and also called the axillary vein, and which the common people call arm vein and tendon of the arm which is located on the tendons and which adheres to it and which appears above the elbow clearly and distinctly.
And it is the vein between the malleolus and the fibula, which has two branches, and in the leg and foot there are three veins, one of them being under the knee from the fleshy side, the second being the saphenous and its place is behind the ankle from the anterior side, and the vein of the achilles and its place is behind the heel from the fleshy side.
In the other leg are three veins like it. As for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit is to repel chronic and acute colds, catarrh, and the poor, long-standing headaches, and how to repel them as I have described.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient and scratch his back in the place of the veins with a rough cloth, then strangle the patient's neck with a hood until the veins appear, and they are behind the ears in the two low places on the head, so you will feel them under your finger, and teach him to do it with ink.
Then take a thin lancet, also known as the nahl, and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein along with the skin into separate cuts of about two fingers length.
Or similarly and send out the amount of blood that you want, then tie them with ligatures and leave them until they heal. And as for the arteries in the temples, their benefit is to repel chronic colds, difficult headaches and permanent swelling and sharp pus that has accumulated near the eyes.
And how to repel them as I have described to you, the patient ties his neck with a hood until the veins appear and can be felt under your finger, then teach him to write with ink, and then lift the skin from above the vein with your index finger.
And insert the thin lancet from below and lift the vein upwards and cut it as you did with the other veins, and send out the blood to the extent of your need, then remove the patient's stricture and place your finger on the vein for a moment.
Then put cotton and linen on it, tie from above tight and close, and leave it until he heals. Its mention and cut and thread were mentioned in the beginning of the book. As for cutting the facial veins, its benefit after cutting the varicose veins is for chronic face diseases such as freckles, ulcers and fine redness.
And the manner of its cure as I told you, it suffocates the vein in his neck with a turban until the vein appears then take the instrument which is called the saw and this is its shape.
Put the spike that is at the head of the saw on the same vein and strike from above with a comb or something else in its direction and leave the blood to flow into the vessel you want then untie the ligature and tie him until he heals.
And it may be opened with a wide syringe but it should not be that the syringe has an edge like other syringes but rather a slightly wide edge and he opens it with the syringe because the bone is close so the syringe might break if it is thin.
And as for the veins in the eye sockets, their benefit is for diseases of the eye such as jaundice, redness and ophthalmia and face diseases. And as for how to open them, it is that he ties the ligature around his neck with a turban then you open them while standing on his head and the opening should be at an angle to the length slightly with a small syringe which is slightly wide.
For the place is not fatty in it, so if the syringe has a thin edge then it may break, then the blood flows and you put cotton on them and tie them for one night then untie them. And as for cutting the vein of the nose its benefit is from acute fever.
And severe headache and face diseases such as red congestion which appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. And as for how to cut it, he ties the ligature around his neck then you take his nose with your left hand and take a thin long syringe.
He wraps himself in the middle of the armrest, while keeping his nose straight because moisture does not appear there. Then blood comes out from his vein and he should put his finger on the probe a little and send what is needed then tie him at night, for it becomes dry quickly.
As for the warts, their usefulness is to remove them since they cause difficulty in breathing and are the beginning of leprosy and black diseases which appear on the surface of the skin such as black plaque, buboes and poor ulcers. And how to get rid of them, by tying a string under them in his neck and standing on it.
The patient sits on a chair then the moisture is drawn to length and lifted up slightly, then some blood is extracted in the amount that has been seen as needed, then the same is done with the other moisture and finally the bandage is wrapped.
The two moistures are tied tightly in the middle so that the patient does not suffocate and it is left until tomorrow, then the wound will heal. As for the veins of the neck, their usefulness is to remove them after having extracted the pus because they benefit from tumours in the mouth and decay of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks in the lips and ulcers.
The ones that are in the nose and around it. And how to get rid of them, that you sit the patient in front of you and tie his neck with a turban then turn his lips and look at the two veins which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side and determine from them by their blueness.
And also because of their being two blue and narrow veins that you cut them with a severed cut, if they are difficult for you to determine what they are then go ahead and cut the larger one of them and show it to him, and do the same with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two sputa under the tongue, their benefit is to remove them after bleeding the throat to evacuate the mucus that forms in the pharynx from diseases of the laryngitis and mouth diseases. The manner of removing them is to sit the operator facing the sun with his patient and raise his tongue and look under it from one side a sputa and from the other side a sputa and their color turns black.
And remove them and preserve [the patient] do not be concerned with cutting them, because underneath them are veins, so perhaps bleeding will flow from those veins. As for the three veins that bleed in the armpit, they are what has been customary to bleed in people altogether, and their bleeding is on two sides.
Either insert a thin or olive-tipped needle into the vein, or slit it with a fine-bladed lancet and this is its shape.
It is wide as you see, suitable for opening the protruding and swollen veins that are visible and contain thick and dark blood. This is the shape of the olive-tipped lancet:.
And this lancet is narrower and thinner, suitable for bleeding the varicose veins that contain thin and yellowish blood. This is the shape of the fine-bladed lancet:.
This fine-bladed lancet is suitable for slitting, and there are various types of it according to the size and narrowness of the veins. And this may be used as a model for others, and among artisans, it is well-known.
And as for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit in bleeding is that it attracts blood from the abscesses that form under the throat and neck below the chest and belly. It should be necessary for the bleeder when he bleds to warn him and to be on the head of the vein because underneath it are arteries. So if he erred and increased in inserting the lancet, cut that artery.
There occurs hemorrhage, therefore its obstruction should not be with a needle of stitches, but its obstruction should be with an incision by a lancet. If the bleeding tissue does not become clearly visible then you must take heed and change to another or seek part of it.
Or you should ligate the place with a tendon of the arm, for it is clear and you cut it with a lancet as we said. If you wanted its obstruction by itself then before taking hold of the arm you must explore the place until you know the place of the pulse then mark on it with ink.
Then you bind the arm and cut the vein a cutting incision with a lancet as we said. And you should search so that the blow may fall far away from the place of the artery. And if when you tighten your bandage you see inflation in the place where you marked with ink, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery, therefore beware it.
And if you see the blood at the incision bubbling like urine of an infant and it was thin red then know that it is from the artery's blood, therefore hasten to stop it. Place your finger on it for a long time then withdraw your finger. If the bleeding stops, tighten the arm.
And leave him, and warn the attendant from neglecting it, let it be on his neck or not move it for a number of days until it heals. If the bleeding does not stop and it is pressing you and has not come to your aid with medicine then cut the artery if it appears to you, because its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a piece of onion peel and cut it in half and press one half on the place of the vein with a tight grasp with a bandage and a tourniquet until another day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise treat as we mentioned earlier by placing stopping pads on the hemorrhage, and cutting its blood is not difficult most of the time.
For a small wound in the arm where suturing is possible, let him know. And for the blue vein: this is beneficial if he prevents it from drawing blood from the top of the head and the lower body to a place that is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we mentioned.
It is advisable for the surgeon to be aware of the nerves, because if they are cut under them then increased sewing in the wound will cause numbness in it which may remain unhealed. And this nerve is often felt by touch.
If it is small in some people and thin so that it cannot be seen, then make the incision for your surgery in a lengthwise direction with the needle, and avoid the nerve. If the vein lies between two nerves, cut the vein longitudinally. And as for the cephalic vein, this is beneficial if he prevents it from drawing blood from the head.
It is beneficial for the illnesses of the eyes and it is necessary to cut this vein particularly if you want to cut it; with two stitches of olive oil needle or with a broad rosemary needle because it is the most safe of all veins since there is no artery nor nerve under it.
Unless it is necessary for you to avoid with the needle only the head of the muscle and look for the soft place, and it will not harm him if he does not hit with the first blow that he go back on this with a cut several times unless maybe it becomes swollen in some people if he did not cut with the first blow.
But that swelling will not harm him anything. And as for the manner of incision and its complications, and what should be done to repair it, first you should know that an incision is either used only for maintaining health.
Or it is used in diseases, and that which is used for maintaining health and its continuity, and the prevention of occurrence of diseases, then let the incision be one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the cephalic, the basilic, or the median, and let the incision be at the beginning of spring if there are signs of swelling.
Punction shall be performed on Sunday or Tuesday after the day has gone three hours. And as for punction which is used in diseases, it does not have a limited time but when necessity and need demand it by night or day.
And in every hour and in every time, the young should not be punctured until they have come fourteen years, nor should the elderly who have exceeded sixty years be punctured. If someone is determined to puncture for any reason.
It should be cleaned with a green instrument before puncturing, if there is much stagnant blood in it so that it does not adhere to the vessels when punctured from the belly, superfluous badness which harms the principal organs. Nor should the drunkard or the intoxicated person be punctured until that has passed away from them.
And one should also warn of puncturing after the menstrual period and vomiting and diarrhea and excessive coitus and fatigue and exercise and vigilance and fasting, and all that exhausts strength from a bodily or mental matter. Then look into the thinning of the humors before this if the blood is thick.
By means of food and drink and medicine if possible, then he enters the bath, if it is not prevented by an obstacle or some forms of exercise in order that his blood become clear and to make the puncture in the morning chest as we said, and that he intends to clear his chest from all bad mental obstructions.
Such as worries and anger and fear, and all bodily obstructions like fatigue and excessive lifting and coitus and the like. And he prepares his surroundings with things that people are accustomed to use from kinds of perfume and pleasant smells and pleasures and the like, each person according to what is possible for him.
Then the puncurer sits on a higher cushion than that which the patient sits on, then he extends his arm and the puncurer smooths it with his hand two or three times then tightens the bandage with forceps and twists it two or three times while being moderate in the tightening.
Because tension, when excessive, prevents bleeding and also when relaxed prevents it; then after the tension it is advisable that the surgeon rubs with both hands together on each other.
Until the blood vessels swell and become palpable, then he cleanses the cut with a gentle application of old oil; then he places his left thumb on top of the blood vessel under the place he wants to stop it so that the blood doesn't escape from the cut. Because of the blood vessels that are like a tendon which clings to the needle when cut, and those which are filled with air so that when you place the instrument on them they collapse beneath it and block the bleeding, and if the bleeding is opened it becomes narrow.
So the surgeon should be firm and cautious in all of this, then he lowers the needle; if it opens the blood vessel at that spot, otherwise he repeats it once again a little below or above that place with some effort unless the spot swells.
If the wound becomes swollen or festers, leave it for a day or two and do not pull tight the bandage; perhaps it may bring a hot abscess and he will not be able to go to the bathhouse, then he repeats the incision if he wishes, if the puncture was small and the bleeding is fine.
And be afraid that the amount of blood you want will not come out, so reinsert the needle into the same hole with care for straightness and increase the opening a little; do this with effort before the spot becomes swollen, because in many people the area becomes swollen even at small openings.
And if you see that it has become swollen, do not touch it at all because it will not help you; put on him something of the old oil's resin and it makes the bleeding easier and is better in this place than the oil itself or any other ointment.
Apply oil of aloes in the process of letting out blood from veins if the bleeding is difficult. The antidote of Feroq and Shakhsinaya may be used, by placing one of them on the wound; then the blood will flow and become clear if it was thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of venesection, it often happens especially to those who have only done it that one time or whose vein was small; be quick and put a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the swelling for an hour; then it will resolve.
It is advisable to do this after the blood has come out completely from the vein itself or another one, if something dark or green remains in the place for days then it will not harm that; but if you wish, put a little of dissolved alum and salt on it.
Or something of fumitory juice and the like, often a swelling and inflammation occur when letting out blood from the basilic vein; put your hand on it, if you feel it soften under your touch then that is a bad inflammation, beware not to put anything on it as we mentioned.
Perhaps blood of the arteries will flow from it, but compress it with what is in its place so that it thickens then treat it with other treatments until it heals; and you should let out from every person as much blood as his strength allows and as much as appears to be the dominant color of the blood.
And if the blood is black then let it come out until it becomes red, and similarly if you see it thick then let it flow until it thins, and similarly if it is hot then let its heat go away; and it is advisable for someone who is full and strong to need to let out the blood all at once.
It is advisable to make the venesection of the vein wide and for the one who cuts it to be wide; and whoever is weak then do the opposite of that, and let it out in installments and have a small puncture; and what is best used in cutting the vein is to make it inclined, curved, and sliced not pierced.
This type of incision is safe from bleeding and nerve cut, and it is Ahmad and more perfect than the superficial and deep incision. If he takes it when making a wound, it should be fed with something soaked in rose water or almonds before making the wound.
If he is melancholic and blood comes out in three or four times, if his temperament is relaxed, then take before the incision a bread soaked in low wine or honey flavored with saffron or rose water.
If the superficial wound occurs during incision and its cause is the great exit of blood, then he should be given water to drink and thin rosewater drink, and use saffron as an ointment for his chest, and use all what was mentioned in the division about the superficial wound in the chapter on boils.
What happens because of a vomiting, and as for who wants to calm his arm and drain his blood again, then it should be drained little by little according to the strength in consecutive days.
And as for who wants to calm his arm and drain his blood again, and if his body is strong then he should do this after seven or eight hours of the first incision. And as for who wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite side that it inclined towards, then he should be taken care of on the second or third day.
And as for who has a lot of blood in his body that has boiled and heated up and made fever, then the blood should be taken out from him all at once and the great amount should be drained and the incision should be enlarged so that the boil is exposed after it has been matured to all the conditions of the incision. And you should put your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing, so that death does not occur at the place of the boil, for this often happens if the incisor is ignorant and forgetfulness occurs. And it should not be done if you wanted to calm the arm and drain the blood again.
If the mouth of the artery becomes closed and it is difficult for the blood to come out, one should press upon it with great force or twist it strongly. This indeed makes it very favorable. Either leave it until it clears again, or else draw away from the cut with a lancet what has congealed in the mouth of the artery.
Or take some salt and hold it to him, dissolved in water, or take some faruq or shakhzinaya antidote and smear it on him lightly until the blood comes out. If the artery has become inflamed then leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the inflammation subsides. If necessity demands that you let blood again, then either bleed above that place or else bleed in another arm or artery.
And as for bleeding the vein of the arm, it is done instead of the akeheel and basliq if they are not found or are hidden, since it is compounded from them. The manner of bleeding it that he puts his hand into hot water until the cloth becomes red and the artery shows itself distinctly then ties above it with a band tightly but not too tight.
Then bleed the artery a little obliquely, neither too high nor too low, and let the incision be wide. Let your cut be above the wrist joint a little. If it is difficult for the blood to come out then put the hand again into the vessel with hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until your need is satisfied. And if you are in the days of summer, perhaps you will not need to put the hand again into hot water, but rather let the blood flow in the warm water more often in winter time. Bleeding this artery is safer than all other arteries. Because there is no vein that runs beneath it nor an artery. And as for bleeding the basilic vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver afflictions. The manner of doing it is to tie the upper part of the arm with a band or with your own hand after putting it into hot water until the vein swells up.
Because there is no vein that runs beneath it nor an artery. And as for bleeding the basilic vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver afflictions. The manner of doing it is to tie the upper part of the arm with a band or with your own hand after putting it into hot water until the vein swells up. The surgeon should make sure he feels the area very well and then distinguish it somewhat by cutting it a little bit, but if he cuts it completely, that will not harm him. He must be careful not to press his knife too hard, as there is a nerve under the skin of the fingers in this location, which is clearly visible from the flesh. Then return your hand to the hot water.
And let the blood run in it; for if you do not put them in the hot water, the blood will clot in the vein and refuse to flow. If you drew out as much blood as is needed, place on the vein oil and salt so that it does not become stuck quickly.
And you should also do the same with every narrow branch. As for usefulness, separate it from the left hand; for it is useful in diseases of the spleen, and similarly do what was done with the second one. And as for bleeding the veins of the vein of the sciatic nerve, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower body, such as uterine issues.
And hold back menstruation and kidney diseases and chronic wounds of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments. And how to bleed it; that his leg enters into the hot water and carries upon it the cupping instrument until the vessels appear then he pulls above the ankle joint with the company and the vein is in its place at the calf visible towards the thumb.
And it branches out from the face of the leg many branches, so bleed him in the widest branch among them or at the calf when they meet; for that is better and safer. If you bleed him on the face of the leg, he will be saved from the nerves that are under it on the face of the leg.
Make the bleeding appear as if you are cutting him, and let the knife be slack. If it is difficult for the blood to come out, let his leg return to the hot water and leave the blood to run in it until it empties. If the bleeder misses the vein with the first attempt.
He should be evacuated upwards a little, as the place is safe and there will be no fear of complication if he has been preserved from the nerve, just as we said. He should also do the same with the vein on the other leg, whichever one it may be. As for the saphenous vein, its place is as I mentioned it before, on the posterior side.
And the benefit of his evacuation for a hip injury if it was due to hot blood and how to do his evacuation, if you insert a small rod into the artery and hurry and tie down his leg from below the hip up to above the ankle with four fingers thick thread.
If it appears, then evacuate him in any condition; or twist him and that is better; or cut him with a cutting tool or slash him. For his place is safe, and he is very small in most people; if you do not find him.
And if it has not appeared at all, then evacuate some of its branches which are the ones that appear on the back of the foot towards the big toe and the small toe, and preserve from the nerves and send out the quantity of blood you want.
Then untie the ligature and put a lint on the place of the incision and tie the ligature, and it will quickly heal.
The sixtieth chapter.
For cupping and how to use it.
The cups may be made of horns, and wood, and brass, and glass. And the cupping may be on two faces; one of them is the cupping with condition, that is the drawing out of blood, and the other is the cupping without condition.
And this cupping which is without condition will be on two faces.
The supports of the lumbar vertebrae, which are two plates at the back of the neck on both sides, the support of the lower jaw from within the mouth, the supports of the shoulders, the supports of the buttocks below the coccyx, the supports in the middle of the arms, the supports of the legs, and the supports of the ankles.
The venesection draws the blood from the large veins dispersed in the flesh. And therefore, it is not fitting that its force be a throwing out (i.e., of the needle), nor should the venesection be performed with fire or without fire for any of the diseases which result from over-fullness until the body has been completely purged.
If necessity demands venesection because of a disease or in accordance with habit, then we use it at any time, whether at the beginning of the month, its end, or in the middle, or whenever it is needed.
And among people, there are those in whom the blood is abundant to such an extent that they need to have it extracted through venesection, and find a heaviness and headache in their head, fullness and redness on their face, neck, and chest. And some of them experience a buzzing or trembling sensation on their face, groin, and thigh. And there are those who feel darkness and clouding in their eyes. And among them are those who find hardness around the supports (i.e., the places where they have been cupped).
And among them are those whose laughter is excessive, and there are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth, and their gums tremble and bleed. And some of them sleep excessively, and some see in their sleep blood, redness, killing, and wounds, and things similar to that. Whenever we saw something like this,
And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we are ordered to perform venesection after two or three hours have passed from noon. And as for the benefit of cupping on the nape, it benefits those with heaviness in the head and water that ascends to the eyes.
However, the patient's body should be purged beforehand. This bleeding may serve instead of blood-letting with cupping vessels; and he is warned not to use it from someone who has cold temperament or has a head flux, for it will harm him greatly.
Therefore, the elderly and those with cold head afflictions should not use it; nor those who have indulged in it to such an extent that it has caused him forgetfulness.
Therefore, the surgeon should order that his hand be lowered slightly into the cupping vessel below, in fear of causing forgetfulness. And as for knee bleeding, it is a substitute for cupping the eye and letting blood from the temples.
Therefore, it is beneficial for those with asthma and shortness of breath, stridor and coughing, and fullness; and the knee cup should be raised slightly because if lowered too much, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for cupping the hollows of the joints, it is beneficial for those who experience pain in the head, inflammation, tightness, constriction and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is a substitute for letting blood from the temples. The surgeon should order that his hand not be deeply inserted lest he cut an artery and cause bleeding.
And as for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for those who have ulcers in the mouth and decay of the gums and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it may serve instead of letting blood from the cheeks. And as for cupping the shoulders, it is beneficial for those with palpitations due to fullness and heat.
And as for cupping the hollows of the buttocks, it is beneficial in that it benefits letting blood from the three vessels (of) the temples, the eye and the neck, because it attracts blood from all those subtle vessels which are in the flesh; and it attracts those subtle vessels from thicker vessels until it reaches the thick vessels.
It is advisable that the barber-surgeon should not delve too deeply into the condition, because the area is marked by flesh and beneath it are nerves and veins. And as for a single compress to be applied over the hemorrhoids, it benefits from anal fistulae and lower wounds.
It is advisable that the barber-surgeon should command a compress to be large and made of copper, because the area needs strong pressure. Perhaps the glass compress has broken and many conditions have been imposed upon it. And as for leg bandages, their filling is deficient by clear deficiency.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, womb and bladder and stimulates menstruation and benefits from boils and abscesses and performs the function of letting out the saphenous veins and the ligatures, except that it exhausts the body greatly and a purging occurs in most people. The bandages for the sciatic veins have almost the same benefit as the bandages for the legs.
The manner of placing the bandages is that the compress should be placed first empty and pressed with moderate pressure, without prolonging the placement of the bandages but rather putting them on quickly and taking them off quickly so that the humors return to the place evenly. And you continue this process until you see the area has reddened and opened up.
And the redness of the blood appeared, then he should compress and repeat the pressure gradually and then look at the condition of the bodies. So whoever from people is lean flesh with porous pores it is advisable that he be compressed only once, lest the area become ulcerated.
The barber-surgeon should command him to widen the compress and slightly deepen it, and adjust the pressure gently and softly. If it is in thick blood, he should be compressed twice. In the first instance, he should open a way for the clear blood and its fluidity, and in the second, to expel the thick blood.
If the blood is very foul, we repeat the condition a third time to reach perfection. In general, if we want to extract a little blood, one bandage is enough; but if we wish to remove much blood, we use more bands. If we reckon that the blood is thick.
It should be bandaged deeply with a medium thickness of the cloth, which reaches only the skin. The unguents used for the dressing and the water that is drunk by the patient should not be used; but he who has thick, hard, rough and narrow skin.
It is necessary to apply ointments to the areas of the dressings that are open and dissolved; but if it is in the summer time, like the unguent of roses or the unguent of violets or the sweet almond oil or the juice of colocynth.
And if it is in the winter time, like the unguent of narcissus or the unguent of jasmine or the unguent of lily or like them. And if the ulcer is thick and cold, then let the ointment be the unguent of marshmallow or the unguent of nard or the unguent of saffron or like it.
If the patient has wide pores and a looseness of flesh, it is necessary to abstain from ointment; and these should wash their dressings with rose water or cold water or fox berry juice or colocynth juice or radish juice and like them. And as for him whose blood is very moist.
He washes his dressings with vinegar or with mulberry water and pomegranate juice and like them. And as for him whose ulcer is thick, he washes his dressings with old wine or with marshmallow water or colocynth decoction or jasmine-like waters and like them. It is necessary to beware the bleeding in the bathroom and after the bath.
It is advisable that one should use the steam bath after an hour or two of hmorrhoidectomy, and no one should sleep after it. What the patient who has been cupped and blistered should prepare before and after the operation.
It is necessary to look first; if the patient who has been cupped and blistered has jaundice, with a strong likelihood of bile in his blood, then he should take cooling medicaments such as dates, purslane, khell, honey, and jalab. His diet should be easy like stew, goat meat soup, and sweet dishes similar to them.
And if the patient has a cold temperament, he should be given honey drink and rose water or sweetened jalab. He should eat moderate wine which is between old and new, he should take little food and make his diet of soft dishes such as stew, small birds, and pigeon meat easy to digest. And on the day of hmorrhoidectomy and cupping, he should have more drink than food.
And it is advisable to give him sometimes for some people the antidote faruq or musk medicine or shiltha before hmorrhoidectomy and cupping, or after them, in order to strengthen the main organs and purify the blood. And he should not be given intoxicants.
And as for the cupping without a condition, it is the one that is applied to the liver, spleen, breasts, belly and back, and the place of the kidney and hip because these organs cannot bear bleeding on them. The intention behind it is either to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the cups on the breasts in case of mastitis or we use them to make a cold sweat come out from the organ that has become hot and congested, just as we place them on the belly and back; it loosens the member, warms it up and takes away the pain by evaporating the bad air.
A pressure is placed on the kidney if a stone or gravel appears in it; perhaps the stone will be drawn out or the gravel will be loosened from its place. And similarly, this pressure is applied to the liver and spleen when there is an uproar in them. This bandage can also be used empty alone with a poultice.
And it may be used with fire, and it may also be used filled with warm water for the cure of hernias; this is that one fills the bandage with very hot water alone or with some herbs which are suitable for that.
Then it is placed filled on the place and held in that state and left, and then repeated as often as necessary. This is the form of the bandage used with fire:.
Its mouth is a span and a half, open as we have shown, and its depth is about the length of half a finger. In the corner of it, in about one-quarter of that, there is a small hole, just big enough to put an awl through, made from thick, yellow tin or Chinese brass.
A flat, smooth, hollow bandage so that it does not harm the part when it is placed on it. In the middle of it there is a metal or iron rod where the candle is placed with fire. And this bandage can be made large, bigger than what we have described, and small according to the diseases.
A cloth is used in its application; the bandages of children and infants are not like those of men. As for how to put this bandage with fire on the part, it is that one takes a thread from cotton well-tied or a small candle from tallow and puts it on the middle of the rod which is fixed in the middle of the bandage.
So that the fire rises up to above, about a span and a half of the bandage, so that it does not burn the body of the person being operated on. Then it is placed on the part and the finger is put on the hole which we mentioned, until the cloth is grasped, then one does not need to remove the finger.
The steam came out through that puncture and the stricture was resolved at the site, then the probe progressed along the ureter and returned if it was needed, but the stricture caused by water in the bladder does not have a retracted rod nor a puncture.
And it is used by filling with water and placing it on the organ only, and this is its form:.
And this stricture was better when it was large so as to hold a lot of water.
The Seventh Part.
For the remedy of the stone in the bladder.
The catheter is used in most cases for the organs which cannot have the stricture placed on them, either because of their smallness like the cheek and the tongue and similar ones, or because the organ is obstructed from flesh like the finger and the nose and similar ones.
And the manner of its use is that you take from the catheter which is in the clear and clean water free from impurities, then leave it for a day and night in the fresh water until it becomes dry and nothing remains inside it. Then the body is first purged by venesection or cupping, then the affected organ is cleansed.
Until it becomes red, then it is placed on it. If it is filled it falls off, and if possible the place is coated with a stricture but if not then the place is washed with vinegar and then with much water, it is rubbed and squeezed, and if the blood flows after the stone has fallen and this was profuse let a linen cloth be soaked in cold water.
And it is placed on top until the bleeding stops, and if the blood flows abundantly ashes of za'ja or alum or similar substances from the soapwort are sprinkled on it until the bleeding stops or a piece of cut papyrus is put on the place.
Leave until the bandage is applied there, as the bleeding will cease. If it is necessary to reapply the ligature, do not remove that ligature if possible; however, if the ligature refuses to be reapplied, clean the area with warm blood.
Or insert a needle into the place until something comes out of the blood, then it is put there. As long as it feels anything from the blood to stick in its place; if you want it to fall, sprinkle some vinegar or salt or ash on it so that it falls onto its place.
The Third Chapter.
In fracture(s).
This chapter is also a trick and necessity for the craft of medicine, which is treating fractures and dislocated bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter is also claimed by the knowledgeable physicians and the common people, and by whoever has not reviewed a book on it nor read a single letter from among the ancients.
On account of this reason, this art has been nonexistent in our land and I have not seen it done properly at all. And I have benefited from it only as much as my prolonged reading of the books of the ancients has allowed, and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted its knowledge from them; then I persisted in practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have depicted for you in this chapter everything that is contained in my knowledge of it. And my experience has been added to it after I have brought you and simplified it from the branches of complexity, shortened it to the utmost shortening, made clear its indications and depicted for you in it many images of the tools that are used in it.
As is its clarity, as I have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no power but with Allah the Most High the Great.
The First Chapter.
There are some general phrases and sections related to the breaking of bones, which must be presented before we start mentioning the broken and dislocated limbs one by one. In the beginning of this chapter, there should be mentioned some preliminary words and chapters. You are first compelled to understand them, and you must stand firm on the truth of them. And it is not you alone who should be eager to learn this noble profession, but anyone seeking to master this craft.
And I say that whenever one of breaking, dislocation, or fracture, or fall occurs to anyone, it is necessary to rush first to its remedy or treatment or both. If a hindrance such as weakness of power prevents it, or if the one who suffered from it is a child or an elderly man, or if the time is very hot or very cold.
Then he will restrict his food to cold legumes, game meats and cold jadah. He must avoid drinks and thick meats, and be satisfied with little food, so that the vessels do not become filled with blood, even if the swelling has subsided and no liquid is expected to flow into the place.
Then the patient should return to his original treatment. If the broken bone is taken in a splint, then the patient should be fed nourishing foods that are rich, thick and easy to digest, such as barley, wheat bread, heads of cattle and onions and cow's tripe. And eggs, dried fish and thick drinks, and similar things. With this treatment the union of the fracture will be faster and better. And know that the bones which are broken in strong men and elderly people can never reunite and heal naturally as they were originally.
The bones of old men are thin and brittle, and the broken ones will reunite and heal like those of young children. But nature produces on the fractured bone something resembling a glue in thickness that unites and tightens it until they become attached to each other.
And some of them (are) tied to each other, until it comes in a great strength and trustworthiness as it was originally until nothing of its deeds hinders it.
And because of this reason, it is necessary to make the patient's food nourishments which have durability and density as we said, and know that a fracture may differ in its kinds according to the difference of the members because a fracture of the leg bone is contrary to a fracture of the head bone and a fracture of the chest bone is contrary to a fracture of the back.
And likewise all the other members are contrary to one another, and we will come with a mention of every type of fracture described in its place in detail from the others, and the kind of bone fracture may also differ within itself.
Because it may be a fracture which is fractured without causing shavings, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone with shavings and protruding and non-protruding splinters, and there may be a fracture with a wound and an incision in the skin, and there may be a light bruise.
And for every type there is a special trick in its setting, as will be mentioned in detail in its place. And what indicates a fracture of the bone is its distortion and bending and protrusion to the sense and crunching when you touch it with your hand.
So if there is no obvious distortion, or crunching, or feeling of disturbance in the bone when you touch it, nor does the patient find much pain, then there is no fracture but rather a bruise or a slight crack or a light bruise; therefore do not move him with stretching and pinching at all.
But rather take him on the remedies that will be mentioned afterwards when it suits the place, then pull it with a gentle pull, and know that if the bone is splintered and broken into two without causing shavings, except that all parts have been separated from each other.
You should begin from the time you are able to correct him and straighten him out before a hot tumor occurs in him. If it happens that a hot tumor occurs in him, leave him for some days until the hot tumor settles down then correct him in any way you are able with kindness and cunning.
Know that straightening and correcting him is easier than the bone in which fragments have occurred, then bind on what will be mentioned later. If the bone has fragments, there must be a broken member extended from two hands or a man.
Or with your hands if the member is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand. Let it be that you put the member in its natural place until straightened, then when the fractured bone extends, at that time pull back those protrusions to their places in any way you are able with cunning and kindness.
Be careful with your effort so that by your action you do not cause pain or discomfort to the patient. Make an effort to bring one of the bones together with its fellow in the best form. It is necessary at this time for you to touch them with your hand and feel them. If you see something contrary, correct it and straighten it as much as you are able.
Be careful of strong pressure and powerful traction, as many ignorant people do, and they often cause a hot tumor or inflammation in the member as you have seen them doing repeatedly.
Then bind the member after straightening, correction and traction, to rest and calmness. Warn the patient to move it in his wakefulness and sleep, at its change and disturbance, at his urination and all of his movements until he is able, so that it may be a cure for the part that he fears pain with.
So that whenever he feels with his member in its cure position pain or discomfort, he moves it to a different position where he does not feel pain and tries while doing so that the other position be straight and upright.
If the limb becomes numb, deformity will occur in the member. However, as for how to tighten a broken member, it is as I have described to you. Know that fractured members vary in their smallness and largeness and their cleanliness; some are small like the arm and the finger and the hand and similar things.
It is necessary that the bandages of the fracture be soft and thin, but if it is in the large bones such as the thigh and back and chest, then the bandages should be hard and rough. For a wide bandage encases the big member and tightens it evenly from all sides without any unevenness.
Then you start after freeing yourself from the alignment, to apply the plaster suited to that. Then you start to apply gentle pressure on the place of the fracture, then begin to roll the bandage on the place of the fracture itself three or four rolls according to what the member deserves. Then hold your hand a little with the bandage and go with it to the upper side from the place of the fracture.
With a pull less than the pull for the fractured place, then you distance yourself a little with the roll from the place of the fracture and relax the tension a little until it takes something good from the correct place. Then take another bandage and wrap it also on the fractured place.
Rolls, then go with the roll to the lower side from the fracture. Let your action in tightening and relaxing the roll be as we mentioned for the first roll above, then put between the rolls some soft pressure or bandages to equalize the deformity of the fracture.
If there is deformity, then put something in it; otherwise do not put anything in it. Then wrap another bandage over it and straighten up on these firm rolls from your time if there is no swelling or heat in the member.
If there is an inflation or a hot tumor, carry on it what quiets that tumor and gets rid of the inflation, then leave it for some days. Then put on it when the time comes the flasks made from half-twisted reeds cut into shape with skill or the flasks made of palm wood.
The one made from cedar or palm fronds or papyrus or date-palm leaves, similar to what has been prepared of that kind. And let the capacity of each flask be in this shape and form.
Unless the flask that is placed on the break itself is thicker and a little wider than the other flasks, and as for the length of the flask, it should be made according to what suits the broken member in its size, small or large.
Then bind the flasks with another bandage, in accordance with how tightly you bound the first one, then tie from above with strong threads, as we have mentioned that your binding should be on the place of the break more. And however far away from the break was the binding, it was less tight.
It should be that the threads are medium in thickness and softness, and they should be made of wet linen specifically. Because the threads if they were thick like what you have seen from the acts of the foolish people who make their threads from unfolded linen strips, this is a great mistake.
Because the binding with them goes outside of moderation, and also the soft threads do not suit because you cannot achieve the desired tightness with them. And it should not be less than a finger's width between the flasks.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the flasks after being tied in the proper places, put under them linen or wool padding until nothing hurts him from that. And as for if the break has a wound and there was a hole in the skin, we will attend to it separately.
Know that not every broken member should be bound with splints from the first day, for if the member is large then it should not have splints placed on it unless after five or seven days or more as you deem safe from occurring of hot swelling.
And this is the nature of the plaster which the ancients used to bind with, which is placed on the fracture and jaw and swelling, the nature of a common short binding plaster that consolidates the fracture and suits most tissues especially children and women because it does not cause either heat or cold.
And take the flour dust from between the millstones when they are in motion, mix it as it is without grinding with white eggs and make its dough neither thick nor thin then cook it.
The nature of another plaster that consolidates the fracture and dislocation and swelling, taken from cow's milk, and the root of the plantain and aloe and rasaan and mughath and sakk, each one ten drachmas, and from the root of the marshmallow five drachmas, and from Armenian or Roman clay twenty drachmas. All of them are crushed and mixed with marshmallow water or white egg if the temperament of the patient is disturbed, then this plaster is used because it is good in composition consolidates broken bones quickly and suits most people because of its moderation.
The nature of another plaster that also benefits the fracture and swelling, taken mughath and cow's milk and white ram's horn from each one ten drachmas, mercurial and rasaan from each one five drachmas, aloe six drachmas, Armenian clay twenty drachmas. All are crushed finely and mixed together and kneaded with water or white egg and used.
The nature of a plaster for joints and dislocated bones that go out of their places, and drives away the pain that opposes them and loosens the bone fracture, taken washed wool which is immersed in cooked vinegar and oil, and put on the place, and this plaster does not have consolidating power.
But he is excellent in soothing the hot tumor and relieving pain particularly. A characteristic plaster that forces the broken bone to set, one takes and crushes the inner bark of the terebinth tree and the inner bark of the Nigella plant together and applies them moistened. A characteristic plaster another short used when there is a fracture of the bone.
And you wish to analyze the rest of the tumor, take from the onion and the hibiscus and the petals of the violet and the powder of the cranesbill, crush all together and mix with varnish if the part is not inflamed, then mix with rosewater or water if it is inflamed and use.
A characteristic plaster stronger in analysis than the first one is used when a hard tumor occurs due to bone fracture, it is taken from the onion and the seeds of flaxseed and rue and cloves and mustard and violet petals and hibiscus from each one part.
They are all crushed and mixed with vinegar or sweet water or varnish, all according to the temperature of the part and its quietness, and as for Galen he did not mention that it is put on the fractured bone when it is set.
Except for the wax and oil which are used alone, a description that it should be medium between thickness and softness, and as for Galen he thought that when setting the fractured bone things with skin and something of heat such as resin and myrrh and saffron and what we mentioned should be put on.
A characteristic plaster that is beneficial for weakness and pain, it is taken from gallnut and mustard and human hair or bird feathers and onion and salt equal parts, crush and sift and mix and apply with it, and as for the amount that should remain the bandage.
Then it is peeled off, and look at the place, if it did not cause great pain or crackling or movement of the fractured bone from its place then do not leave it for a long time because if it does occur severe cracking or anxiety or swelling.
Then hasten to apply the poultice at once, and remove the plaster from it. Then take a soft, moist linen cloth or sponge, submerge it in lukewarm water, and wash the area with it until the swelling subsides and the pain lessens. Then let the limb rest for an hour.
Then place on it a swab moistened with vinegar and oil or rose ointment, and tie it up for the night so that the inflammation subsides and the part ceases to swell. Then return it to gentle stretching and light plastering but not as tight as the first time.
And treat it gently until it heals. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, swelling and all symptoms have disappeared altogether and it needed the plaster and stretching as before, then return to do so again in the same way. But if there is nothing wrong with the part as we mentioned.
Do not apply plaster to it except after three, four, five or seven days, and sometimes one can leave it for twenty days, all according to what appears to you of the state of the limb as we mentioned until if the fracture is complicated and the bone approaches being reunited on it.
Also, increase the stretching at that time more than your first pulling of it all. Also, increase also the nourishment for the fractured part on what we have mentioned before regarding it, if you see the site of the fracture has dried up and become worse than it should be, then know that the nourishment is being obstructed from reaching it.
Then wash it with lukewarm water whenever you plaster it again, and let that be every three days. Also ease the pulling a bit because by this action nourishment will reach the part and it will heal quickly. And as for what the ignorant have fabricated from the break of the member occurring another time.
For if it does not heal properly first and becomes crooked, then that is a great mistake on their part. And if what they fabricated was correct, they would have mentioned it at the beginning in their books and implemented it, and I have seen no effect of any of them in this regard whatsoever. The correct thing is not to operate on him.
Chapter Two.
In fractures in the skull.
The types of skull fractures are numerous and varied, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures may result from a blow with a sword, and the bone may be completely shattered until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone. As splinters do in wood.
And for that reason this type of fracture is called splintered, and it may be that the sword cuts some of the bone and crushes its surface only, without penetrating to the end, and this type of fracture is simply called crushed. And the wound of both fractures can either be large or small.
And there is a type of fracture which is brittle or crushed, and its cause is a blow with a stone or it has fallen on a stone or the like. This type of fracture can either be that the bone membrane has been almost ruptured or it may be in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small, and there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone of the skull hairline and it is a slight impression.
And for that reason this type of fracture is called hairline, and there is a type of fracture that results from a fall or a stone splinter and it enters the layer of bone inside and becomes an ulcer like that which would occur if a blow with lead hit it and part of it entered inside.
And that is more common in the fresh bone skull, like those of young children's heads. And there are fragments of all these types of fractures which are either clean or unclean and we will mention the treatment of all of this in its place, and we will identify all these types of fractures by cutting them open.
And examining them with probes and removing the putrid flesh from them, and as for the hairline type it is identified by cutting open the bone and wiping and staining on it with ink because the fracture becomes black. And as for treating the fracture we look first at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms something that clearly points to fear, such as vomiting of bilious matter and diarrhoea, departure of the mind, loss of voice, delirium, acute fever, and convulsion or redness and bulging of the eyes, then do not approach him nor treat him because death is inevitable in most cases with these symptoms.
If you see symptoms that do not frighten you and you hope for his safety, then treat him in this way. That is, if the wounded man comes to you at first when he was injured and it was on a winter's day.
It is necessary to exert effort in removing the bone before the fourteenth day at the very least, and if it was on a summer's day, then you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that what is under the bone does not decay and those symptoms we mentioned will be exposed.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and was accompanied by swelling and inflammation, then you should cut the fractured part that is damaged as I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And you should expose the bone in any way that you are able to, and according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient, if when exposing the bone you find bleeding or a hot tumour, then treat it as necessary.
And this is that you should stuff the place with soaked cloths in vinegar and oil of red roses, and then sew up the wound until the tumour subsides and bleeding is secured. Then take to consolidating the bone and removing it, which will be on one of two ways of doing things.
As for the one way, that you should cut the bone with a fine toothed saw, and this is its form:.
Then use another saw after this saw, one that is slightly wider than it, and this is its form:.
Then you also use another segment which I have also mentioned, which is obligatory for you to have several segments that are different from each other. Some of them will be longer than others and some will be shorter than others, and they will be very sharp at their ends, made of good Indian steel or good iron.
And use a forceps to strike on the segment, lest it shake the head and harm it. If the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the segments with the non-piercing reeds which are called non-piercing reeds.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the bone of the skull to what is behind it, in order that the reed has a curved edge below its sharp head similar to a small rope or circle, which prevents it from sinking and passing through the thickness of the bone.
You should take a number of these reeds, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone until it prepares you with each skull to be drilled to the length and shortness of the sharp end of that skull. And here is an image of three types. Of the reeds, large, medium, and small:.
And as for the way of drilling around the broken bone, it is that you place the reed on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has perforated, then move the reed to another place and leave a space between each hole the thickness of a reed or near.
Then you cut with the segments what is between each two holes and do that with great care as we said until the bone comes out either by hand or with something else from some of the tools which you have prepared for this.
Such as the silk and the fine calabashes, and you should be careful with all care that neither the reed nor the segment touches anything of the membrane. If you have loosened the bone and freed it from the membrane if it was stuck to it, you should clean it.
The roughness that remains in the bone is smoothed with another instrument similar to a chisel, but finer and softer than all other chisels. If there remain small bones or shreds, they are taken gently with what instruments you have.
Then the wound is treated after that with catgut and ointments which are mentioned, and as for the other aspect of the work it is an easy matter far removed from danger, which Galen has noted and praised greatly. This is what he says. You should first begin by removing a part of the bone from the place where it was broken, the more severe and more common. If you remove that part, then insert the tip of this chisel under it and this is its shape.
The part of the chisel that is rounded out is smooth and does not cut anything, while the sharp part of it on its movable sides as you see, so that the rounded part extends to the peritoneum and the face of the sharp part in the bone. Then strike with the chisel from one direction.
With a small mallet until it cuts all the bone gently, as it turns around and you are safe from the membrane in which no frightening event occurs. And if the healer is one of the most ignorant people and the most clumsy among them yes, even if he was careless.
If there remains something necessary for the bone from the membrane in some places of the bone, then shake it off with the rounded tip of the chisel itself and free him from it gently. For he frees himself from it without harm or fear.
And as for if the bone break had not reached the membrane and what was cut from the bone faced downwards and remained in it some roughness and shreds, then you should strip that roughness and peel those shreds with gentle rasps which have been made of them of different measurements so that you can use them wherever it suits you best and correct them according to the work that guides you.
The shape of the broken bone and its form, it is necessary that you first use in your chest the widest of these splints then use after that finer than it and do not stop doing this until you come to using the finest of them all.
And as for the small, thread-like cracks and fine breaks, it is necessary to treat each one with a treatment according to what will restore its soundness. It is something that will not be hidden from anyone in this craft who has the least bit of knowledge, and we have stopped at what we have written and explained about the large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth of the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and put it on the mouth of the wound. Then take another folded or triangular cloth. And immerse it in vinegar and rose oil and put it on the first cloth, and do this with as little weight as you can so that you don't burden the omentum. Then use it above a wide bandage and don't pull it tight except for what will hold the wound only.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the inflammation subsides. Then cover it and use after that the medicines which are like myrrh, such as senna root, finely powdered gentian, and zedoary and similar to them, by making from these medicines a poultice.
And apply it on the wound as it is dry and in general use for that a medicine whose purpose is to clean and not to become suppurated. And make an effort in treating your wound so that it will be clean, without grease or pus, and do not let the discharge accumulate in it at all.
Because the discharge if it accumulates on the membrane of the brain corrupts and deteriorates it, and a great mischief will happen from that to the patient. And it may expose in the fontanelle of the head when it is uncovered, especially if it is neglected in its treatment.
If the skin on his surface appears black, then consider him doomed, as was previously mentioned. Know that if the blackness occurred due to a medicine that was placed on it and because of the strength of that medicine it caused this blackness.
It is fitting to take a part from honey and three parts of rose oil, then beat them well together. Then smear the mixture onto a cloth and place it on his abdomen, then treat him with all types of treatment until he recovers.
The Third Chapter.
For stopping a nosebleed if it is broken.
Know that the upper part of the nasal passage does not break, rather one or both of them break in order for it to be a fracture. For below is cartilaginous and does not break but rather becomes swollen, discolored and ulcerated.
If one of the upper parts of his nasal passage breaks, it is fitting to insert a small finger into the nostril and straighten that break from inside with your index and thumb fingers from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently and be careful not to cause harm or pain to him.
If the break is in the upper part of his nasal passage and you do not insert a finger into it, then he should be straightened with the edge of a spoon that is slightly thick. If the break is on both sides, then do the same. And he should begin to treat it from the first day of the break.
If possible, and otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided, then insert a thread of linen cloth into the nostril. If the break is on one side, insert one thread, and if it is on both sides, insert two threads.
And let the thread be thick in accordance with what fills the nostril. And some early physicians have said to soak the thread in lard and change it every day, but I do not see that as correct, rather it should be soaked in white egg yolk mixed with saffron powder.
Then leave the bandage until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens. And for the nasal septum, the place of the bandage may be inserted tubes from the feathers of a goose after they have been wrapped with a linen cloth so that their confinement may cause a harder break in the nose lest the patient should not breathe properly.
And this is not a necessary thing if you wish to make it or if you wish to make the bandages, for the tip of the nose in your work becomes swollen and hot, so bind the nose with lint or soaked cotton dipped in rose oil or fat or something from the paste of the Diachylon.
If the swelling does not appear, then bind it from outside with fine semolina and kender powder which has been kneaded with the white of egg, then place a linen compress on top and do not tie the nose with anything whatever, if the bones of the nose are broken in small fragments.
Or if it is fractured, then make an incision on it and take it out with the instrument that is suitable for that, then sew up the cut and treat it with what unites and heals from the appropriate pastes. If there was a wound inside the nose, then treat it with the bandage and use lead tubes. Until he recovers.
The Fourth Chapter.
For the treatment of a broken upper lip.
If the lower lip is broken and there is no wound, if it is a break from outside only and has not been split into two and is cracked inside then knowing it makes it easier.
If the break is in the right fissure, then insert the left forefinger into the patient's mouth and also if the break is in the left fissure, then insert the right forefinger and raise the protrusion of the break from inside to outside gently.
And with the other hand from outside the bone, control it so that it is smoothed out. If the jaw fracture has split into two parts, then use a spatula on both sides until it can be smoothed out. If there was a growth in the teeth, it should be treated accordingly.
If it is broken, fasten what you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wire, then place the ligatures on the fractured jawbone. Then place over it a folded cloth and place on the cloth a large bandage or a piece of leather sole equal in length to the jawbone. Then tie it from above in the way that seems suitable to you, so that he is tight and snug. Order the patient to remain still and be quiet, and make his food a soft diet. If you think that something has changed in his shape on one of its sides, take action with him on the third day.
Then tie it from above in the way that seems suitable to you, so that he is tight and snug. Order the patient to remain still and be quiet, and make his food a soft diet. If you think that something has changed in his shape on one of its sides, take action with him on the third day. Then repair what you have packed with the emery powder mixed with egg whites or flour after removing the ligatures from it. Place over the poultice a soft compress, as long as it sticks to that poultice and does not change for bone, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until it heals and the fracture gets stronger. Often this break becomes strong in three weeks, if an abscess appears during that time, make use of what we have mentioned repeatedly to alleviate its swelling until it disappears.
And as for if the break is accompanied by an ulcer, then if a shard or shreds of bone have healed out of it, smooth its removal with what agrees to you in removing them from the instrument. If the opening of the wound is narrow, widen it with the probe according to your need.
Then, if you have removed those shreds and there is nothing left of them, sew the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments suitable for that. And close the wound until it heals.
The Fifth Chapter.
For setting a fractured humerus.
The humerus more often fractures in front of the shoulder from its end and its break is on one of three faces, either that it shatters into two pieces without there being shards in it, which is easier to set.
If the break is shattered and that is more difficult to treat; or if it is with a wound, you should act as follows: If the break is not with a wound, have two servants ready, one to steady the forearm near the broken arm, and the other to extend the neck towards the other side.
Then you should adjust the break with your fingers until its shape becomes as it should be, and there should not be a swelling nor a bruise in it. If you needed to pull more, it is necessary to place under the elbow of the patient a ball made from wool or flax.
And its bone will be according to your need, you should extend and lift the forearm, and press with your hand on the ball until the break is adjusted as it should be. If you were not able to pull the tip of the forearm outside because it had sunk in deeply, then the patient should lie on his back.
And a folded cloth should be placed under his armpit in the bone, and the servant should press on his armpit downwards until the bone of the forearm that is deep inside is raised upwards. Then you may correct the break and straighten it with your fingers.
If you felt that a fragment of the forearm had broken and was moving, then it is necessary to cut through it and remove that fragment gently. If the fragment was embedded in the bone, then take one of the instruments prepared for this purpose and use it to cut it. After the apparatus that protects the membrane has been placed under the forearm, which is an instrument made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
It resembles a spoon with no flaw, and its width should be according to what you need of the bone's size and smallness. As for its length, it should also be according to what you can do with it. And it should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower.
If the wound cut that you made when removing a splinter of bone is wide and you have prevented the suppurating swelling, then sew up both sides of the wound with stitching. And if the cut is slight or you are afraid of the suppurating swelling, then reopen the wound by cutting it again and use a dressing according to the width of the cut wound.
If a suppurating swelling appears, then scrape it before cutting with kohl or vinegar wine or drink. And if the bone is set without cut nor incision, then apply to the bone a plaster made from ground pumice mixed with white of egg. And place a soft, folded pad on it. Then put the ball under his armpit if necessary. Then take a long turban, its width being about a forearm or somewhat more than that. Then put a folded dressing on the pad and the plaster. Then take a thin wooden splint. Its width and length should be three fingers. Then wrap it in a cloth, then insert that cloth with the splint into the place of the turban where the fracture is located. Then tie the turban on the break as one wraps a bandage. And tie it around his neck and under his healthy arm and the sick one's. Fold it over on itself several times in each direction. And how you see that the tension corrects the break strongly, which is not hidden from you.
And the condition for all of this is that the splint does not come off the broken bone. And for that reason the patient should be inspected every day. Every time you see the bandage has relaxed and the splint has come off, correct that and tighten the bandage. Then have the patient sleep on his back and under his armpit at night a small pillow.
So that the rib rises with it, and the fracture of the ulna is raised to the height of the shoulder or his arm is tied to his neck. And do not remove the bandage unless an accident occurs such as a wound or swelling in the place within twelve days.
Then renew the poultice if you see fit to do so. It is applied to the swelling and left until it heals and becomes more firm, stronger still in twenty-eight days. And there may be some people who heal in less than that.
Chapter Six.
For the healing of a fractured shoulder. The shoulder rarely breaks in its broad place and it usually breaks at its joints, so when it breaks in any other place or breaks in the middle and this is known by touch, then the shape of the break will be as follows.
You mend it and apply to its natural shape with all the devices you can from every side, then carry some powdered pumice mixed with white egg and fine lint over it, and place on top a wide splint of wood.
Thin, as much as the whole shoulder or a little wider than it, if there is swelling under the splint in any of the places of the shoulder, then mend that swelling with fine lint until the splint lies flat, and then bind from above with a long bandage.
Bind firmly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, and examine the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it again and mend the splint if it moves from its place. May the swelling on the true side be at rest, and the shoulder heal in twenty days.
Or in five and twenty days, if you have completed this number then loosen the bandage and you will be safe, for it is one of the bones which are not feared to be shattered or broken. If a fragment emerged from the bone and was hidden under the skin, cut into it and extract it. And make what I mentioned in a fractured elbow regarding soothing the hot swelling if anything of that occurs.
The Seventh Section.
For healing of a broken chest.
The chest may break in its middle and this is rarely shown, but rather its edges are more likely to break apart. And from its symptoms if it breaks in the middle that it leans down and shows severe pain and difficulty breathing and coughing.
And it may be that blood flows and the separation in the broken bone is evident and not hidden to the touch. And its treatment is for the patient to lie on their back with a pillow between their shoulders then compress their vertebrae together with the hands from both sides and calm them as much as possible by laying them flat on any face that can be done.
And when its form returns as it should, then apply a compress and bandage on top of it. And place over that a splint made from a flat piece of willow or mulberry wood or the like in softness after having wrapped it in a cloth. Then calm down in tying it on the broken bone so that it does not move, and make a knot at the binding which turns towards the back a few times and tighten it tightly. Then inspect the bandage at all times, and whenever it relaxes tighten it again.
And if necessity demands its removal from the place or pain or swelling then hasten to remove it, lift off the compress and correct what appeared in that spot by way of treatment then put back the compress if you see a need for it. And face him and order him to tighten until he is healed.
The Eighth Section.
For healing of the ribs if they have broken, know that the breaking in the ribs occurs in the sharp places which follow the back and their edges from the front are exposed to bruises because they are cartilaginous; and knowing this is not hidden to the touch when searched with the fingers.
It is necessary to arrange the fracture by hand on the powerful side until the shape becomes equal to what is required. Then, wet and tighten the broken bone with a splint if it requires that. If the rib fracture tilts inward, it exposes the patient to severe pain.
And the trachea, like the trachea of one who has a goiter, in order for the bone to be visible and exposed. It also causes difficulty breathing and coughing and spitting up much blood. This is a difficult condition to treat. The earlier ones have dealt with it by many tricks.
Some of them said that it is necessary to give the patient food that will cause gas and flatulence so that the stomach swells and the fracture protrudes outward. We dislike this lest it confirm the occurrence of inflammation if there was no inflammation, but if it had occurred then it increases and confirms it.
And some of them said that a warm compress should be placed on the place and squeezed strongly, it is similar to an application but one fears that the compress will attract dirt to the place due to its weakness. And some of them said that the place should be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil.
A poultice is made between the ribs until it is full, then the bandage becomes even if one folds it round. Then the patient is treated with the treatment of goiter from food and medicine. If the patient is exhausted, his condition is very severe and he cannot bear it. And the bone would grow into the goiter in an injurious manner and we were worried for the patient, so it is necessary to make an incision on the place and reveal the broken rib then sew under it the apparatus which preserves the membrane that I mentioned and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we join the edges of the wound if it is large by stitching and treat him with ointments until he heals. If inflammation occurs during that time, act beforehand by applying a poultice of rose water on the place and treating the patient with what will calm the inflammation from within as well.
He lies on the side which is furthest from his sleep until he becomes well.
The Eighth Chapter.
For the treatment of scabies of the back and neck.
But as for the bones of the neck, if it has a fracture and this rarely occurs, but more often a boil appears there, and also the lumbar vertebrae, then if one is exposed to that and you wanted to know whether he will get better or not. Then look, for if you see that his hands are stiff and numb and he is not able to move them or straighten them or clench them, and even if you punctured them or scratched them with a needle he felt nothing and did not find any pain in them, then know that in most cases he will not get better, so he is lost.
And if he is able to move them and feels the puncture and scratching in them, then know that the marrow of the bone has escaped and the illness will be cured with treatment. And if the scabies of the back was like that and you wanted to know whether it too would get better or not.
Then look at his legs, for if you see that they are stiff and there has occurred in them what occurred in the hands, then if he lies on his back, wind and stool will come out without his will, and if he lies on his abdomen, urine will come out without his will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but is unable to do so, then know that he is lost, so do not concern yourself with treating him. And if nothing of this occurs, the matter will be lighter. The treatment for what occurred from this is to strive to calm the hot abscess.
To put on the affected vertebrae rosewater alone or with cooked egg yolks, and to place it on that three times a day until the hot abscess is calmed down. Then take a padded pad and tie it tightly around the place and order him to remain still and quiet.
A patient should not sleep unless he places the affected side away from his pillow, so that he may rest well. If something has happened to him in the bone at the site of an incision, a splinter or some other object will have formed there; it is fitting that this skin be cut open and that splinter removed. Then the edges of the wound, if it is large, are sewn together with a suture. Then it is treated with ointments until it heals. If the lower bone of the pelvis breaks, which is known as the ischium, then the tip of the left thumb must be inserted into the socket.
The broken bone is set with the other hand, as far as it is possible to do so. Then splints are applied and a bandage wrapped over them if necessary, before pulling tight.
If you feel a splinter that is broken off within it, then cut into it and remove it. And treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In Setting a Hip Fracture.
Say what breaks the bones of the hip. If they break, then their fracture is that it becomes splintered in its ends and cracked in length and tends towards the inside and exposes itself to danger and pain in that place and swelling and numbness in the leg which was broken from its side.
And set it by passing your hand over it until you stand on the fracture and see what its shape is. If the break is only in its ends, then set that break as you are able to do so with the setting until it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is in length or it has tilted towards the inside, then lay the splint on his stomach until you are able to set that break. If you have set it, then place a splint made of wood or skin over it and pull it tight.
Do not be afraid of the fracture's progression or the dehiscence of the wound and filling of its edges with what fills it until tension is equalized. Command the patient to sleep on his back or sound side, if he has a hot swelling.
Withdraw from him and stitch it until the hot swelling subsides, then put on top of him what will calm it as mentioned before. Then go back to stitching and tightening it properly, if there is a splinter or something has come off from its edges do not remove it.
Nor should he touch it but rather have it sutured from the outside as we said, and leave the tightening until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In stitching a fracture of the arm.
The arm is what is between the elbow and the top of the shoulder, if it has fractured then stitch it on one of two ways. One is to take a rod that is hollowed out smooth and medium thickness in this shape:
and ties two cords on its ends, then hangs it from a high place. The surgeon sits on a chair, then lets the broken arm hang on the rod until his elbow is pressed against the middle of the rod's curvature, then hangs something heavy above it.
or has it brought down by a servant, then the doctor stitches the fracture with his hands together until the break is returned to its proper place. The other way is for the surgeon to lie on his chest and hang his hand from his neck with a cord.
Then commands two servants to adjust one above the fracture with his hands, and the other below it, and have each one stretch in their direction. And if you want the pull to be stronger, tie a cord under the break and another on top of it, and have both servants stretch them towards theirs.
If the fracture is close to the angle of the arm, it should be wrapped with a bandage under the armpit and the other one near the fracture towards the elbow. Likewise if the fracture is close to the elbow, the bandage should be placed on that spot and also on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture should be aligned gently without violence until the fracture is properly aligned and a good union results. Then it should be tightened, if there isn't an acute swelling, otherwise leave it till the seventh day and put on a woolen compress soaked with vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then it should be tightened. The method of tightening is that a pad is placed on the fracture, then a sheet of fresh cloth is wrapped over the pad, and the arm is brought to rest against the shoulder itself and his hand is placed open on the angle.
And the cloth and the bandage are worn on the shoulder and arm so that the arm acts as a substitute for the splints, unless you are prevented from doing so by something or there is some change in the fractured bone. If you fear there will be some change in that, use splints.
And it is that a splint is placed on the fracture itself, which is wider and stronger than all other splints. And let there be three fingerbreadths between each splint, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then tighten over the splints the bandage that was mentioned earlier.
So that your tightness on the place of the fracture is stronger.
And whatever was left after the casting of the splints, if you see that the tightness is less, then place them as we said at the time of casting in your hour.
And if you fear an acute swelling, then leave the tightness and splints until the seventh day as we said. Then check the bandage every three days so that a hardness or inflation does not occur in the place, or that food cannot reach the member due to excessive tightness, and correct all of this according to what we mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of this sort will occur, the binding should not be done until a number of days have passed, and the swelling of the wound will be on its back with its hand on its belly and is placed under the elbow muffled filled with wool moderate.
And you must check at all times, day or night, so that the shape of the broken limb does not become distorted or the binding loosen. Correct everything with your effort and make the food of the patient in the order we mentioned, that is, the food should be light first until if the bone has a strong tendency.
It is necessary that his food be thickened, for it is the habit of the arm and leg to strengthen in forty days. Therefore, when this happens, it is necessary that he be bound again and bathed and treated with ointments suitable for that, if the break is very deep and settled.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months.
The twelfth chapter.
In setting a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, and they are called the humeri, one being small, which follows the wrist, and the other being large, which is located under the small one from below. It may be that only the larger humerus has broken or only the smaller one has broken, or both have broken together.
If the small humerus above has broken, then setting it is easy and its cure will be faster. But if the lower humerus has broken, its fracture is worse and its cure is harder. And it is most difficult to treat them together, when both the humeri have broken, if indeed the humerus of the arm that broke the small one above was in a bad state of health to start with.
It is necessary for the doctor to make its length moderate and gentle so that he can straighten it. If the larger humerus has broken, it is necessary for him to make its length stronger. And if both humeri have broken, it is necessary for him to make the splint much stronger.
It is necessary that the hand be placed in a moulded shape at the time of plastering and stretched out on a pillow, with the tip of the thumb above all the fingers. The little finger should be below all the fingers, and the ring finger raised up high on itself.
And let there be a pillow to his side at this height, so that the ring finger does not have trouble.
Then a servant will extend the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant will extend it from above as well. Then the physician will shape the bone until he returns it to its best shape possible. If there are fragments of bone in the fracture, he will reduce them.
Reduce every fragment to its place with effort. If a fragmented piece appeared that was inflamed and had penetrated the skin, and you have no intention of reducing it, then split it open and extract it in the manner we mentioned earlier. If the fracture is accompanied by an injury, you will have made a cut for him.
Then take treatment from there. If, in your first plastering, a hot swelling appeared, then make a poultice with the mixture of red rosewater and white wax being neither too thick nor too thin, and apply it to him tightly until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the powder and put the prepared plaster with white flour, then take the plasters and let the one that is placed on the fracture itself be slightly larger and stronger. Know that there are usually six plasters for the arm.
If the fracture was in one of the humeral bones or in both together, then make your traction stronger and firmer at the place of the fracture. And whenever you turn with traction upwards or downwards, make the tension looser slightly as mentioned earlier in the first chapter.
And let the poultice that is wrapped over the fracture be a soft, moist linen poultice, not too stiff at all. Let the thread which binds it be from special cotton, being moderately thick, as we have described. And inspect the limb and bandage after some days.
If something happens that requires repair, such as a cut in the member, then the member should be immersed in warm water until the cut is absorbed, and it should not be drawn tight for a night to rest. Then tighten again.
If the tension has relaxed and the bone has been lost or something similar, then you must try to repair all of that with effort. Also, if food refuses to reach the member due to excessive tension, it is necessary for you to loosen it a little and leave it for some days until food reaches it, then tighten it again.
If something that has been mentioned does not become exposed to the open air, it should not be healed except after twenty days or so. Then hang the bandage of the healer onto his neck and let his arm be moderate and keep control over his movements and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm is healed in thirty days or two and thirty, and it may be healed in twenty eight days, all according to the conditions of temperament and strength.
Chapter Thirteen.
For healing a break in the palm of the hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and joints of the fingers are rarely exposed to a break, but rather they are often exposed to an ulcer. When a break or ulcer is shown in the palm,
It should be that the healer sits elevated and before him there is a stool on level.
Then he puts his hand on it, stretched out, then the servant brings the broken bones and the doctor arranges them until if they are set in a good consolidation, then it is necessary to apply a splint and bandage. If there is no hot swelling, then a wooden splint is carried over according to the place.
And I have placed it in a green cloth, if the break is towards the bottom towards the palm of the hand, make the shape of a ball from the cloth and order the healer to grasp it with his broken palm then tie with a long cloth.
Let the cast be made of soft leather so that the skin is moulded with the flexure of all the palm and attached to what is necessary. If the fracture is outside, then make a cast from above and another from below in the palm, so that the hand is open and standing upright.
Then carry the strain as the hand rotates and tie it between the fingers with a bandage. If the fracture is in one of the metacarpal bones, then smooth out the thumb as necessary and tie it along with the palm. And if you wish to make for it a small upright cast to set the fracture.
And do not let it move. If the fracture is in one of the other fingers such as the middle, index or little finger then smooth them out and tie with the next sound finger or tie all together to the splint it is better or place a small upright cast on it.
As we said about the thumb, and check with your cast and apart from the warm swelling when it happens as it has been repeated in its description.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
For a splint to set a fracture of the thigh.
The femur often breaks and is felt because it swings forward and backward, and its splint is by tying a bandage above the break and another below the break with the patient lying on his back.
Then extend each slave band to its place with moderation, if the break is in the middle of the bone. And if it is near the hip joint then you should tie a soft band either from wool or something similar.
When the break is near the hip to about the groin, then the extension should be upward and the other band below the break. Similarly if the break is near the knee, then the band should be near the knee so that the extension is downward. Then the doctor smooths out the bone with both his hands until it returns to its natural shape.
When the bone becomes inflamed, its union will be good. In that case, it is necessary to leave the poultice and bandage if a warm swelling develops on the member; for if this happens, wait until the warm swelling subsides, then return to treating it.
And as for the bandage, it should be twisted around the fracture two or three times and a little bit left in place, then the limb should be twisted until the heel is at the level of the ankle. A long thread should be inserted between the thigh and leg near the knee from below and its ends should protrude from above on both sides.
Then turn the remaining part of the bandage around the thigh and leg, then make small splints on the thigh in place of the fracture itself. Make one splint on the bone of the leg, then fill in the gap between the thigh and leg with soft papyrus to even out the tension.
Then start with a strong binding from the middle on place of the fracture three turns or four, and as you bind the bandage from the place of the fracture let the tension be less and softer each time.
Then take the ends of the thread which you inserted between the thigh and leg, and tie them to what comes next from the splints above. Then pass through the ends of the thread downwards until they reach the ankle bone, and bind both ends of the splints with it on the other side as well.
So that the bandage does not come off its place. Then leave the tension on it as long as there is no pain, swelling, or inflammation in the member; if something like this happens, take action to resolve it and correct everything as we have mentioned many times.
If there is a splinter in the bone that protrudes, it should be straightened out if possible; otherwise cut over it and remove it, then treat the wound as has been mentioned previously until it heals. This fracture may be fixed from the thigh without adding the leg with splints.
As we have mentioned with regard to the arm and forearm, except that when it is fractured so badly as to expose bone, and if only the arm itself was broken, without any part of the leg being attached to it, then it must be permanently elevated.
Know that the thigh takes about fifty days or a bit more to heal, or a bit less, all of this according to the difference in constitutions and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteen.
The fracture of the femur.
The femur is rarely exposed to fractures, but it may be frequently exposed to lacerations. If it is exposed to a fracture, it will either break or split into its parts, and this can occur with or without an accompanying wound.
She will be aware of this by the sense, and she will fix it by gathering with her fingers what has been broken into parts until they come together and adhere as much as possible by being put in order, comforted and done accurately. Then she will place the compress on it and place a rolled up splint on it if necessary.
She will tighten the string above from which it was adjusted, then she will take care of all the conditions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as the hot boil and similar ones by confronting each opponent with what is suitable for it until it clears up.
Chapter Sixteen.
The treatment of a fractured leg.
There are two bones in the leg, one of them is thick and called the bone of the leg, and the other is thin and called the fibula, and it is exposed to types of fractures that occur in the humerus. And because of that, its treatment is the same as the treatment of the arm, whether it be one or the other. If both bones break together, the leg turns in all directions, and if the thin bone breaks, the leg turns forward, and if the thick bone breaks from below, this should not be hidden from you.
Use the splint and bandage, and tie the femur as needed, except that if the tibia is broken with many fragments, use a lighter and less tight splint, and exert yourself in binding it.
In the leg, there is a thing added to the arm's work, that if you have tied the femur and finished all your work, then take two wooden splints from the cedar tree which are used for flattening between cracks of boards or like them.
Choose from them what has a slight thickness and is not too thin, let its length be the same as the leg from the knee down, then wrap on each one two linen cloths along its length, with one cloth placed on the front of the leg and the other on the back.
Let its length be from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two splints in three places at the sides and middle, so that with this hold the leg will not incline to the right or left nor bend well. And it may be used with a board of wood along the leg.
And it is placed in there to preserve him from movement, and more often than not this should be done if there is a special wound with the break, then examine the leg every day and attend carefully to any swelling or inflation or anything else. So when something of that happens, deal with it as it is needed until he recovers, and the leg's bone heals in thirty days or around that.
Chapter Seventeen.
In fractures of the feet and toes.
As for the heel, it is not exposed to fracture at all, and as for the foot bones, they may be exposed to fracture. And also the fingers are rarely exposed to fracture, but rather to laceration in most cases.
If he is exposed to a fracture of the foot bones and you have seen that some of those bones are overlapping each other, then let the patient stand with his foot on the ground upright like walking, then come and place your own foot on what has risen from those bones, and tread upon it and bind it.
Until they return to their places, then take the dressing and bandage from above and place under the sole of the foot a small flat board, then pull with it the foot with great force after loosening for her with the poultice and all that she needs.
If three or four days have passed for him, then release the bandage; you will find that the bones are straight, whether they were broken or dislocated. The treatment is as you see it. And if some of the fingers have been fractured, set and splint them according to what I described to you in setting the fingers of the hand.
Then place a splint for the fractured finger along its length, and let it be slightly wider than it; then place under the foot this board which I described to you and pull it with great force, if two or three or more of the bones were broken.
So place a splint for each finger made of its equal length in a linen cloth, and pull the board down at the foot so that each end of it is protruding outside the sole of the foot in good adjustment.
And it is incumbent on you not to forget that you should treat all what we mentioned to you in other fractures from the symptoms which we mentioned and meet every symptom with what is appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
In fracture of the thigh of a woman and the bone of the vulva and the penis of a man.
When the vagina of a woman is fractured, place her on high supports then bend her slightly towards her back with firm hold, then fill her vagina with cotton until it fills it and becomes like a ball in her vagina.
Then shake the woman and raise her pelvis slightly, since that cotton will come out until it becomes like a ball at the entrance of the vagina and the bone fracture returns. Then place a pad on her back. Whenever she wanted to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
If a urine fistula occurs, it is treated as I have mentioned first. Then it returns to its original position, doing so for seven days or so until it heals. If you wish to take out an abscess, tie one end of a short tube onto the mouth of the abscess and insert the whole thing into the vagina.
Then inflate the tube with force until the bladder swells inside the vagina and the fracture returns. Then bind it with cloth and keep for days as we have described until it heals. And if the bone of the penis or the woman breaks, it is used in its treatment.
And its treatment is as we have described for the hip bone. And do not conceal from you that this fracture is rare and especially in one who has some weakness, and my writing of this is a benefit to you because the fracture itself guides you most of the time.
Follow the right treatment in setting and binding it, so you will understand. And if a man's penis breaks, it is put into a bird's stomach then a cloth is placed on it, it is bandaged and left for three days or so until it heals.
The nineteenth chapter.
In treating fractures of the bones if they are accompanied by an injury.
It is necessary for one who presents a fracture with an injury, especially if the bone is large such as the femur or arm or similar to it, to hasten and clean it of its purulent matter if you have the conditions of bleeding as we have mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding with blood, it is necessary to hasten and stop its bleeding by sprinkling powdered alum on it if that is not available then take care of setting the fracture in that day itself without delaying.
If there is no severe inflammation, then set the fracture. But if a severe inflammation occurs, leave setting it until the ninth day so that the inflammation settles and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all because it will be exposed to bad symptoms.
If the fractured bone protrudes on the skin exposed, it should be sought to return and smooth out with your hand gently and a little stretch. And if you do not come to return and smooth out with your hands, let it be returned by this instrument which is made of iron as long as seven fingers or eight. and expose it on the level of the wound.
Therefore, it is advisable for the physician to take three or four of them as needed for each type of fracture and let them be curved so that they are slightly thick so that they do not bend on her when striking her at the time of work.
And it will be sharp in its end with an angle on one end and the top of it to thickness and from half of it downwards very thin and this is its shape:.
And it is called in Greek Pyrmy which means small wedge, so its sharp pointed end should be placed on the protruding end of the bone and pushed by it once until the bone returns to a certain level of smoothness and the edges of the fracture are smoothed out against each other.
If the fractured end is thin and the instrument did not take a good grip on it, then the tip of that bone should be cut off until the instrument can grasp it. And if you were unable to return the bone as we described, cut it with the parts we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the pincers if you can, then strip what remains in the bone from roughness and thick scales. And if after returning the bone you find a severe and painful swelling, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to return it to its natural place, then do so, for you will be of great benefit to the swelling. And if your treatment of the bone is complete, dip a cloth in blackish tightening liquid, especially in summer, and do not put any grease or anything on the wound.
Do not let moisture accumulate in it, and then use the calabashes at a time when you have removed the bone fragments and left the wound open to dry by folding the cloths into a thickness according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to close the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done that and caused their patients either death or gangrene or putrefaction; whereas your closing should be like a linen cloth stretched over it.
If the wound is foul or large and you fear some of the bad signs we have mentioned, and he feels pain in the place disturbed, then do not put calabashes on it; instead make a cloth bandage of strong linen in the place of the calabashes and tie him with it.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to form pus, then remove from him the bandage with which you had moistened him; and then use the poultices and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds, such as the four-cornered ointment and similar ones, and it is necessary for you to replace the bandage.
And check the wound every day at night and morning until it closes and heals; and it is necessary for you to position the part so that pus can flow out from it downwards easily. If many days pass over the wound without its healing or the pus flowing from it ceasing, then know that there are small bone fragments.
And it is necessary for you to search the wound with a probe; what is from those fragments that are not purulent, then extract them and remove them; and what is from them that is not purulent and eats away at the part and causes pain, then crush them and take them out in whatever pieces you can.
If a fever, gangrene or another kind of decay and corruption appears on the wound, then face each one of them with what they require from treatment which we have described in its place.
And it is fitting that you stand by his nose and direct your mind to him if a large bone breaks, such as the femur or humerus, and its protruding part touches the limb. Do not expose yourself to pulling on it nor taking it out. And often from that is presented the threat of death, so leave it until it becomes gangrenous; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
So when that happens, you treat the wound if you see in it a place for treatment; otherwise, leave it.
Chapter twenty.
In the treatment of the complication that occurs in the aftermath of some fractures.
This complication often occurs in the aftermath of setting a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and it makes the limb ugly; perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Observe, if the complication is soft, then use medications that are applied such as aloes, myrrh, galbanum, onos, and aqua colocynthidis, taking some of them or all of them and mixing them with a binding drink or egg whites or vinegar.
And you apply it to the complication with a bandage and tie it firmly on top of it, leaving the tension for many days and then relieving it, repeating this process until the complication goes away, God willing; or else cover it with a well-finished lead plate.
For lead has a special quality that removes everything in the limbs; if the complication becomes hardened and the necessity compels you to remove it, cut into it from above and cut out or scrape away the resulting cavity with some forceps until it goes away and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter twenty-one.
In the treatment of a fracture if it becomes brittle and the limb remains fragile unlike its original nature.
If the bones have been set and the limb has remained thin and weak afterwards, it is for many reasons. One of them is perhaps because the ligaments were loosened too much and tied in a way that was not fitting, or because they were tightened excessively so that nourishment could not reach the member, or because excessive flexing was done at the wrong time, or because there was a lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body until blood increases in it, then to use a warm bath and to put joy on him and happiness and similar things. Then to apply poultice on the member so that it attracts much food to it or to keep flexing with lukewarm water. until nourishment is brought into it and it returns to its natural shape.
The 22nd Chapter.
In the treatment of the broken bones if they have been set crookedly and prevented from functioning as they should.
When a member that was set after being crooked, or swollen with the broken bone, or complicated and deformed as a result of it, is presented. Unless the member had not been prevented from performing its natural function, it is not permissible to accept the claim of someone who says that the member should be broken again, and indeed many foolish doctors and practitioners used to do this in our country.
And this action is extremely blameworthy and leads to great chaos, but if the crookedness and complication are slight, it should be treated with water in which the tender shoots of plants such as reeds, its roots and crown have been boiled.
And it is plastered with the softened poultices such as the hardened diachylon or taken from the saliva of reeds and beaten with chicken fat and shiraj fat, then applied, or taken the ripe grape and pounded with pigeon dung and similar medicines that are called dissolvers of congealment.
The complicated knot is loosened with a thin, fine, constant soap which is in the hand. One moves the limb to all directions at times; if deformity appeared and strengthened and hardened and necessity demanded its treatment with iron.
It is necessary that the upper part be cut and the connection of the bone released, and what remained of the knot or the bone be cut with gentle strips. And one should apply softness in that with effort and care, then treat the wound as mentioned above until it heals.
The 23rd Chapter.
The jawbone is a dislocation of the joint from its place, preventing it from moving and deforming the shape of the member, causing severe pain and suffering. When one of them appears, it should be hastened to return it to its place.
He should not delay it at all, for if he delays the place becomes swollen and inflamed, making it difficult to return the jawbone to its place. Therefore, it should not be delayed or moved or extended while it is inflamed because severe pain often occurs.
But if that appears, one should hasten to lance the abscess then leave it until the swelling subsides slightly. Then one bathes the member with hot water and fat, then returns it gently and treats each part as mentioned in its place.
And I have also arranged the chapters of the jawbone in accordance with what was mentioned previously about the fracture, from top to bottom.
The 24th Chapter.
In the treatment of the lower jawbone.
The jawbones are rarely dislodged, and their removal is either partial or complete. Either they slip out of place slightly and are loose a little, or they completely dislodge until they become loose. To the chest, until saliva flows from his mouth and he cannot hold it in or bring himself to speak; as for if his dislocation is slight, he will most often return to himself by an easier means.
As for if the dislocation is complete, it should be hastened and not delayed; when a servant holds the head of the suffering person and the doctor inserts the tip of one finger into the jawbone within his mouth from one side.
Or he inserts the tips of both fingers if the jawbone is dislocated on both sides, and the rest of his fingers arrange it from outside; and commands the suffering person to loosen and release his jawbone in all directions, and the doctor arranges the jawbone and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If his return is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated, use the poultice with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to return them; do not delay their return as we have said. When they have returned and settled down and the mouth of the suffering person has closed without spasming, then place on them a compress made from beeswax, oil and red ochre which is made ready.
Then tie him gently with a relaxed cord; and the suffering person sleeps on his back, his head nestled between two pillows so that he will not be moved to the right or left, nor will he have difficulty chewing anything; rather, make his food liquid.
Until the pain has gone and the jawbone has become stable, he should eat whatever he desires; and use it gently without forcing his mouth open when eating, drinking or yawning until the jawbone becomes stable and is healed.
If the return of the jawbones is difficult when they have come loose at some time and have not returned to their places, often as a result of this, fevers and constant headaches will occur and sometimes the belly of the suffering person will go out or he will vomit repeatedly; so if you see that, know that it has been damaged.
He often dies from that condition within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-five.
For the treatment of a broken shoulder blade and the tip of the scapula.
As for the scapula, it does not break from within, as it is connected to the chest. It breaks outward and this will be apparent by feeling. Its treatment is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms.
Then you press the place with your hand with great pressure until it returns, then put a poultice and a compress on it and bind it. As for its tip which is adjacent to the scapula and connected to it, it does not break except rarely; if it breaks one day then it should be replaced and smoothed out as we have mentioned and what is prepared for you.
Then you put a poultice and a compress on it and bind it, and order the patient to keep still and calm until he recovers. And with this treatment in itself the tip of the scapula will also return if it has moved from its place.
Chapter Twenty-six.
For the treatment of a broken scapula.
Know that the scapula breaks in three ways: one is that it breaks towards the armpit downwards, and the second is that it breaks towards the chest perhaps breaking above the scapula, which is rare.
It does not break towards the back behind the location of the shoulder blade nor does it break forward in front of the nerve, and more often it breaks and comes out downwards towards the armpit especially in those whose muscles are thin because it comes out quickly and goes back in quickly.
And as for those whose muscles are many, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out with difficulty and goes back in with difficulty. And perhaps some people will suffer a blow or fall and the scapula will become swollen and hot, so they may think that it has broken and should be checked to ensure its safety.
When, therefore, you treat it, the mandible will advance. The jawbone is known if it goes down towards the armpit. If you compare the broken acromion with a healthy one, you will find between them an apparent discrepancy and in the acromion you will feel a lump of the head of the bone, while under the armpit on touching there is the head of the bone as if it were an egg.
And the skilled physician cannot raise his hand to his ear nor move it in all its movements, and similarly if it is fractured towards the chest or upwards you will find this apparent on touching, not hidden.
And this mandible may be easily reduced if it is soft or the physician is a youth, and its reduction is that you make a servant raise his hand up then place your fingertips underneath his armpit and lift the joint with force upwards to its place and the servant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then you lower it down and it returns quickly; if it does not return as we mentioned, since the mandible has been in that condition for many days, then the physician should bathe himself in hot water and use natron which softens and becomes like it being cooked just like the throat lozenge, the fig and the crown in the water and use it.
Then the physician lies on his back and you place under his armpit a ball of wool which is moderate between softness and hardness then the doctor places his elbow on the ball and grasps the patient's hand with his own hand and extends it downwards.
He pushes the ball with his leg and it returns to its place; and if you wish, reduce it in this manner which is that you prepare a leg longer than the patient's and grasp him from the side and insert your acromion under the patient's armpit and lift up his armpit upwards until the patient is hanging in the air. Another attendant pulls the patient's hand down to his belly. If the patient is slight, another thing should be hung on him so that it will distract him, for he may return the jaw (forceps) from its place, and also he may turn back to another face.
And it is to place in the ground a long beam, its head being round like the stone of a sling, not thick nor thin, then under the patient's arm. The patient stands on the length of the beam.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and extends his body also from that side with force. Then the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult for him to return by all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a beam of length approximately two arms long. And its width is as much as four fingers, and it thickens as much as two fingers. Its head being round so that it can enter the depth of the armpit in this way:.
Then a linen cloth is tied on the round head so that it does not harm the beam. Then he places it under the armpit, and extends his hand and arm all together down onto the beam, and ties the beam to the elbow and forearm and wrist.
Then the arm is placed on a support, with the support raised high and the hand extended downwards. The rest of the body is left hanging from the other side. Then the joint enters into its place, so if it goes in easily by any means possible, then a ball of moderate size made of wool is to be put under the armpit.
Then the prepared poultice, mixed with frankincense and egg white, is carried on the shoulder in a circular motion from above. Then the ball is pulled tightly under the armpit and tied with a bandage over the poultice. His hand is then tied to his neck.
He is left without moving his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be a little less until the member strengthens. Then, after seven or five days, he should be exercised by movement; if it stabilizes and does not ache, then he is healed.
If the joint is frequently dislocated due to dampness or another affliction, it is advisable to apply a poultice of the three saffron-infused pastes as mentioned in the chapter on poultices. If all this has been done and the ligament has been loosened after seven days but the joint does not stabilize.
The poultice and bandage were reapplied several times, but it did not stabilize and fell and became flaccid and was unable to be lifted up. So know that its nerve, which is at the head of the humerus, has been cut off or stretched out or relaxed. So know then that the joint will never stabilize in its place ever.
And as for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast, and behind its separation it should be pushed and stretched with the hands until it returns. And all of the bandages and treatments are used in it until it heals. If a lump appears in the member after healing and it moves slowly.
The patient should repeatedly apply hot water to it until that lump softens and returns to its original nature.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In the treatment of the shoulder joint.
The joint of the shoulder dislocates easily and also returns easily, and it dislocates in all directions especially to the front or behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is visible and palpable in any shape in which it dislocates.
If you compare the dislocated shoulder with the sound one, it will be clear to you by its appearance and looseness of the joint that it cannot be bent or lifted with the humerus, and you should hurry and reduce the dislocation before a hot swelling appears.
If a swelling appears on him that is hot and difficult to reduce, he will not be completely cured, especially if it is behind the jawbone, for it becomes more severe in all types of jaw swellings and more painful. Many people have died with this condition.
And if it is something that can be reduced, have a servant extend his hand with both hands and arm relaxed, the physician's hand from above the elbow and beneath it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers together or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And as for the jawbone being forward, it can be reduced by bending the hand once so that its base knocks against the angled part alongside it. If the jawbone does not yield to returning, use a strong forceful push, and have servants extend their arm.
And the physician should also have servants hold him, so that he does not move when being pushed. Then his arm is turned in all directions after a cloth or a wide turban has been wrapped around it. And if the physician begins with both hands, the joint is rubbed with grease, to make the movement of the joint easier.
Then the joint is pushed firmly until it returns, and after its return a poultice is applied to it that contains drying and thickening with egg white, and it is tightly tied. The arm is hung from the patient's neck and left for some days.
Then, if the joint has remained in its place, the bandage is removed from it and left. And if you see that the joint has not been tightened enough, the poultice and bandage are reapplied and left for some days until it tightens up. Then it is removed, and if a swelling occurs after the joint's return and removal of the bandage,
And if there is difficulty in movement, moistening and gentle rubbing and anointing are applied in the bath until it becomes supple. Or a fat sheep's tail is placed on the joint and tied to it and left for a day and night. Then it is removed and he enters the bath, and when sweat appears, rub the joint with a moderate amount of rubbing.
Then repeat the application three times, after entering the bath until it softens. If you wish to make the fat of a cow liquid and subtle with the fat, do so several times; it will soften and return to its original state.
The twenty-eighth chapter.
For the treatment of a dislocated shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint of the hand is often dislocated and returning it to its place becomes easy compared to other joints, except that it should be hastened to return it to its place immediately when it becomes dislocated before a redness or inflammation occurs in the area.
Return the dislocated shoulder by placing the patient's shoulder on a board, and having an assistant extend their hand and the physician put his own hand on the point of the joint and push it until it returns, unless the dislocation has gone into the palm.
Let the patient place their hand's palm on the board during the push and pull, and if the dislocation is prominent to the surface of the hand, let his inner hand be placed on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same point of the joint. Then let it return immediately; otherwise, tie him with a soothing compress for the swelling.
And leave him, he should not repeat it; for he cannot endure or you can return it to its place after days have passed except that the joint will remain dislocated and nothing will harm the patient except if the hand becomes stiff and is unable to grasp anything.
Then you know that the nerve has been cut or injured, there is no remedy for it except to bind him with catgut; perhaps it will be beneficial and perhaps it will not help at all. If the shoulder joint is returned, then apply the compress which we have described, tie it, and leave him for five days.
Then he will heal and the hand will be trained. If its movement becomes difficult and something from gangrene appears in it, then wash it with warm water and vinegar several times until it softens.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
In the treatment of finger fractures.
The fingers may fracture in every direction; when a finger fractures towards the front of the palm or to its back, extend it and push the break with your thumb until it returns; then tie the base of the finger and suspend it towards the side from which it fractured.
Then leave it for two days, then let it go and extend it until it becomes straight; if it was at night, tie it as described above; it will still be in line by day and exercise it with movement, tying it at night. Do that for some days until it is strong.
And do the same with it if it has fractured towards the back of the hand, tie it to about the same side and do with it what you did first until it heals; and do likewise with it whenever it has fractured in any other direction.
Chapter Thirty.
In the treatment of a fracture of the scapula vertebra.
When there is a fracture of one of the vertebrae in the scapula or neck, whether it is a complete fracture or many vertebrae have come loose from their places, then there is no treatment for it because death approaches quickly.
And a sign of it is that the patient's stool comes out without will, and he cannot hold onto it; often his limbs or arms, or one of them, become weak. And if one vertebra becomes dislocated from its place then many times they also come loose.
And their dislocation is to four sides, the one that moves towards behind is called a hump; and as for its treatment, look, if the hump has occurred from childhood then there is no treatment for it nor any cure whatsoever. And if it happened due to a fall or blow and the like.
We have mentioned it by the name of treatment in long words which most of its benefit has returned and we shortened it from that, what is enough for a little about much they came with from simplification to the meaning and explanation for it and I have shaped the instrument contrary to what they mentioned and explained.
I say that the hernia which occurs in front of the chest, there is no cure for it and no remedy from it, also the one that occurs to both sides. And I treat only the one that occurs on the back, specifically by having him stretch out his face.
On a horizontal beam close to a wall, place a soft mattress under him so that his chest is not harmed. Then put a plank standing upright into a hole in the ground near his head and another plank near his feet on the other side of the beam.
A servant holds the plank and let it be unsecured in the hole. A servant also holds the other plank on this shape. Then wrap a soft bandage around his chest and under his arms, and extend its end to the plank near his head and tie him to it.
Then pull another bandage over his thigh and his knees, and around the back of them. Then gather all the bands together and tie them to the other plank near his feet. Then each servant will extend towards him the plank with the bandages, without moving the planks from their fixed places.
Unless they are not fixed as we said, the doctor will place his hands with force on the pin until it is returned or he will put a board on it and then lean on the board with his feet until it is returned. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board that is three arms long.
And dig in the wall near the patient a place for the end of the board. Then put the middle part of the board on the hernia and the doctor will put his feet on the other end and pull strongly until the pin is compressed.
It returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with the tourniquet which is tied by hand, that is by inserting into the ground at the head of the ulcer in the last incision two wooden sticks each one arm's length, and at its feet also two wooden sticks.
And let there be a space of one span between each wooden stick, and it has been made in every stick a hole through which the tourniquet passes, and all the wood is fastened to the ground firmly so that not even a hair's breadth moves. And enter a turned over staff, which is the tourniquet wrapped around it, into both holes of the wooden sticks.
And at its end there is a hole which has been fastened with a staff of one span in length wrapped around it, and similarly in the other two wooden sticks. Then draw the bandage that you tied at the chest of the ulcer into the tourniquet that is near its head, and the ligatures that you tied at its legs into the tourniquet that is near its feet.
Then a servant stands near each tourniquet and tightens it with the vice which turns around it, and the physician sets the swelling as we have mentioned. And this is the image of the tourniquet, the wooden splints and the ulcer:.
Then after the splints have been returned and the place has been evened, it is necessary to carry the dried poultice with white egg and vinegar. Then put a splint from a board on top of the poultice which will be three fingers in width or so, and its length will take the place of the swelling.
And on top of some correct splints then tie with the bandage that is needed. And let the ulcer eat the gentle food until it heals, if there remains some nodules in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to use the medicines that are dissolved and softened along with the wooden splint that we described for a long time.
And it is used for that a lead plate, and there may be an abscess at the end of the vertebrae in the back which they think is a perforation and it will be a redundant bone that has become inflamed so you should not expose it to this treatment lest death occur.
The Thirty-first Chapter.
For the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the knee are only dislocated in them (i.e. the bone can be dislocated) and not dislocated in them as is the case with other joints, where they slip out or fall apart, and the joint of the hip dislocates on four sides.
And that is because it dislocates inward and outward and forward and backward, and more often does it dislocate inward, and less often does it dislocate forward or backward, and a sign of its dislocation inward is that if you compare the healthy leg with the diseased one, the diseased one will be longer.
And the knee will be bent more than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to bend his leg when sitting down, and the place which is behind the crease and is warm and hot, will be clear of what was there before the head of the femur had moved to that place.
And a sign of its dislocation outward is that the symptoms are opposite to these symptoms, and a sign of its dislocation forward is that he will extend his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain, and if he tries to walk he will not be able to do so in front.
And it will be in a state of retention, and he will be unable to control his urine, and he will tremble at the crease, and when walking his heel will strike the ground, and a sign of its dislocation backward is that he will not be able to extend the knee nor bend it before bending the crease, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
The thighs should be relaxed and the prominence of the groin at the site where the inguinal hernia is present. As for the treatment of this rupture, look: if the rupture has long since worn down its owner, and he did not try to reduce it, and remained in its state, then there is no cure for it whatsoever.
There is no need to treat it. As for the rupture which has a recent onset, and whatever type it was from among the four forms of rupture, move the joint that is connected with it towards the inside and outside, and turn it left and right. Perhaps.
He should return to his normal state without the need for further treatment. If he does not, it is necessary that a strong servant holds him fast with both arms, and another servant supports him from above.
He should enter his hands under his armpits, then he should be held fast with a soft strap at the base of the groin. And another servant holds the end of the strap and another third servant is holding him either from in front of the thighs towards the knee or from behind towards the back.
And they all hold him at the same time until the rupture is lifted up by his body from the ground and remains hanging. If this type of support is used, it is a common treatment for all four types. If the rupture returns as we said, or else there must be a specific treatment for each type mentioned.
As for the specific treatment, if the rupture is inside, the patient should lie on his healthy side then a strap is wrapped around the base of the groin between the prominence of the groin and the place underneath it.
Then the strap is stretched upwards from the groin area to the top of the body towards the knee. And another strong servant takes hold with both arms and holds the swollen part from the inside of the groin and stretches it outwards very tightly until it returns to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment by which this member can be returned, if it was difficult for you and did not respond to entering this type of treatment at all, then the patient's two legs should be bound with a strong yet thin bandage on the ankles and knees.
And it will be with each of its two companions the length of four fingers, and the healthy leg will be stretched more than the other by two fingers, then the patient will be hung from the head of a beam which is in the house and it will be above the ground by the length of two arms.
Then order a strong youth to embrace the patient's thigh and hang him from another youth, then push the other youth with force who is embracing the thigh, in this way the joint will return to its place quickly, and as for his own reduction, if it was outside of his socket.
It is necessary that the patient lies on the wooden boards as we described for the one with a dislocation, and the bandage should be tightened tightly on his healthy leg, and on his chest, then two planks are placed next to his feet and another next to his head, then an additional plank is placed in the middle of the wooden boards very securely.
It may be wrapped with a wet cloth to prevent the patient from being harmed, so that the plank is between his thighs, lest he slides down when he bends, then each servant extends towards him and the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, if it has responded to returning.
If not, then place the plank on him and secure it as we mentioned for dislocation, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side, and if the dislocation is in front, then extend the patient's leg once while he is in this position on the wooden boards.
The doctor places the back of his right hand on the upper femur, then presses it with his other hand, and while doing so he extends the pressure downward towards the knee, and if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be extended downward.
He should be elevated above the ground, but rather it is suitable that he be placed on a solid object. Also, his foot should be relaxed outside in accordance with what we have mentioned of his being twisted on the board and he on his face with the bandages tightened.
As we have said before, it is suitable that the pad be used on the board also on the place where the joint has come out to, if the return of the hip joint becomes complete as it should and its sign is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's legs.
If you see them being steady and the patient grasping his leg and extending it without any difficulty, know that the joint has returned as it should. Then tie the thighs together and hold the pad and bind with a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move to one side or the other.
The patient needs rest. Three days or four is required for it, then the bandage and pad are released and the leg is measured with the other. If you see them equal in measurement, know that the joint has been stabilized, so release the patient to walk, if however you see something of relaxation in him.
Then return and reapply the pad, bind it as you bound it first, and leave him for three days. Then release it and he will walk on it with a little slowness for some days until his leg becomes strong, if God willing.
The second and third chapters.
In the treatment of a dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates in three ways: it dislocates inward, outward and downward, meaning backward. And the sign of its dislocation is that you order the patient to bring his leg towards his hip.
If it does not adhere to the hip, know that the knee is dislocated. Then correct all faces of its dislocation. Have the patient sit on his back with his legs straight if he can, and a bearer sits behind him to hold his middle and bend him slightly backward, then you sit on his thighs.
Hold your back against his chest and place his leg between yours, then grasp the calf of his leg with both hands and intertwine the fingers of each hand among those of the other, firmly compressing the knee with both hands. Have another servant stretch out his foot until the kneecap returns to its natural position.
And a sign that it has returned is that the thigh will become loose and relaxed, not forcibly. Then grasp them firmly and tie them together with bandages for three or four days then release them. And he should only perform a little walking until they become strong again.
If you find it difficult to return her as we have described, then use the strong traction with bandages that I mentioned in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In the Treatment of an Ankle Sprain.
The ankle may slip away slightly or become completely dislocated, either inwardly or outwardly. A sign of its dislocation is that the ankle will be swollen and prominent in the direction it has dislocated to.
And as for the treatment of its slipping away, it is easy to return it and that is by gently straightening it with both hands until it returns. And as for the treatment of its being completely dislocated, it is necessary for the physician to sit the patient down back-first and have a strong servant hold him from behind his back in the middle.
Then take hold of his right hand with your right hand from the top of it, and with your left hand from the bottom of his foot in the position of the ankle. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand gently towards the leg without force.
Do this twice as we described, then in the third time push the front of the foot towards the leg while you are pulling with the heel, if it returns in one or two attempts and you see the foot straightened, otherwise repeat the work on it because it will return.
If the patient refuses to return as we have described, then place the patient on his back on the ground and insert a splint firmly into the ground so that it falls between his thighs. A mat should be placed under him so that he is not hurt by the splint. Then the servant will tie his foot.
Then another servant will extend the man by his hands or with a rope tied around the man's neck. Then each servant will extend in opposition to the other one and the splint will be standing between the patient's thighs holding him so that he does not pull down when being extended, then the physician will straighten the jaw with his hands.
And another servant will hold the healthy leg down. If the jaw returns quickly and it is clear to you that it has returned correctly, then take the splint and traction and bind it with tight straps and secure the foot by a strap downwards. It should be avoided from the nerve which is behind the heel.
So that the strap may not be too tight and harm him, then leave him for two or three days. If the strap has relaxed then tighten it again and release it in the third or fourth day. The patient should abstain from walking for forty days.
If the patient attempts to walk before this period then I fear that the jaw may break and be ruined, and he will not accept treatment thereafter. If a hot inflammation appears, it is necessary to use what we have described for its relief in another place of treatment and dressing until it subsides.
The 34th Chapter.
Treatment of the jaw fracture of the man's hand.
It is necessary to straighten what has been bent by a short stretch without force, which is not difficult but easy. If the jaw fracture occurs in some parts of the heel then it is necessary that the patient places his foot on a level place on the ground.
If he stands on a board, as if he were walking, then you come and place your foot on the part that has been dislocated from those joints. Then press it with your foot with great force until it goes back in place and does not appear again at that location.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, taking all of it so that there are two heads to it. Then pull it tight with great force and security for three days. Then cover it and keep him from walking for many days until it strengthens and you can prevent it from returning, if God wills.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
In the types of fracture of the jaw, whether with a wound or a break, or both together.
If something like this has happened and his treatment and cure are neglected, it often results in death.
Therefore, it is not fitting for anyone to attempt a treatment like this unless he is skilled in the craft, long experienced, gentle, calm and deliberate, without haste or rashness, and first uses medicines that quiet down the inflamed ulcers alone.
Praise to God for what I have hoped for him, safety from the injury with a mild sickness, and I saw in him some hope so return it from your time in the beginning before the inflamed ulcer occurs.
If the limb returns to what you wanted, then use the treatment that quiets the inflamed ulcers and treat the wound with ointments that are dryed, if the jaw is broken and there are splinters of bone that have been exposed, remove them. And agree with what we mentioned in simple illnesses, as stated in their places.
And strive with effort and cleanse yourself from entering the path of error, as you advanced and my advice to you, for that is more lasting for your reputation and safer for your honor, if God wills.
