O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the medical sciences. By its completion, by what it contains, and by its explanations and clarifications, in my view, I believe I have fulfilled your love for this treatise, which pertains to the practice that lies with me, namely surgery.
For the practice that lies with me is almost entirely deprived in our region and at our time, except that there is a slight trace of its science, and its appearance remains. We have nothing but small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which mislead people into error and hesitation regarding its principles and weaken its strength and the art itself.
And it seems to me that I should revive this through the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes in the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work as indicated by the explanation, and for its preparation, which is a necessary cause.
But the reason why a good practitioner is not found in surgery at this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be well versed in anatomy before being practiced, which Galen described as understanding the functions of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, and their numbers and distribution; and of the pulsating veins and the stationary ones, and the places where they are found.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name it is much, but in practice little, and especially in the art of surgery.
This we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not well versed in what we have said about anatomy will inevitably fall into error through which men may die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that without knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die quickly.
And I saw another doctor who thought he would remove a stone from a man who was suffering from kidney stones, and the stone was large. He came to him and pulled out that stone along with a piece of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
And I was called to remove that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was being paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery on a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh. Due to the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure but did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he untied it according to his desires and then bandaged it again. After some days, he commanded that we loosen the binding; and thus, between loosening and reapplying it, the thigh and foot became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
And I was called to attend him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage. Once it was loosened, he found relief from his pain and tranquility.
However, once the corruption was confirmed in the member, since it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who lanced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about ten days, until the malignancy worsened greatly under his lord's supervision.
The cause of which is that the cancerous part is free from melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to reach all parts of the body, but rather remains in the member that has suffered and hosted it.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a procedure involving significant risks.
And I have already stated this in every place in this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and avoid that, so that the pages do not reproach me for speaking and leading you astray.
And thus take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and name does not evade you: for it is better to remain in your glory, and more so in this world and ultimately for your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered concerning the head and its treatments, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning bleeding and punctures, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of extracting arrows and similar objects, fully chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered regarding the head and its treatments, and of the forms of the instruments.
I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its precautions, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the movements of cautery and its precautions is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise men have spoken about it, and they are often at odds with each other, but for me a little of their discourses suffices to avoid prolongation.
Therefore, I say that cauteries apply universally to all formations, either material or immaterial, with the exception of two formations which are tail-like and immaterial.
In the tail-like and dry formation that is material, it dries out; for some say that cautery is helpful in such cases, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease that is due to heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry condition with something that is hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite are wrong, because cautery is beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies. When you compare the condition of the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is fragile.
And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But I do not intend that it should be upon this for one who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human formations and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes thereof, and their accidents, and the duration of time.
But in other formations there is no fear for you, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all physicians are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cautery in such cases.
And you know, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness is that fire is simple, and its action affects only the part being cauterized and does not harm other parts nearby except for minor damage.
Here is the English translation:
May the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, do nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and by this I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were read in my book here paused for you secrets hidden with fire, and the quality of operation thereof in the bodies and expulsion thereof by which expels diseases, philosophical discourse demonstrative, which would be sharp in your possessions.
And remember, children, that they who neglect the time in which it is proper to perform cautery lose the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary to relieve pain, strength and inflammation, which cannot endure delay because it is feared that from those might come malice, which is worse than a small injury entering through the wrong timing.
And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors, is that for the illness which is cured by cautery, it is not remediable at all times, and they delay that consequence.
And the reason is not just as they think, for cautery is merely a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which is the cause of pain.
But may the fire, however, be used sparingly in medicine due to the speed of its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of the illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what has been acquired in him through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle one in a member with little superfluity and moisture, such as the cautery of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that this pain will not return, but this applies to minor cases.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by those who specialize in it, not because those who understand it hold this view, for I believe they consider there to be no cure that benefits more than cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those remedies are ineffective, and at the end of this cause, cautery is administered, and it proves effective. And at this point it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I hold regarding the common misconceptions and excessive practices of foolish physicians.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have already experienced this and have found that it works well only in certain bodies and not with others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they say; but when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clearly defined to you, because the hardness of the gold changes according to the quantity you want by the heat of the fire, and because it prepares itself to receive friction; and if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire for the craftsman to shape them during that process.
And thus with water is made the cautery of iron which you should apply gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery after the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the parts, so that I relieve the inquirer asking for what they want.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the cold and moisture that causes an accidental inflammation of the head, and these two causes are also the cause of lethargy and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes called corsica, from the head to the limbs and ears with fluid discharge, and a multitude of sleepiness, toothache, and gout, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, according to what you require based on the strength of the patient and their age and habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him sitting between two chairs and have him rest his elbows on his knees.
And then place the palm of your hand near the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows. But when the temperature of the middle finger has been felt, mark that place with ink, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
And then pause there at the marked spot with the needle, in such a way that it descends, by which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
And then move your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see that some part of the bone is uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in one's palm, now raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool or another like it, if it has cooled, until you feel the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it be for three days.
And then pause on the inner edge and let it be inside until the burn scab is destroyed. And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
And when it is said that if the wound heals covered, then remove the bandage, for it is better and more helpful.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the way of alpechati (cauterizing slightly). And they estimate that from that place the vapors of the head emanate.
And let the wound be dressed for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
I have not seen these two types of cauterization on everyone, but only on some people due to a certain way of fearing; and leave that one alone, as far as I am concerned, it is better for the health when it is left alone; because the head is delicate in terms of maintaining its continuity as we have testified with other parts of the body, and even more so when the patient's constitution is cold by nature.
And the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion; and from that one, health is more likely to follow.
Chapter Second.
About cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, even after using plasters, poultices, compresses, emplastres, ointments, and other remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we have described but has not benefited from any of those causes, then consider whether the constitution of the patient's head is strong by nature; and if it is not cold and if there is no great danger, at that time one can use another type of cauterization after that one. And then cauterize it above the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is relieved. Incise the area of pain and expose the amount of bone that we have described, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the temporal artery is located. And handle it thusly in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from that different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I shall describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate to use the cautery which is used for burning the horns of the head and the occiput than that with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Recent Abscesses.
When severe pain is found in the front part of the head or continuous pain inside the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other treatments should be administered as I have described for various illnesses; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp, combustible medicine or with iron.
But if you perform cauterization with a combustible medicine, take a piece of amber and scrape it, then hold the scraped ends between your fingers. And then cut the area of the pain on the temple with a scalpel until it reaches the proper location just below the skin, so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with a cloth for a continuous period, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the cloth and place the amber on it, and leave the wound covered for two or three days; afterwards, place a poultice soaked in butter over it until the area becomes warm.
Let him be treated with those remedies which will heal him.
And if you wish, use some of the medicines described in the second treatise on burning medicines which I have written.
Here is the cautery method according to this manner: fire for cauterization, of which this is the form:
and it is called a nail clamp, for the head of it is in the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and at its middle part there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered to—and move the instrument slightly but quickly.
And if the amount that adheres due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then moisten cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply soft bandages, and afterwards treat with internal remedies to heal.
And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the ulna according to cautery methods, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cauterization of ancient ulcers.
When you treat an ulcer as we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the ulnar cautery until it becomes white-hot, and place it on the site of the pain along a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly longer; and then raise your hand once and quickly apply pressure so as not to injure the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves that control it are intact, so that spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is danger in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not careful and experienced; and leave the operation at that point at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recollection of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you do, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two edges, and this is better cautery and more effective.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to itching and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, now apply the cautery, and this is the one called puncta, whose form is as follows:
And bring the puncta close to the heat source, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that specific area. Lengthen the cautery of the piercing of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery reaches those points throughout the ear, and wherever it does, then take care of the places inside until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of the turture (Note: It seems there might be an error or archaic spelling in the original text. The word "turtura" could refer to a specific medical term or condition from medieval times, possibly related to ear treatments or ailments.)
The one for which treatment and cautery are not appropriate is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of illness with jars and capipurgi and gargle remedies, and your treatment does not comfort the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize the illness with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite part of the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then a little above the horn of the head, and at another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, the form of which is shown below. However, even more subtle is that which you see only slightly; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness, just a little.
And subsequently treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on top of all the joints of their head; and one cauterization at the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization on the nape of the neck. And the method of the cauterization is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better later; and then proceed with treatment as appropriate.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization for forgetfulness done with flame.
Give the patient large doses at the beginning and pills made from honey for purification.
And then shave the patient's head completely and place on the nape of their neck the plaster described in the chapter on plasters.
And place it several times, for that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order of the method which I have already said.
And thus if he heals well from that; but if not, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which should descend from the highest part of the head to the part nearest the neck. And place the thickness of a finger between each cauterization, and then proceed to treat the cauterizations as appropriate.
If you wish to apply it where there is little tolerance for pain, then now make the cautery in the middle part; and if you want a stronger application, now cauterize that above the two horns.
Proceed with its care until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the cleansing of the head as we have mentioned and using the methods described; then shave the head of the patient, and afterwards cauterize it in the middle part of the head, and over all the parts of the head, and over the rear part of it, and apply three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to use that and the patient can tolerate it only moderately and the illness is severe, then now cauterize it with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply a cautery inside so that it extends from the shoulder blade area, and increase the heat gradually. Then proceed with its care until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive-shaped.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized except when the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, you should cleanse the brain at the beginning with decoctions and the other treatments we have described in the section when the patient is robust and can tolerate the exception of medications.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargles and powder mixtures which are purified, before that for several days, with purification of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the occiput of him, and on each side of the head he should cauterize. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive-cautery as was described previously.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have mentioned while inducing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a well-made tortora around the circle, and subsequently place it in the middle part of the head.
Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more suitable to use the grease of sheep. And heat that over the fire in a timely and measured way, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied. And then place it in the proper location on the head in a circle, and allow it to be rubbed in.
And do this once a week for the wound, and follow another regimen to promote healing; or if you prefer, cauterize it with small points as needed, but use your hand with a cautery properly arranged: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that powder mixed in grease or goose fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
When it is clear to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the head, and protect it from all humidity.
And have him sweat in baths for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the proper place of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning of water descending is in two bellies, or on one side if the water begins to descend in one belly.
Cut away all the veins and arteries that you find attached to the bone; and place the cautery at a distance equal to the width of the temples.
And be careful of bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And you will need wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their ligation, as well as caution regarding bleeding.
And in some cases, it is cauterized at the neck between two bones with two cauteries applied subsequently.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cauterization of Old Abscesses.
When old abscesses of the eyes occur frequently and through the veins and arteries that are in a visible location on the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to cold phlegmatic superfluities, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have described in the chapter on how water begins to flow into the eyes. Apply one cautery at an appropriate location on the head and two cauteries between the temples of the neck, and two cauteries between two bones of the neck. And if you need to add something, then cauterize that area across the entire socket of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cauterization of Nasal Odors.
When you treat that person with what we have mentioned in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize them with a medium-sized cautery using an olive-shaped cautery. And so cauterize that part with a cautery in the shape of a trefoil, using two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly exposed.
And be careful of the archery so that you do not injure it.
And this is the shape of the trefoil cautery.
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather let it adhere to one-third of the eyelid.
Chapter XVI.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid When the Hairs Turn Inside and Scratch the Eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and scratch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medication.
If you use cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to cut their hairs as those of people in the world are cut, so that they are extended and even; and if they scratch from their origin, then bandage the eyes so that it does not happen again until the hairs grow back.
Therefore, when the wound is new and inflamed, place the tip of a lancet on the head of the injury in its proper position, and then mark around the eyelids with it, making a sign like the shape of a willow leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
And then place a probe deeply in the eye socket or in the mucus of the eyelid.
And then apply the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the wound, which is like a myrtle leaf, is burned properly.
And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hair raised around the perforation of the eye.
And then raise your hand and lay it still for three days, and then place the probe around the border until the scar is eradicated. And then care for it with medication until it is healed.
But if any cause returns the hair to its original state and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
But if the hair remains in the eyelid downward, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is healed so that the hair does not enter the eye.
But the cautery with a combustible medicine is one that you command the patient to pull out the hair until it grows long and healed, and then make the shape of a myrtle leaf from paper or cloth.
Take soap that is known and living oil in ounce i, or what water you have, and mix those causes well, and do it with speed so that it does not become chilled; then spread that over the sheet which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put one side on both; and place underneath the poultice completely wrapped in white cloth, and the head of the patient should be toward you.
And place the hand on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for there is a burning in it like fire.
And when the burning pain persists, then remove the medicine and apply it with your hand; when the burning stops, then remove the medicine and wash the area with water; now check if the eyelid is already lifted as it has been washed, you should then use constriction by fire or incision, for now it is good; but if not, return to applying that of the medicine on the place where you have not applied the medicine and do not let it darken until your operation is equalized and the area is constricted.
Then place on it around the border until the edge of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with anointing or another method until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard with diligent vigilance that no dust of the medicine falls on the wound, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and any cause of hair growth in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then around it until it is healed.
This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the leaves of men are diverse in magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
And the way to rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head between your knees, and let someone assist by holding the patient's head steady between your hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour over his eye.
And then light the cautery, which has this form:
which is made of copper, as in the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end being the cautery.
And if you wish, it can be inserted into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
But the one that is curved is better for your work.
If you approach the treatment of the fistula when it is swollen, and then drain the pus and dry up that area. And if it is not swollen, then open that area and extract the pus from it.
And then proceed with cautery using one that is well-heated, and hold it close but not too much so as to avoid burning your hand or disturbing the patient, and then place the cautery on the flesh around the area and cauterize it.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then proceed by placing a poultice around the area and apply a drying agent until it is healed.
But if after those days it has not healed, then proceed by applying sharp and corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and act according to what is appropriate in that case.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners described: approach the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin piece of lead, about one ounce in quantity; hold your hand close but carefully so that the patient does not move, lest the molten lead reach the flesh; and ensure that you apply to the wound an egg white or water poultice, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed as we have described with the cautery and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal irrigation and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose.
Chapter Eighteen.
On cauterizing the wound of the anus.
Often such fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment is not effective, then use fire to cauterize it slightly with a small knife in the following manner:
And let the heat of the cautery be according to the subtlety of the tissue.
Apply the heated tip carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter Nineteen.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth, and it bursts, and then becomes inflamed, and is left untreated, it forms a fistula. If you treat this and your treatment does not succeed, it is necessary for you to cauterize with fire according to the size of the fistula, and place the heated cautery in the tract of the fistula, using your hand until the very hot part reaches the edges of it; do this once or twice. Then treat it as we have said for its cure until it is healed.
And if the tissue is divided and heals, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the site and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, apply these medicines and do not confereys; then place the tip of the malady in its site, and immediately ignite the cauterizing agent which will be appropriate for this purpose, so that you place the cautery quickly on the tooth, but only slightly enter it so that the pain from the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the diseased tooth is now arrested and the softened gum has become firm and the corrupted moisture has been dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and no relief is obtained with medicine, then the cauterization should be done in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauterization with a horn is done by taking a cow's horn and boiling it in oil. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and immediately immerse the horn in the hot oil, then quickly place it on the painful tooth to rub it.
From there insert candles around so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you take wool or cloth in the boiling mixture mentioned above and place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on top until the heat reaches the pain area of the tooth.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should wait for the moment of lesser intensity or use iron, and place it in the center of some thickness so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the desired form and place it on the tooth, moving your hand until the cautery is applied; do this for several days until the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient rinse their mouth with good liquid due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are caused by phlegm and other humors that do not respond to digestion through medication and you wish to digest them lightly, then heat the cautery according to this form, which has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold one end of the cautery and place the heated part on the abscess once, or again if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, postpone the use of cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and then wait three days and pause on top of it until what the fire has burned becomes softened.
And then take care of that which is wounded and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of Throat.
When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and subsequently cauterize that part below the root of the navel.
And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the navel, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize that part with another cautery below the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And let the cautery be shaped like a nail according to the previous method.
And then take care of that which is wounded as previously described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries above the collarbone in the lower parts on both sides; and with another cautery at the middle part of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like nails according to the previous method.
And if you want, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called puncta, the shape of which precedes in the piercing of ear pain.
And let the points be inside the cuts for those; and then cure that with what has been prepared so that it may heal.
And there let the cautery have three slopes, for the cautery is for that: in one instance you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of the titillium which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement until it reaches what it usually returns to, and then through a slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified, at that time you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and then lift the part inside the citillium towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
And then use the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four tips after the cautery.
And for some wounds it is appropriate according to this count and because there are cauteries .viii.
And then pause over the cauteries porous and distant from salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and this is done, then cauterize over the muscle near the cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dispersed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is bleeding in the stomach, mix and stir the moisture until it becomes part of its composition and so multiply its quantities. And if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: place one cauteri below the feet by the length of a finger from a nail cauteri, and two cauteries below each side of the first cauteri so that they form a triangular pattern; and space them apart so that they do not touch and cause burning.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
And let the figure of the cauteri be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and that you feel over the stomach with a point according to the amount you wish to try, and then cauterize that which was pricked with the cautery; and then cure that with the treatment mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Cautionary Use of Cautery for Inflammation of the Kidney.
When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or moisture or excessive windiness causing deviation from its normal composition through excessive excretion, and it is cured with what we have mentioned without compression, then the patient should be positioned on their back, and you should feel with your hand three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed over the kidneys below the hypochondria, as would be appropriate for a person lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not press your hand on the cautery.
And if the quantity of water adhering is half the length of a cubit, and it should not be more closely adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having laid out their things, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and let the cautery be applied to the entire length of the wound so that it adheres to the whole body and reaches into the pouches, for here the wound is delicate; and understand this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of an abscess of the testicle with a cautery.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will experience a heavy pain and acute discomfort.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, the pain will be intense and often exhausts the efforts of the physician to treat it.
Therefore, have the patient lie on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and then apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire wound is consumed, until it reaches the center, until it becomes healthy.
And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has recognized many diseases; but even after experimenting a few times with this procedure, he should be cautious and leave it to those more experienced, which is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On Cauterization of Ulcers.
Take the cauterizing materials from the roots of artemisia for ulcers according to this method. And it is that you take a root of artemisia, long and dry, one piece which can be found, and let it be as thick as your finger.
And then immerse it in oil and roast it over the fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at that place which is between the clavicle and the neck; and two small cauteries below it, slightly inclined towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the back, slightly inclined to the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle of the feet; and one above the stomach; and three cauteries at the rear parts; and one cautery in the place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on either side of the feet below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary to make a cut at the cautery sites, but rather let them be evident on the surface of the skin.
And some ancient authors say that sometimes in men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heat it, they place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess so that it may be drained, as we have said regarding the abscess of the testicle.
But in this puncturing with the cautery there is no fear, for it happens quickly and such an accident occurs at the place where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the melesa.
When you treat the disease of the melesa as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three ways, all of which are appropriate. One of these is that you make three or four lines of cautery depending on the length of the melesa, following the shape of the cauteries for the fetus, the figure of which has been described previously.
And there should be a space between each cautery as wide as the thickness of one finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cauteries of the fetus.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the disease be above its two sides.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries vertically, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the shoulder, which is on the right side of the melesa where the disease spreads from the left side.
And your elevation should be such that when you elevate the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both sides, ignite it immediately, at the place where it penetrates the shoulder on the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are completed.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
And if the cautery becomes filled with pus and it is necessary to remove it after too many days, for it may be more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cautery should not be applied to hydrops except in a specific proper manner.
When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the kidney, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then let the cautery ooze so that it can drain for a long time.
And do not evacuate the harmful substances from the treatment near the cautery with water, but rather let them be absorbed into the body for healing purposes.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be nail-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous description.
Chapter xxxii.
On cautery for pus and other matters.
When pus is apostematous in hydropic areas and the area is filled with thin water (edema), it is necessary to cauterize the pus over the part that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not return it completely, because the thin water will be expelled.
The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to each of the areas, and at each area, perform a cautery with the tip of the cautery. The cautery should be performed according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area, perform two cauterizations.
And leave the affected area untreated for some time until some water (fluid) is expelled from it.
Then treat according to those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter xxxiii.
On cautery for swellings of the abdomen.
When swellings of the abdomen are due to irritation and humidity that debilitate the organs, particularly the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated according to methods of treatment without confinement, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery intended to expel harmful properties. At such times, cauterize it with a large cautery over the center of the abdomen as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, along with a subtle clavilh cautery; or use one larger cautery above the pubis, or two smaller ones.
And if you remove the excessive humors and the pain tolerates water, then cauterize that over the navel and over the abdomen, and gently place two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When dealing with the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the water we have mentioned in the division but do not respond to the usual cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries below the spine near the two small ones shaped like a triangle, and place two of these above the navel.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food is not being digested, and his face appears inflamed, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen with a nail-shaped cautery, and allow the patient to rest for some time until he is cured.
Chapter xxxv.
On the Cauterization of Atheyl Near Its Abscess.
When you incise an abscessed atheyl, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray. After incising that abscessed atheyl, apply heat to it and ensure that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
In this one or two times, because if the bleeding continues, immediately cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and then treat those with what applies to their medicines until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature behind in the parts there.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with rotten pus and moisture, what is most worthy to do is to probe that with a fine instrument, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then heat the cautery so that it is like a red-hot needle. And then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the amount in which the probe entered.
And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted substances are consumed completely in one instance or two or three, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the intestine, then be cautious in all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate further.
Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
And if the place is sealed off, and all matter has been removed from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter does not come from the bone, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the area of the corrupted bone, or comes from those causes about which there will be mention later.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When pain in the wounds arises from rubbing or excessive inflammation, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is appropriate to cauterize that area with a cautery on each wound using a nail-like instrument about which there will be mention later.
And wait a little while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three intervals between the cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to friction and excessive moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize once on the right side and once on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of sweat; and cauterize that area once in the lowest part of both sides, or twice if necessary.
And let it be cauterized with a clamp as is prescribed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid.
When there is blood and humidity in the eyelid, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence; therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and two cauteries should be applied near the affected spot, or two cauteries may be used, and let it be cauterized with a clamp as has been described.
Chapter XL.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
When there is moisture and swelling around the joint, and it occurs due to causes that lead to displacement from its proper location, and the sign of this is that the part extends beyond the other when they are compared. And the location of the dislocation is treated where it hurts.
Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries after having marked their positions around the part as it is described, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the form of the cautery be as prescribed in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
Let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spicitude of the entire wound; and then treat that part which needs healing.
Chapter XLI.
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the joint area and its cause is friction and humidity, treat it with the methods we have mentioned and do not confine it, for this is outdated. Now you should relieve the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar remedies; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with combustible medicines, or cauterize with fire.
It should be done according to two known methods, one of which is that you cauterize that area over the joint using three triangular cauteries as shown in this form; and ensure proper depth with them. And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or grape in shape.
But at other times, the cauterizations should be on the middle part above the joint so that there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize using a circular method that precedes the form used in the cauterization of a dislocated joint, ensuring that the circle is continuous and burns the entire wound's surface.
And this is the method of cauterization when pain is localized at the joint and does not spread to the surrounding area.
If it is spread inside the joint, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the joint above the place where you will direct the pain which is the ache; and with one cauterization on the knuckle for four days a little away from the wild area.
And if the cautery cuts through, let its depth be according to the amount of spicitude of the tendon.
And if the pain you direct is spread in the area near the soles of the feet, then cauterize there where you are directing it with three points or four or more if you need it.
And if the pain you direct is below the elbow near the joint, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby cause harm to your patient maliciously or by mistake.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the knuckle and ended the cauterization, and the bed of fire spread inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. And as a result of this severe abdominal inflammation, and after that death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of each cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and place it above the skin according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly more.
And in that circle make another third one; and let the space which is between them be equal to the width of a finger; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those bands be one or two fingers, and attach those edges of iron decently prepared around the circles; and this is the form of it.
Then it should be ignited in the fire so that it glows and sparks, and then it should be placed over the part of the wound, with the malady placed upon its surface. And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
And then let it rest for three days; then apply a bandage to that area and let the wound be covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with medicines until it is healed.
Al-Bucasis says: O children, we have used this type of cautery rarely due to the fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who are knowledgeable about it.
But for the very cauteries that one has endured, and find the place where they were applied.
But cauteries with medicines adhering should be made with two circles having a perforated template in which the hole of the iron door should fit. The length of the edges should be one or two nuts or similar to those.
And if the space which is between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them fit within each other according to this form:
And then apply a poultice to the exit of the urine, and let the patient sit over it, and place your hand on the exit of the urine; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and make the quality of that water little by little hotter until for one hour’s quantity, and let the patient endure the biting and irritation — as if that torment were like a burning bite — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the urine to lukewarm water.
And then let him rest for three days and apply a dressing until the blackness of the irritation is gone, and let him rest for some more days, and it will heal from infection; this is the final remedy.
And then treat that with medicines until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or the ribs, treat it in the same way as was done for the urine, similarly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and another substance not extinguished from both parts, and stir them and place in a new jar whose lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the process.
And place below the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and living substance lukewarm water in which it rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, and let the jar from which the sharp water drains out through the lower part into the inverted jar.
Then adjust all that water, and add it to another living cause and another renewed alkali, because at that time it will have great strength of sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation does with fire.
And so with some medicines with which it is cauterized widely, such as vinegar and honey mixed with natron and a cause with soap, in such a way that they are mixed.
And Gaul relates of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure with which he was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies much how good it is for that, and says that there is no need for any other treatment, and because he was healed once as mentioned, because lightly that intervention in bath and vinegar sufficed.
And it should be taken from a certain green herb, and if the green is not available, fresh figs should be used; and much should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the hip, or on the thigh, and bandaged.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient estimates as comfortable.
And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is warmed, move them to dry land, for the pain ceases and they are healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and let the cauterization be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the bones.
Take a split piece of dry goat horn and fill it with something to make charcoal inside until it is charred; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is stretched. And then continue doing this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Pain in the Joints.
In some cases, pain in the joints is caused by various reasons, such as from dislocation or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
And cauterization is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of irritating matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the noxious substance with small pills and similar remedies, apply them to the joint where the pain is located in three rows according to its width. Place at least five cauterizations or more in each row, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the remedy.
And let the cauterization be done with pointed cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cauterization in this manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Most often this disease affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their digestive system, with the yellowness and elevation and movement.
And you observe at the last vertebra of the back and in those that are beginning to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that you take the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two lines or three away from it. And let the points be close together.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
But be careful that cauterization is not administered in jaundice that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pains are caused by humors rubbing against each other as they flow through the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is common for doctors to refer to this as gout properly.
And therefore, since gout caused by rubbing is treated with a specific method and the pains are not relieved by other means, then cauterization should be applied.
And so you cauterize that part of the evacuation area in the vicinity of the joint at the end with the cautery.
And may you cauterize the olive-shaped one of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the shin, then perform a point cauterization. And if the pains rise into the joints or other junctions, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each joint with three cauterizations or four from all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if indeed you need these cauteries, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery, but only around the specific area of the wound.
And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries as we have said in their respective chapters.
And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called a cramp, then puncture around the affected area as it revolves, puncturing those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then puncture around the affected area on each knot and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains rise near any of the joints in the spine or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistants.
And do not evacuate the malady without proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter XLIV.
On cauterizing wounds.
When you find a rupture in the groin and intestines coming out through the wound, and this begins to happen nearby, then you should order the patient to stop eating for a day and to use laxatives so that the protrusion returns to the abdomen.
And have the patient lie down on their back immediately, and order them to keep their belly in so that it is forced inward or the wound does not appear.
And then return to explain to the patient and show them how to identify the rupture near the pubic bone, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the lower parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has this form:
so that it is round and emits sparks. And then reduce the intestine or wound to its normal position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not slip out again.
And you have already placed pillows between the patient's body parts and let them lie on one pillow, with other pillows under their thighs, so that they remain lying down.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, and do so until you feel the pubic bone in the middle; repeat this several times if you did not succeed on the first attempt to locate it.
Observe wisely the condition of the bowel when you are about to cauterize it, that you do not burn that bowel so that death or other great harm does not come upon the patient.
And be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And take care of the place where you cauterized for three days, bandaging it so that the burn scar heals.
And take care of it with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the wound healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of the healing time for which the belly is inflamed, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
And when you want to remove it after about forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that in place for another forty days.
And let them be restricted from work and overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let this be about one-third of its length; and afterward treat it as we have said, and it will heal.
And some early writers said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, as it is marked with the template:
and a line is drawn for the latitude in the flanks above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is quicker and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Dislocations.
When pain occurs in some member due to falling or striking and persists for a long time without being relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the dislocation and pain.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in the member closest to where the pain is, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are helped greatly by cauterization, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured by what we have said in the division, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption will encompass the whole body and its entire composition, then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle part of the head, and another further down, near the forehead; two on the temples; and one at the back, above the neck or nape.
And last of all your cautery must be applied a little inside where it presses upon the bone and makes a slight impression, so that the scales may thereby be displaced, whereby the emission of gross vapors is facilitated; and cauterize over the mucus as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is manifestly apparent, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two on each vertebra of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, a large one near the buttocks, another on the buttock itself, two on each thigh, one on each leg, two on each instep and one on each heel; and cauterize that over all the joints of his arms and feet, and on each sole of his feet, and on the creases of their hands.
And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so that you do not burn them.
And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body is already numb.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as required by the nature of the instruments.
Here is the translation:
Chapter XLVIII.
On cauterizing for numbness.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not get better, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the heat of the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little. And then treat that with an ointment so that it may be healed.
And sometimes numbness is cauterized not only in the affected area but also on the bones and vertebrae of the back and on the points where the nerves that control that limb originate, and the numbness is thus alleviated.
But do not proceed with this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limb and the emergence of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterizing for ulcers that are necrotic.
When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize over it with a cautery for a short time according to the quantity and specificity of the skin depth until the whiteness and color of it change, and its color is altered.
And then treat that with flour of eggs and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a pigeon or swallow, each in part and all mixed together, and then apply it on a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter I.
On cauterizing ulcers.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in a circular manner around it as it appears.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle part; but to me this has not been seen, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen in some cases.
It is more prudent to cauterize it around the part in a circular manner as we have said, or rather use cautery around it.
Chapter II.
On cauterizing hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are delayed in maturing due to excess moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, such as being old and debilitated with little blood, or simply due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize around them with small punctures using a cautery. After this, they will mature more quickly.
But if you want to perforate it with the cautery, then take the cautery which has this shape and place it in the middle part of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied to that area further back, so that the arm remains undisturbed; then care for it until it heals.
Chapter LII.
On Cauterization with Corrosives.
A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then you ignite and apply small points of cautery, and larger ones as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
And proceed to cauterize it thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate the entire corrosion and leave no cause for its recurrence.
And then wash it for three days, and apply dressings over the cauterized areas with oil mixed in until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for those are a means instead of cautery. But cautery with fire is more rapid in bringing about healing.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicines in the division, and therefore use that when you find it necessary.
Chapter LIII.
On cauterization of wounds and other similar conditions.
Most times, when treating wounds in the lower part of the thigh known as "clau," which is a serious condition involving thick and deep tissue damage, one should proceed with cautery using two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
The fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery instrument, which should resemble a circular shape similar to a wheel, made of iron in accordance with the size of the wound. It should have fine edges.
And then place the heated instrument on the wound, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the perimeter of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound. And let it be for three days until it begins to scab over. And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallow mixed with salt to it, and let the plaster remain on it for one night, for this will help remove it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and buttocks, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of iron or copper or resembling a wheel, and place it on the wound; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold it tightly while rotating it thoroughly with compression from your hand, applying the edge of the tube to the root of the wound; as the hot water flows through, wait for about an hour for the effect of the water's heat on the wound, and then remove it, for the wound along with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus place them one close to the other until you come above all those which by nature are in the body.
And apply treatment to those abscesses after the roots of the nails have been removed with the instruments which cause flesh to grow.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for trembling.
When you find that someone has a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever causing friction, or for some other similar cause, it is then necessary for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the feet of the patient, as well as over the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness caused by friction.
Chapter LIV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When in the body there appear accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are caused by thick, corrupted substances; therefore, at the beginning when they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire length of the fistula with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated over fire; or with long radish seeds; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess matter causing those issues will be disrupted, and they will heal from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Chapter LX.
On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is prolonged due to the disease that caused it in the first place, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar conditions, then it is difficult to remedy that.
Therefore, when such a situation occurs, quickly apply your finger to the opening of the artery, and press on it until the bleeding stops and no more blood escapes.
Then place the olive wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire in great number, and blow on them until they are ignited.
Then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and the condition in which the artery is severed, and apply it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the bleeding is stopped and restrained.
And if the blood flows out of the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and take away the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure it does not cause other harm.
Know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the blood at that moment, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or apply extraction, because when extraction is applied, the extremities are burned and thus the blood is restrained; or wrap it with a bandage made of strong material, or place it on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and strengthen it with a pillow and appropriate constriction.
He who administers appropriate constriction with bandages and by wrapping in cloths or placing near burning substances and similar methods should do so slowly.
If anyone attempts this and the physician is not present or there are no medicines available, then gently place the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and feel for the strong constriction inside where the blood has stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery the finger should not be moved; and sprinkle it with cold water to cause intense cold within until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed with cauterization or necessary medication.
On incisions and punctures and vents and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have organized the chapters on the superiority of the head over the body.
In this process in this chapter by that method, so that the seeker may be blessed with it, at the time regarding what they have asked.
And before I begin this, understand, son, that in this chapter it is by means of fear what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because it is necessary that there be great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of blood may be dangerous, whether from the application of heat to the vein or cutting on an abscess or opening an exit or purging a plague or extracting stones or initiating surgery and similar procedures. And with all of those, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their danger, death.
And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes the case may lead you to methods of men with many methods of illnesses. And among them are some who become angry about their illness and die because of it, and this due to the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and from the length of their illness, and the illness brings fear which signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you their belongings and says, "I hope for health from you," while their actual illness is deadly.
And therefore it is not right that you consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any cause about this without proper certain knowledge that verifies what concerns you, and to which praise-worthy success follows.
For the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication of the time to which their health is converted, for in that you will have help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have organized this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other things, so that what you seek and need from it may be made clear to you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often afflicts children shortly after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too vigorously.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not understood.
But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it affected, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that its outcome was left to fate.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move because of the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity may be accumulated between the skin and the bone, or below the bone over the brain.
For when the operation is to be performed and the humidity lies between the bone and the swelling but is slight, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at one point, and let the length of this incision run two inches along where the moisture flows; and this is the shape of the puncture:
And if the humidity is more increased and the swelling is greater, then there are two incisions made in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the place beneath the skin but not from within. Then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
and immediately the incision should extract all the moisture; and then dress the incisions with cloths and plasters; and then apply poultices of oil and vinegar over them from the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and unguents, and bind the head tightly; and eat food that is dry with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the swelling and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be more in the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the swelling and the accumulation of water appear, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and beware of excessive bleeding, for the patient may die from that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Second.
When I proceed to treat cases of hemorrhoids or fistulas in the buttocks or around the anus, and if it is necessary to do so, and not to rely on medicines for treatment, then at that time the last resort is to ligature these two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you want to cut those that the patient shaves his head, and then rubs the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is felt; and the locations of each near the areas below the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
And then place a ligature on the artery with a thread, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, making the incision until it reaches the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it at the points above the incision.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, which comes out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear clearly, then you should measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then place a ligature with a thread, and proceed to make an incision into the bone.
Of the quantity of blood to be let from a vein, it is one vi uncie, and it is lighter to let from wheat flour or thinner, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the patient's strength and the fullness of the vessel.
And then consider the inflammation, and if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, now divide that so that it does not become an abscess from cauterization.
And then strengthen the inflammation with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
When it happens that someone suffers from acute migraines or sharp headaches due to excessive humidity in the body and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if it is an ancient severe condition similar to these, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to bloodletting from the veins in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is in the temples; and understand the visible vein in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
And if it is hidden from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatula which has this shape: And then you peel the membrane in which it is enclosed until you reach the artery; and then cut it where necessary to extract it along the partitions until you remove it from the membrane and expose the layers beneath which are underneath it, from all sides.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the point where you are working, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the ends need to be lengthened or shortened, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut in this way, the blood will not flow properly.
And then evacuate the blood from the vein, about one ounce to three.
And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of fine silk or with cords, and do not allow it to become putrefied before the wound has consolidated, so that there is no bleeding.
And then cut away the excess which is between the two ligatures; and do this at that time or another appropriate moment.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife until the ends are cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
And it is better to do this when the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery helps to dispel final humors, and therefore is better in such cases.
And after the extraction of the arteries, fill the space with dried herbs, and place them on a prepared powder, and then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with plasters until it is healed.
And if while you are operating elsewhere there flows blood from the artery, then you should seek to constrict that blood, either by cauterizing or by filling the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so as to constrict the blood. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause your hand on the place until the blood coagulates, and apply cold water to the area until the pain subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
And the quickest way to extract an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked the two places with thread, and then apply some ignited material until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between them can be stretched, since it is not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted. However, if there is keen sharpness such that two knives are better, for if they are as sharp as two knives it approaches each fracture, and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be removed quickly.
And this method is better than all other methods and faster.
And let the space between two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
Regarding the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects the veins that are above the forehead on the head's surface, and if no cause for treatment by medicine is found in this matter, often the face of the patient will turn red, and a sensation like an ant crawling appears on their forehead, and the eyes become so weakened that even the hair around them can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to treat such cases with this operation, but they did not perform this treatment without reason.
And you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then cut three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly beyond the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal passage, and the third on the other side.
And guard against the beginning of the arteries, which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three such adjustments.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can dry the blood.
And then insert the spatum of two sharp points, which has this form for the incision: which is from the edge of the plate to the second incision. Excise from there all the tissue that is between two incisions at the suture which is on the bone, and then make this mid incision from the first to the second incision. And then stretch this spatum and insert into the first incision another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the sharp side against the flesh and the adjacent tissue, and the flat side within the bone, and proceed with it until you reach the midline fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the limbs.
But ensure that the incision continues along this appearance of the tissue, and then make this in the midline fissure to the other side.
And when an equal quantity of blood flows, press the sites of the collected blood clots.
And then apply to each fissure dry linens soaked in vinegar and oil mixed with honey, and place bandages so that no abscess forms by cauterization.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure it with an ointment of basil and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
When you encounter sudden and continuous bleeding for catharsis, and sometimes the fluids of the patient are exhausted and scarce, and their condition shows debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and in their place hair loss, and at the temples there is sharp pain and subsequent emaciation, then from these symptoms you should understand that the matter and catharsis do not come but from small veins within the inner parts.
And the best treatment in such cases is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision at the midpoint of the forehead (beginning from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and cut through to the bone; extend your hand over the temples which are swollen due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with boiled cheese or linen strips. And then apply powder soaked in wine and oil so that it does not become a cauterized abscess.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone where it begins to grow new flesh, and afterward treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture to be applied to these wounds until new flesh grows.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, such as iron or wood; or it is from a plant, such as chaff or beans; or it is fluid-like, such as water and sour wine and their like; or it is some animal.
And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or clot in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then at that time drop into it some substance of violet oil or cumin, and immediately administer its extraction, and make them sneeze with certain conditions, and plug the nose before the occurrence of a sneeze. And immediately place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, as this often helps with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a small screw extractor, which has the following form:
And if it is expelled with the screw, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a fine piece of wood from a few doublings.
And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and secure around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the tube enters. From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
If it is not forcefully pulled in this manner, now take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught a small quantity, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap around that point properly placed. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And if it is not forcefully pulled due to all the causes that we have recounted, now you should consider cutting that area which has become inflamed or spasmodic.
And the method of cutting that area is to begin by puncturing the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear near where it hurts most. And let the incision be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this method, then take fine cotton wadding in this form: and administer the removal of that growth which is causing trouble in the ear.
If you do not wish to apply water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, place it in several pieces, and prop extracts near them with onces or subtle gestures, or as we have said concerning incision, for the extraction is easier.
In the water that has entered into the ear, it is well for the patient to use sneezing with a prepared mixture at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some warm cotton, and then lie on the side where the water is, and if by this means it is expelled, it is good; but otherwise, take small pebbles or stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them slightly in fire, and let the patient insert one of those into his ear canal and jump with one side of that part, striking upon the stone inside the ear with another stone. Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled.
Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the middle part is burned.
And place another piece of cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze it with a cannula as was said above about the extracting stone.
In the extraction of an object entering the ear, if it is a small thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object that causes pain to the patient, then administer its removal with gestures and onces, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract them with your fingers or with fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that suffices for the patient; and then suck it out forcefully with a suction tube, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not follow this method, then apply and plug in the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, which you will find described in the chapter on distillations.
And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this form: And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And it should be like a plunger at the end of the tube where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap one end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and place that end in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
Take what is to be inserted into the ear and heat it slightly over fire. And be careful that the substance you will apply to the ear is not too harsh, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing in it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the most difficult conditions to treat.
And in the one where you can see clearly, it is necessary to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine spatula, which has the following shape:
If the end of it where the width is small, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be double-sided so as not to injure the ear.
And if the blockage is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the flesh inside.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it slightly over fire, and then insert that into the ear.
And therefore, if you find an obstruction with what the patient identifies as causing difficulty, due to hearing impairment, apply pressure gently on it; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of lint in the quantity appropriate to the size of the wound you have wrapped with Egyptian cloth; and do this for several days until you are sure that the swelling has consolidated; or take something and soak it in water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then you should extract what you have used and replace it with another piece wrapped in cerate made with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and thereafter treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of eyelid inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Inflammation of the eyelids sometimes occurs with moisture, and at other times it is dry.
Therefore, you should have these at hand or in small containers, and mix them with the ashes of their roots, and then apply them as finely powdered dust to the affected areas.
If pain and bleeding come from a vein, then at that moment you should cauterize those parts with a fine cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned up and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Wounds that remain in the eyelids have a cause similar to swelling in their strength and hardness, and thus they are called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid both above and below.
Therefore, the procedure in such cases is to consider at that moment whether the swelling has arisen within what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of this is light.
Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it from all parts with ease until it is clean, and then suspend it with an ointment and bandage it.
And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, no harm will come from it because the heat of the treatment will restore and heal it.
And if the swelling is inclining toward the inner parts of the eyelid, you should press the surface inside, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, which you need for incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid because of incision is elongated, this you do not note as any cause.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of abscesses above the eye on the eyelid.
Abscesses are more common in the layers above the eyelid, especially in children, and they worsen the condition of their eyes, leading to a worsening of their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect for them.
And for this reason you see them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and thus their lower eyelids are covered by moist eyebrows, which have become inflamed, and the likelihood of an abscess is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel tenderness there.
And one method of operation is when the patient rests his head in your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make a circular incision according to the quantity that contains pus from all sides, and then place that on it and press with your fingers all around so that an abscess forms in the middle of the circle, and then drain the moisture in the middle using a spatula inserted through a small incision, which should not be larger than the incision made in flaubotomy.
In the main incision cut through the wound completely until you reach the periosteum, for in major dislocations proceed to the periosteum by means of a fissure according to the form of the white line.
Then extract the bandages which you have wrapped around the said limbs at the parts from the inside, and twist them between your right and left hand until they are disentangled.
And be careful not to probe in the fissure so that you do not reach the bone and damage it.
But if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then probe in the fissure gently until you find the artery; and then extract it as we have said; and afterwards immerse the bandages in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and sprinkle those with powder.
And some people who sprinkle salt and place it in the depth of the fissure to absorb any remaining moisture.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, now treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of palpating the bone.
When in the eyelids of the bone, there grow hairs beneath the natural ones and when these are plucked, then those harm the bone and cause various illnesses such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which is called palpating the bone, and it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by canals as I will explain.
Therefore, when you place the clamp on the wound in its place; quickly turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into where there is pus underneath the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the base above, near the edge of the eyelid from which hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus towards the upper parts under the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then insert into the inner part of the eyelid below the hair adjacent to the lower lacrimal passage entering into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of cork or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with a probe, and it should be as shown in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should depend on the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in people, as some require it to be incised from the eyelid in great quantity according to the extent to which the eyelid is softened.
And then insert into the space along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the lower lacrimal passage entering into the smaller lacrimal. And if your incision is near the natural hair line as thick as the king's [royal standard or as the king's usual practice].
And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the jaw, and then excoriate that entirely, and then approximate the wound edges with fine thread or wool floss, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what excesses of pus remain on two eyebrows for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
About four days after sewing up the intestines, begin treatment with this.
And if you wish to treat the wound without sewing, use something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but sewing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
However, one should be careful about the condition of the wound, and it is good practice, not done out of fear.
And there is another method for treating the eyelid, which involves shaping it like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid by three inches, separated and brought together in this form:
But if it is not possible to do this, hold the stitches, and if they are uneven, now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the shape, and position the other side near the larger tear duct, and the second side near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the said threads for equality, and then lift your hand evenly to raise the entire marked area as we have recommended.
And then align the two edges of the wound with the suture, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or the wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
And sometimes you may need to turn the eyelid so that its side can be incised; then proceed as we have described for incision. But sewing is more artificial in such cases.
To make a needle, follow this form: And so you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two needles or two slender rods whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width shall be slighter than the width of the pupil. And you have already cut into the extremities of each section where the threads are located.
Then apply each needle with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the needles in each section with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days, because the excess will die due to the constriction and will be rejected so that it may fall off by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut the needle with scissors, and afterward treat the wound until it is healed.
When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two needles that you shall make according to this form: and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye using an awl when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural hairs that are hard, rough, and sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine awl and place it in the soft fiber of each hair, and afterward adjust the ends of them carefully and gently. And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
And then place the malate [affected area] in your lap in the proper position, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires removal, and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly before you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into another area, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is moved to another area on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled to another area and the hair does not move, pull again to the parts below near the field you have prepared with that, so that it is moved to another sufficient place.
And place that in the sight of the eye, for now you will move it to another area and the field, and sew together each part and close the eye with stitches, and leave the stitches for two or three days so that the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, now you should attach a long hair from the natural hairs to that one, or leave it so that it grows longer over some space, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When an abscess occurs in the eye, and it is contracted when the eyelid is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine. This abscess may be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar malpractices.
The method of the operation is such that you should divide that consolidation and separate its lips, place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it; for if you do this, the abscess will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek; boil the seeds and leaves in water, or use myrrh dissolved in some oil. Then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
The essence of your treatment is that you should pierce any part that has not healed in its proper form from the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is simply a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This ulcer which is made in the lower eyelid, which is properly called an ulcer; and it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
The accidental kind is caused by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the left lacrimal bone into the right lacrimal bone, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh in the parts above the needle and cut along it with a broad probe. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a thread and place that in the incision, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both openings at the lower part of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two openings meet at two corners of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and let there be their formation such that when they come together, a proper shape is formed.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there in the amount of the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if through cutting or by means of a wound or cauterization it is necessary for you to make an incision, then you should make a shallow cut along the skin of the eyelid as has been described previously. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, it should proceed according to the operation, as has been prepared for the form of the incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way that is possible within their means to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adapt according to the needs of the operation and the instruments in the best arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, lift it up with it, or extend it to the root.
And then you should cut the adherence with a fine probe, which should not be sharp enough to cause cuts, keeping it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the procedure, and move the probe gently so as not to scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
And you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in the water.
And you separate between the eyelid and the wound with a probe, and apply on the wound linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use consolidating remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the formation of swelling and elevation of flesh in the area of the tear ducts.
Know that swelling occurs in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle knot; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with a finger does not allow the finger to sink into it, it is separated and the finger does not enter it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the major tear duct gradually spreading to cover the eye and preventing light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working on the swelling is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the swelling with a probe by slightly folding it back to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horse hair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread, and fold the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the swelling, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with thread the swelling; and extend it to the parts above, and irritate with the hair the edge of the swelling which is near the pupil. And thus you should pull the hair together at the rear.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the conjunctiva of the tear duct intact so that by this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun on it extended or with glue, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, of which this is the form:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or dry paste made from myrrh in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it attached to the flesh underneath, then this particular kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the malady and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape described: with delicacy. And if it happens that the area is inflamed and swollen and needs treatment at the root, then apply a distilled solution from your own saliva or a dry paste made of myrrh or powdered salt to the wound, and bandage it for another day.
Then proceed with the operation until everything that is there has been removed, except for the opposite abscess which lies in the belly, because at that time you leave it alone and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
Then proceed with your operation on that one for the same reason until it is healed.
If the lacrimal flesh becomes swollen and painful in the eye, suspend it for a period of time; then incise part of it, but do not proceed with the incision to such an extent that you cut off the flow of tears.
Then apply a dilution of rose petals and sinah (a type of plant) to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of styes and of what is born of flesh tightly attached to the eye.
In the eyes of some people, small pieces of reddish flesh appear and grow until they cover the pupil, or approach it or protrude over the eyelids, causing the eyelids to be pushed apart in certain areas and resembling a balcony railing.
The operation in such cases is that the patient rests his head on a pillow; then open the eyes of the affected area and remove all that flesh at appropriate times, using forceps or scissors; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely removed with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And perform your incision with the scalpel that you use to incise these areas or with the spatula that we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is removed, depending on the form of the condition as described in this chapter.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it has been thoroughly cleaned, now fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and cover the wound with a white cloth so that it is protected from abscesses and cautery.
And if any reason arises to guard against infection and the wound requires cautery, and you fear an abscess from cautery, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever remedy cures it, and subsequently proceed with the operation once it is healed, and similarly handle the flesh around such a wound as described.
However, you must be careful to remove all healing from the wounded area either naturally or accidentally by iron, and do not use your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Sutures for Wounds.
Apply red sutures to the veins that are visible on the wound and prevent their operation by dressing, and leave the wound to heal over several days.
At the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is a stitch is strong and if there is no other illness but the stitch; then you should collect that stitch.
And you must command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two as per your discretion; and let that thread be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or use two threads gradually in one piece according to this form:
And thus bind those veins with fine ligatures, and let the blood little by little, until you see those veins become flattened and turned empty.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and if you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you should apply distilled vinegar or rue to the blood because of its acidity to corrode what is left of the wound.
But if it is not possible for you to do this all at once, then apply a plaster that relieves the pain, and let it be for several days until the pain subsides and is assured of being free from abscess.
And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal remedies as described and not healed, then do not let them generate in the wound but cut into the abscess when it is ripe, and remove all the humidity that is within until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it with an instrument of this form:
He is called the rough-headed one, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this which is made with small pricks by lime or steel points by fine pricking (as in the following form).
Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between the said tissues, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the core of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed and without forming an abscess and without any incident occurring, then you know that it has healed.
And if not, now there is no other way but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: first expose the bone with an instrument or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply three strips in this manner:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually tapered towards the end as you see here.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little bit, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the discomfort because of what it finds venting out when you move your hand.
Now, treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Thus when the flesh and the place are hardened, at that time the matter which was flowing to the parts outside returns to the nose, therefore this is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
When the nose is prominent in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs upon touching it, then you should allow the patient to rest, and subsequently cover the neck with windy poultices without scarification and suction with good cupping; then apply a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla over the nose, and finally apply a plaster on the prominent part of the nose using powdered substances.
And the method for making the powders is to take linen cloth strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; then make the powder from these strips.
Then apply those one over the other according to the amount the nose requires. Then apply a hard cloth with tight bandaging over them; and repeatedly use the wind poultices with suction without scarification; then remove the poultices and let the nose be tightly wrapped day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loose during this time, then it should be made tight again.
Then remove the bandage as we have said, both day and night.
And if you see that the nose has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and tight bandaging and the wind poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tissue.
When you find disruption in the uveal tissue, and it protrudes prominently outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, shaped like a human figure because of this, and you wish to incise it, then during the operation proceed as we have recounted: insert the needle at the edge of the uveal tissue from below and above, and immediately place another needle where the double suture thread is located near the lacrimal area, allowing the first needle to follow its natural position; then incise the site of the double suture and lift that part of the uveal tissue around the needle, strengthening this movement.
Then withdraw the needle and pause over the woolen thread infused in egg white, allowing it to adhere to the uveal tissue.
Then treat the wound with what will comfort it until the injury is healed.
And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the wound to cover the large prominence, and then puncture it with a fine spatula so that it adheres to the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow, and soon the wound will subside.
Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of contusions.
This illness, called alconati, is not actually running water on the wound but appears similar to it.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not descend lower, know that it is water.
And if the descent to the canthus with water as we have said is not prepared, now make the patient sit and take a fine spatula and apply it on the conjunctiva just above the panicle near the continuation of the conjunctiva over the tunic cornea at the edge (enter the affected area), so that the pus may be discharged.
Once it is discharged, now you should instill warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it for other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which is appropriate to puncture, as explained earlier, now do so according to the patient's condition.
Now it is necessary for you to have the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and lift their affected eye with your finger, applying gentle pressure.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if it is the right eye.
And then with your right hand take the needle, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the needle near the edge by the thickness of the white of the eye from the inner corner, and then gently press the needle in with your hand.
And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, which is the rim of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And so pause the almond in the place where the fluid is, and then pull it down a bit to another place nearby, and if the fluid descends immediately, then you see the ailment upon which his vision rests immediately, and the almond in its eye.
And then pause for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now pull it down again before the almond is displaced.
And when it has settled and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll your finger in it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the fluid and irrigate the eye with that solution; and then cover the eye with a piece of cloth or stopper or flax infused in rose oil and egg white.
But we and those of our time pause over that procedure with egg white applied to the eye.
And if you cannot place the almond in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, which has this form:
And so perforate with that the conjunctiva, and do not leave your hand in the wound, and only make a way for the almond to move into place.
Then he proceeds with the almond as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for the operation by having them sleep on their back in a well-prepared dark room, and they should be prohibited from any movement.
And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move the patient's head to the right or left at all.
And change the bandaging according to its condition on the third day.
Then untie it in that dark room and show the wound to view, examine some causes, and then re-bandage it on day seven.
And it is not advisable to do this during the hour of surgery or immediately after infusion. Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and strong attention.
But if an abscess occurs and needs to be cauterized, then you should untie the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Now you should cover the wound and pause on its surface for several days, allowing it to rest in a dark room.
And then move him gradually from that room and converse with him about his condition.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from observing several times, and now you should be confident about the operation.
And I have come to us from some of those who know, and some said that they make fire in the Airag magdaam perforated through which the water is sucked.
But however I have not seen anything like that in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaam by which those who do not know them can recognize them:
And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this subtlety, triangular, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths attached, some of which are caused by a condition that resembles a spider web made of thick threads, or a water polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that aquatic growth. And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is flesh like a lion's but not of a dark color.
Therefore, for the one who has these lion-like flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover it so that the illness feels between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and starve the nose of it, and apply poultices occasionally to those flesh growths. And then extract it from the parts inside, and then cut out what you have identified of those with a sharp subtle spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if you leave any part for any reason where the excision is possible, then remove it with one of the fine instruments easily so that no part remains for any reason. If the master decides to treat an abscess or boil with cautery, then proceed according to what is necessary; but if it is one of the malignant boils, then incise and cauterize that part which allows the blood to drain and all the cavities to be exposed.
And if it is necessary to cut near the nose close to the insertion, use either water or vinegar. But if the nose is swollen and the process of moisture extends to the palate, then you will know that it has already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as necessary, then you will know that inside there is flesh still attached to the excess bone of the nose to which abscessification has not reached.
Then you should introduce some thick substance into the area where there is swelling, and use small nuts, placing an amount equal to the width of a finger or less between each nut, and generate the pus, then insert one end of the substance into the nose either through the ray or for another reason that is possible.
And once this has been done, cause the smell to penetrate until it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it sit over the affected area, for diligent observation of such actions is how children are taught in schools, and it is a quick way to achieve the desired effect.
And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a layer of flesh around the nuts that are in the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the nuts of the substance.
Here is the translation:
At the end of the treatment, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you use a drying method of treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal irrigation, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon with a rounded end, like a little bowl, and the tube similarly.
And if you prefer, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used for nasal irrigation should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from juices and substances that need to be heated.
Chapter XXV.
Of swellings in the nostrils.
Swellings often occur in the nostrils, and they are treated with applications and ointments for several days until it becomes clear what course of treatment should be followed.
And for this reason, you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance and treat it entirely. Here is the translation:
If the incision is delayed until it becomes hardened, then consider whether it has become pus-filled, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point do not touch that part with a sharp instrument as it is chronic abscesses; for many times those to whom you incise this abscess will suffer great harm because of that.
And if the abscess is painful to touch and not dark in color, and there are times when an incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the site with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing up the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is disrupted by plague or similar causes.
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, few will be suitable for this operation except in some individuals.
Therefore, when there is any cause for one of these conditions, consider whether it is a fresh wound or the result of blood, and then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches, and subsequently treat it until it is healed.
And if the edges of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is clean and healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until blood comes out. And then approximate the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of those apply powder from dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and continue treating with an ointment until it is healed.
This is the method of suture: you add the solution of continuity with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or you add the solution of continuity with silk as you know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur between the two lips in the private parts.
Often in some men, in the private parts between their lips, there appear hard swellings similar to the gristle of birds, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you make the incision, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with cold water and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Often there arises on the gum flesh that is adhered to, which the ancients called "albulus," then you should suspend that with a thread or what you have at hand and incise it down to its base, and let the pus or blood run out.
And then apply to the area finely shredded wool or other astringent powders or substances that promote drying.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason for Pulling Teeth with Iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in both the inner and outer parts, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough spots, discolorations, some areas are blackened or have become greenish or brown, causing corruption to the gum, and thus the teeth become discolored.
And therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place his head so that he leans forward, and then remove the teeth in which these rough spots appear and cause sand-like substances to form inside, so that none of them remain, thus removing the blackness and greenish discolorations and other such issues so that they may be cleaned.
If that is what remains as stated at the beginning of the reason, it is good; otherwise, repeat the procedure on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until you reach the final stage as you desire.
And know that the teeth have the need for various tools of different shapes and sizes according to how you prepare your operation. And therefore, the razor used to remove the part inside the tooth is different from the one used to scrape between the teeth according to other forms, and you should prepare these various shapes of razors as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with all care and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no reason to spare it when it needs to be extracted, as it is a substance that requires removal.
When the patient is forced to have a tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain deceives the patient and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain does not stop until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have seen from experience with barbers.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know for sure, now it is necessary to incise around the diseased tooth with a spatula that has some virtue until it dissolves from the gum completely, and then use your said tools or fine forceps gradually little by little until it comes out.
And then hold firmly with large forceps for good leverage or a strong grip, and place the patient's head between your knees so that you have control without discomfort to them, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not loose, now take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth from all sides and endeavor to loosen it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, now it is necessary to fill that break and reinforce it with a thin wire so that it does not break further during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you must work carefully when incising around the entire circumference of the gum and be cautious with your strength so that you do not break it or leave any part damaged, and return to the patient for the sake of avoiding further harm, as it is better than causing more pain than necessary.
And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the removal of [conditions], since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring about great illnesses upon people, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain unremoved entirely, or some of them, or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have testified many times.
And after the removal let the mouth be washed with warm water or salt water.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then apply some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and holding them skillfully with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long, narrow, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
And they should be like handles of thick material so that when you hold them, they do not bend; their extremities should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron with straight extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth, some of which fit into others and hold by strong constriction; sometimes the extremities of these are in the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are very strong in their grip.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are trapped.
When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is rotten for some reason, then it is necessary to wait over the place where it will be removed for one day or two until the area is softened; and afterwards insert those tools whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or hawk, which have the form of forceps:
The ends of them should be made in such a way as a file or a reed.
And if it does not obey when you try with these forceps or tools, then it is necessary to scrape around the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And it should have a short thick end, and should not be hollow so that it is not broken.
Then if by this the root is removed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it has a triangular and more slender end.
And with these instruments, having two prongs of which this is the form as follows: and with other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because the tool is made like a small spoon, and this is its form:
with a triangular end that is curved or short, which has some thickness, and should not be hollow so that it is not broken.
And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar to and resemble the other instruments.
And let the skilled and subtle artisan find for himself according to what he understands from the operation and the various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it pains you, then place your hand carefully on that part with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help it with a gesture of this form:
And let it be removed little by little, and hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is completely extracted; then restore the place with suitable medicines.
But if there is a small abscess in the bone, then remove that of the abscess and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the care of prominent teeth over other teeth.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is weak, especially when dealing with women, and particularly with those who are respected; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it properly, then root out that one; but ensure it is not attached to another tooth, so use this instrument of which the form is described; it resembles a pig's snout and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And so let your incision be such that you cut it after too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be joined by another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth to be filed, then file that with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And let it be entirely of Indian iron and grind it accordingly; let it have small pointed teeth, just like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that another tooth is not joined and damaged. And afterwards line it at the end, and rasp it with some razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and you examine the tongue, then you should file down the inside where the sharp edge of that fragment is, so that it is smooth and rounded off, and fill it in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or knocked out by impact or accident, and the patient cannot eat properly because of this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then to prevent further damage, you should strengthen those teeth with gold filling and not silver, for silver will corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the restoration is that you take the gold and place twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then build up with twists of the filling between one or more damaged teeth, until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth on the other side. From there proceed with the tissue into the part from which you began, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not harmed.
And let your thread be such that when you pull the needle with the thread of the teeth, it should not slip.
And then cut off the excess part of the needle using forceps or scissors, and attach those parts at each place with stitches, and convert them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue. And then sew it as tightly as a Roman stitch.
But if it comes loose or breaks, pull that or those parts with another needle in such a way throughout its entire length.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two damaged teeth, as you see them tied:
And when it happens that you return one tooth or two back to their proper places, and they grow back as we have described, and they are restored.
And only a skilled and wise artisan can do this.
And sometimes a piece of cow bone is used for a certain purpose, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is sewn as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which is mentioned above the tongue, can be either natural, with which one is born, or it can be accidental and occurs due to a disease that has already become consolidated.
And the operation is that of opening the mouth of the patient, and their head being positioned accordingly; then lift their tongue, and proceed to incise that nerve ligament horizontally until the tongue is sufficiently freed from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or swelling in that area, and this has become consolidated due to disease, then you should cut carefully and divide it horizontally until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the swelling.
And be careful not to make a cut in the upper part of the flesh so that you do not divide the arteries and cause bleeding.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with salt water or vinegar or fresh water; and afterwards place a linen pad below the tongue. This is to be done so that the patient keeps something under their tongue each night to prevent it from healing too quickly in another manner.
But if bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the location with a hot cautery that is appropriate for this. And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ranula Underneath the Tongue.
At times, an abscess similar to a small swelling appears underneath the tongue, preventing it from performing its natural functions; and gradually grows larger until it fills the mouth.
In the operation, place the patient sixty paces from the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color and hard, to which the patient has no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined towards a whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the incision into it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then pause and apply vitriol above three times, until the bleeding is stopped.
And then return to your work until you have treated it properly, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those in the throat and other abscesses.
When dealing with abscesses in the throat area, which are glands that are somewhat assembled together and appear as if they are ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point, do not touch that which is gangrenous with a tool.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with an instrument due to the flow of blood; instead, leave it until it has matured, and either you will remove it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, hard, and the layer beneath it is thin, then at that time it should be cut open.
And the operation on it is what you consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested from the heat or if it has been reduced in any way; and then make the patient lie facing the sun, and his head towards you, and open the mouth of the patient, and the assistant takes between their hands the tongue of the patient downwards with an instrument of noble form, which is shaped as follows:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Then when you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then apply your instrument carefully over it, take some of it out, and place it in a container, and pull it out to the sides as much as you can. Or take something from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Or take something from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is opposite the other, sharp, made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one slit, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then the patient should rinse with water.
If blood flows, guard yourself with water from the decoction of thorns of mulberry or leaves of myrtle and similar to those of styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it once it is healed.
And sometimes pus appears in the armpit or as abscesses in those two ears, and incise them according to what is said about the incision of two breasts similarly.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in her armpit, the abscess tending to a dark color, with little sensation, which had closed her arm pit, and the woman breathed very narrowly, and had prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if may not have been for one or two days.
And the abscess had burst so much that it made two channels through which it discharged by two tracts.
Then I carefully examined one of the channels and pulled it out, removing its large portion, and then I incised that which included the other tract, and then I closed the opening, and covered it with a dressing, and then I placed the channel in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then the armpit of that woman was completely open, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after started eating food. I did not stop incising that abscess multiple times over a long period, and an abscess formed in place of it, which needed to be incised to prolong its healing.
Thus I applied a cautery to the wound and dressed it properly; then I walked around not knowing what God had prepared for me in that regard.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of an abscessed wound.
When the discharge from the wound is directed downward and it is abscessed and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at the lower part, it is then called a boil.
But when it is cured with what we have described in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and you often see that although it has been cauterized, it persists subtly, then you should incise those that are aggregated and round. And if they extend along a certain length and are bloody, of dark color or black, and do not respond to this method, then you should attempt the incision because there is concern about potential harm.
And when you see it as I have described by its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and press your tongue against it with an instrument that conforms to its shape and then place the thumb below, pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the double incision procedure.
And you should not incise it more than what is appropriate according to the natural term without excess, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
If the patient is terrified by the incision, use an instrument in the cauterization of him without fear, and the method of the cautery on him is nothing but sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it on that cause alive, and place that not thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Let the extremity of him who is cauterized be where the medicine is placed just as the cauterization of a ladle of reed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not fall due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from any cause onto him and contaminate that.
And then take your hand with the medicine and apply that to the uvula for a short while until you see it become blackened and numb due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it as it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify it with what is around it of the medicine, and wash it with rinsing water, and treat it from outside with embrocation, and heal it with remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less lengthy from fear.
In some cases, the uvula is treated with something that is milder than cauterization and incision, for it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take a poultice, hyssop, mint, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and steep them in hot vinegar, let them boil; the pot should be heated moderately with coals, and place on it a tray upon which rests an instrument made of straw according to this method; it is made of silver or straw.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula, until the uvula is sufficiently treated and becomes clear.
And repeat this procedure several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh for the abscess, and you should not do this; instead, you must wait for the formation of an abscess before cauterization.
But if this instrument is not available to you, take a cane and attach a hollow tube at its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the tube prevents the steam from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and what adheres in wounds and other causes.
Move gently around the belly or spine of the patient or for some other reason.
Then look for what is visible among those things, upon which your eyes focus, and then press the tongue with an instrument in sunlight so that it may be made clear to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong adherent attached to the throat will be easily expelled by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of bread or a leaf of lettuce or a dry biscuit to swallow; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and bind it firmly with thread, and then let the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the adherent is lodged, there it will easily expel it. And take an eel and bind it with thread, then place it inside and gradually extract it; or take a probe and gradually insert and withdraw it.
And if it is not expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a curved part that you can easily insert into its throat with ease.
And let the patient lie with his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bones of the throat, so that it does not harm him or cause pain in the bone or spine, or hurt the doctor's hand.
However, let the patient take honey, because of his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and enveloped within him, and he inserts his hand with the instrument in it, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him until it is expelled.
Chapter xxxix.
On the Removal of a Leech Attached to the Throat.
When treating a leech with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider the position of the patient's throat relative to the sun, after you have pushed up the patient’s tongue with the instrument that we have recommended.
Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with a small forceps or with a fine instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula. Do this as many times (until the leech is dead and falls off) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a jug full of warm water and pour it into the patient’s mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any cause remain in the mouth, and have the patient swallow the water for an hour afterward with his hand, because as soon as the leech feels the water it will catch.
However, if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then熏use smoke to fumigate the patient with camphor or asafetida using the instrument that we have recommended for fumigating the uvula.
In this way, then in which position it lies.
And there is another method of operation by fumigation, which is that you take a jar in which are burning coals and the jar is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and fit the end of the instrument into this hole; and place it above the smoke; and have the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumes do not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-letter, for the blood-letter will immediately fall.
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give dry and salty foods, and do not allow water, and likewise it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-letter is treated when it is seen in the groin; and it resembles forceps as you see them, but with some curvature: which is placed in the groin, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses something, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And there are various methods of puncturing and incision for them in two ways, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what they obtain from the humors.
And the second method is appropriate for the locations where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through surgery.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but only after the pus has properly matured or in their completion.
There are other abscesses that should be drawn out when they are crosswise and have not matured according to their completion, just as abscesses that are near joints; because when an abscess approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged within what surrounds it, and if the tendons or nerves of that joint become corrupted, it can cause contraction of that limb. Or if it is close to a principal member, and you delay puncturing it until it matures, it will endanger the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it before it has matured; but do not puncture it raw, without proper digestion, except for one near the buttocks so that the pus does not spread to other parts inside the buttocks and form a fistula, or be done in such a way that it cannot heal. But it is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you should know that it is mature when there is relief from pain and the cessation of fever, along with a reduction in hardness and pulse, and the sharpness at the top of the abscess, as well as other signs.
And you should know that the puncture should be made in the place where the pus is below the abscess and coming from the swelling.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the limbs or the chest and in places such as ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other areas where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the second stage of digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause great foulness, and make the lips of the abscess harden and deepen.
But some abscesses should be punctured across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And you should administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple sections according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which the incision should be hollowed out and opened up, when it is made as if by bread dough and is done at a time when it has already hardened, just like those that occur with too much swelling and boils.
And of those that are incised in a section having three corners; and of those that are incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the armpits.
And there are also those in which a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision are made, similar to those.
But for one who does not have such swelling as abscesses or superficial tumors, you should pierce it with a shallow puncture, or just plane it out.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted one portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess internally, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this in several stages according to its degree until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is a young man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in debility, because their vital spirit is very weak and depends much on the evacuation of pus, and the patient easily dies, so you should operate on them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or if it requires a flat incision; at that time, administer some of it or use cotton. If the abscess is large and the wounds from the puncture are many, then you should place a plaster on each wound until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is severed or you have concave it around the circumference, then you should fill it with old linen or thread made from cloth, as when you treat pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; then proceed to care for it according to what is needed from ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then you should prepare water and vinegar in which to dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
If the flow of blood persists, then you should administer treatment and care as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and burnt oil, and place those on the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and let all of this be rubbed into the area for three days, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is appropriate until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already mentioned for each type of abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately.
Chapter 41.
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
And they are soft, and those contain moisture similar to lime. Of those among which I contain humidity similar to flour, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose the structure.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entrobes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a longitudinal section according to a superficial section in this manner:
And begin in the section of the line from .B. to the line of .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, you should excise that skin which contains that humidity and leave none of it remaining, for if any part is left behind, it may return as a cause of illness.
And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with this mixture and leave it for another day, for in this way you will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that piece again, secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise that according to this method: with a section having the shape of a cross, and place stitches between the two lips of the incision and explore it thoroughly, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If your arrow wounds are in opposition to what I have described first, then do as I have recounted subsequently.
And similarly treat the suppurated abscess with regard to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a suppurated abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and less moisture.
And sometimes there are abscesses in the head of certain people who do not have much moisture throughout their body; the reason for this is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, and unable to be squeezed, such that if someone were to strike it, they would cause pain.
However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case for this chapter; similarly, for abscesses that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section should be a superficial incision.
And pause the puncture of those from the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
And then treat those according to what is appropriate for that condition.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
The types of these scrofulas are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only some contain moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
Then in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is similar to that of the skin, and which is soft throughout, does not adhere to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not adhered to; it is necessary for you to incise it at a superficial dryness above the part from the upper part of the body down to the line of .G. between the line of .B., and peel it off entirely, extending both sides of the skin towards the armpit or even further if there is need for that, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not injure your hand during the incision, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is unnecessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from continuing the operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the wound, and leave that inside where the acuteness of the abscess subsides, and let the inflammation be mollified and begin to heal. When the blood has been separated.
Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, so you can incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, do not incise that scrofula in its vicinity. And beware that you apply to it a very strong bandage and that you leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old lint which you have already soaked in Egyptian onion juice, and then treat that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then make sure to approximate the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is excess superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand that it is necessary to incise its root, and extract it and administer sutures as mentioned.
And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you the location of maturity, and pause in piercing until the pus from deep within the body comes out, as we have said.
And then proceed with puncturing, apply dressings and treatments appropriate for those conditions, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with a dressing of generative flesh so that it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and I have not seen any man in our land who performed that operation.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men who have a weak constitution, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as this can be harmful because all the veins and major vessels are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or near the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section along the latitude in that which lies between two circles by quantity, so that the section be in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are thin.
And if the physician is cautious, it is better to extend the throat skin by one inch and then make an incision until reaching the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then cut the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the membrane which is attached to what is divided there and by the abscission of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Thus when the hour arrives in which the perforation is feared, join two lips of the wound, and leave it alone except for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is to observe that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and the throat has been cut open, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound, and thus be saved from death.
And by this commandment allow the wound to remain open until the poison of the illness is consumed; and the poison remains in him for three days; and thus at that time command the wound to be closed, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut it into their own throat, incising part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat them. When I arrived, I heard the moaning like that of one near death, uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from the wound in small amounts.
Thus I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was fully healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
And here you should know that in the section on the epilation there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on the abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called a hernia of the groin.
This abscess called a hernia of the groin is large according to the constitution of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that case there is reason for concern. And it should not be attempted to treat with iron unless it is small. And you should examine it carefully as described, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes and not attached to any veins, then you cut it open as you would with nodes, and extract it with water containing oil and bursiclam; and if not, then thoroughly investigate its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is needed for proper healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the section on types of nodes.
There are various types of nodes, and I have already described all their types in the division.
Here is the translation:
Thus I say that in evacuation there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is stilled; and putrefaction is completed when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But in the case there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and one proceeds as with the lion's wound which is done on a special sac.
And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a boil, and it is treated as such, whether major or minor, and there are two kinds: one dry and containing little moisture, and the colors of moisture are various, as I say in the division.
Thus, when you come to the treatment of wounds, express it and inquire about its origin at the beginning, which is called an intercurrent cause, as will be explained in the chapter near this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all wounds, which is to take this probe and insert it into the most humid part you find in the abscess, and you will move it slightly until you know that the probe has already penetrated the tissue.
And next to last, measure the size of the abscess accordingly, and then extract the probe and examine what has come out in its wake.
And if the moisture comes out freely, of whatever color it may be, then you shall incise it superficially as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the marks left by the probe, then you know that it is dry.
And draw upon the dry surface a cross-shaped section according to this form: And do as you have been taught, and suspend that section by threads, and scrape off the skin from all sides with ease, and keep the hair or sack if possible on it, and extract that pus at the node.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and apply dressings for this, and then you will extract it in stages until none remains for any cause.
For if it remains in any amount, little or much, the abscess will return according to the cause.
And if you see that some part remains, then complete the treatment with some caustic powders and apply them to the affected area, and place on it something suitable for an abscess, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
And if the abscess is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is against it, then you should cauterize and fill the place three times with vitriol and leave it open for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the blood coagulates; then return to incise what remains of the abscess.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, there are forms of the instruments, which are of three kinds: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of introduction is as follows:
The form of small introduction is as follows:
Prepare sharp instruments, clean cloths, and neatly arranged extremities, so that you can promptly proceed with the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three kinds, one of which is large, another intermediate, and the third small.
The form of the great experienced one is as follows:
The form of the intermediate experienced one is as follows:
The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
Prepare yourself for those abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and buboes, so that you can address them, as they affect the bones and other causes.
And you should make hooks, large needles, and sharp instruments similar to thick needles with which sutures are attached. They can be made of citrus thorns, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus thorns.
And the experienced ones use black feathers to probe fistulas, agreeing that by using them, they can explore the depths within which there are reflections, as these feathers are light enough to be reflected in those areas.
And there are three types, some of which are long, others intermediate, and the others short, depending on the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of the large lead plate:
Form of the medium lead plate:
Form of the small lead plate:
The forms of the hooks are of various types, some of which are simple curves, and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And their hooks are of various types, and there are three kinds.
And of those hooks that have two curves, there are three kinds.
And of those that have three curves, there are three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Form of a large hook with two curves: Form of a medium hook with two curves: Form of a small hook with two curves:
Form of a large hook with three curves:
Form of a medium-sized hook having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Form of a large knife:
Form of the medium-sized knife:
Form of the small knife:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they placed in such a way that there is fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes; rather, this is done so that the patient may be healed quickly from the disease and find some tranquility due to the adjustment following the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
And on its lateral extremity, there is a punctured area where the spatula is concealed, and in that place it connects to both internal and external parts as you can see.
The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the incision of abscesses and which I do not perceive in female patients, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are:
They are made of fine thread, round but of some length, and they are delicate.
And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as on the thighs and shoulders, and on the fleshy parts of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and similar fleshy areas.
And sometimes other small tools resembling the teeth of combs are made in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Some women have swollen breasts when they begin to menstruate, and some have them swollen when they are pregnant or during menopause.
And for that which you wish to treat, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excise all the granulation tissue, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
If the breast inclines to the sides and is softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then divide it into two parts along its pus-filled areas, each part resembling a lunar section, such that each contains the other at their ends, with the larger line containing the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then excise the diseased tissue between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur Near the Testicles.
These abscesses that occur near the testicles are of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a skin that is tough.
And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated of what is in the abscess of the sore, then fill it with boiled wool and leave it for another day.
And after the poultice is removed and it is treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type of the glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the inflammation has spread to where putrefaction is present, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the cicatrix has become hardened that lies over it, then abscesses often occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated in the front part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a sound like a hissing.
And an abscess that is due to a vein is round and appears on the surface of the body.
And the incision for this abscess is dangerous, especially when it occurs near the armpits, in the angles, and on the neck, as it can be very serious; therefore, its treatment should be avoided with care. When it occurs in the extremities or on the head, it should also be avoided.
May it be concerning him who is due to the inflation of the artery orifice, cut in the dry section along its length; and near the incision about an inch and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is revealed.
And nearby place upon that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double knot in two places, which cause I show you by drawing out of two arteries which are found in the temples.
And nearby apply the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood escapes completely from there, and let the abscess dissolve.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and subsequently treat it with appropriate bandages until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess and nearby insert the needle below the place where you had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with a double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligature the abscess with a good bandage as I have told you in the grapevine bandage on both sides of the thread's ends.
And if you fear that the thread will be extracted, now insert the knot with the needle below all the abscess beyond the initial puncture of the first needle, and tie the knots in four places.
And then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when what is inside has come out, you incise the excess of the wound, and leave what is attached to it.
Then pause and apply powder in which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment made with cauterization and herbs until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and by analogy.
And it is done to relieve the pain in the places where assistants or the heel are involved, or in any place where the joints are accustomed to pain.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is constricted by inflammation, and the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
And it is not an abscess that forms in the front part of the body, and because of this, it is less painful, and it affects all parts equally without being more severe in front or back.
Therefore, for those who have it in the joints, it should not be wrapped in iron, as it would likely lead to contraction.
But for one who has it in the head or on the forehead, relief can be found using spatha (a type of therapeutic application). But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with poultices and incise it carefully.
But if it is large, then suspend treatment with incisions, and scrape it out; and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter I.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek which affects the abdomen.
Therefore, for some people there are growths in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms, whose root is fine and the head is large; and often the lips of these are smooth, and it can be small or magnificent in size.
And I have seen one such case where in his abdomen there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
And the lips of those were inverted and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
And the procedure during the incision of such growths is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the tumor is white and humid with a fine root; then you should incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, because for such growths the section should expel much blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
And if you see the patient is afraid and hesitant, refrain from incising with an iron instrument; instead, take some recent lead plaster, apply it to that tumor, following the method we have described; and leave it for two days.
And then apply a strip of lead plaster around the tumor; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until the tumor is detached and falls off on its own.
If it is a wound of thick flesh, then at the time of incision there may be cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you may incise most of it, and then immediately cauterize what remains so that it does not return.
And then take care of the inside until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to incise a wound that is of dark color, with little sensation, and somewhat hard, for such may be cancerous.
And this will serve as a reminder of these points.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of a swelling of the navel.
A swelling of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the ciphac which is on the abdomen, and then placing there linen or intestine as with other ruptures; or by a sore from which blood or pus flows, depending on what is present; or by trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the placement of linen, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and soon appears in various situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of an intestine, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats, and soon returns; it lies lightly on the skin, and is easily reduced by bathing and hard work.
May it be that by moisture, the parts are like lions and are not hidden when you press them with your hand, nor are they constricted, nor are they hard.
And if it is due to poison, then these signs appear as the abscess turns to a declining blackness.
May it be that if it is due to dead flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is seated in proportion to a quantity.
May it be that if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to poisoning by an artery, or a vein, or gas; then it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then it behooves you to command the patient to lie on their back and stand extended; then feel around the circumference of the entire navel, and then command them to stand between your hands on their back; then surround with a spatula across the circumference of the navel at the place where you have marked with your hand; and then extend half of the abscess upwards by about an inch; and then tie around the circumference with strong wax or thread in the proper manner.
And then cut the center of the abscess extended over the ligature and insert your finger into that area to explore the bowel; and if you find it or protect it with the ligature, then you should evacuate it immediately and urge the bowel towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place in those two strong threads and interlace the two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then press the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place ooze where the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or incise it when it has become softened and can be oozed out, and then treat it with what is needed from the medicines until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is fleshly or due to moisture, then you should deal with the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is needed and which will consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to proceed properly so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have discussed the nature of wounds generated by carefulness and caution in their treatment.
And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in a place where it is possible to eradicate them completely, just as with wounds in the mammary glands or on the breast and similar parts of the body allocated for removing everything, especially when they are beginning small.
When it is old and hard, do not try to treat it yourself, for I cannot heal such a thing nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor has anyone reached that.
And the operation on it is when it is prepared as we have said, you should proceed and leave the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then let it bleed if any congestion is found.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in the manner in which it is to be performed, and afterwards apply the hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then hollow out completely with a sharp knife for proper excision so that no cause of recurrence remains. And let the blood flow freely, and do not apply poultices to it hastily, and squeeze out the pus, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable for this purpose.
But if you find thick blood congealed in a vein or artery, then cauterize it as soon as the flow of blood has stopped, and afterward treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the Treatment of Hydrops.
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of dropsy related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment for it with medicines.
And the type that is treated with bloodletting is only the single type of anasarca, and not applied to the types of tympanites or hydropsyarchy, for these are fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not apply your treatment anymore, then consider whether the patient has reached debilitation or is suffering from another illness with similar hydrops, just as if it were in the chest or abdomen and similar cases. At that point, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
If you see the patient with excessive vigor and there is no other illness except for hydrops alone, neither in infants nor the elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and have an assistant press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, squeezing out the water from below the navel, and immediately take a spatum spinosum according to this form:
It should consist of two sharp parts that are long, with sharp ends like a spatum; however, there should be some slight tapering gradually, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thereby harm it.
And then consider if the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you distance yourself from the navel by three finger breadths when making the incision, on the side below the navel.
But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney ailment, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three finger breadths.
And if the origin of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not rush to that location and cause harm.
With an instrument, perforate the entire wound, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with a spatula between the wound and the tissue, and you will scrape that; and if in quantity of one stripe or so.
Then pierce the tissue so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water will go. Then remove that and insert an instrument of this form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the part that is lowest on it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a feather, as you can see.
And at the uppermost end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then you should immediately apply pressure on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of water at once, for if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die due to resolution of their vital spirit, or an accident may occur that brings about death.
But evacuate that in accordance with the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
Then remove the instrument, and close the wound with water, which is done because it is immediately retained by the wound that closes the holes on the tissue, as you are advised to pierce those in that manner.
After each operation, leave the instrument in for another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water from them daily, and do this over several days with caution so that you do not exhaust their supply of water but only take a little.
If you are concerned about the patient and allow a large amount of water to be removed, then bury them in fine sand up to their waist, and pour sweat-inducing substances over them for bathing, and have them expose themselves to the sun for long periods; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and treat the chest and abdomen after the removal of the water, as I have recounted in what has been mentioned previously.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its urination not opened (or it is blocked or not in place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perform the operation of opening it as soon as the child is born using a finely crafted instrument according to this form:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate, remove it and allow him to urinate; then return the instrument.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine, which needs to pass through that area, will not be able to flow.
May the one whose wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for enough days until it is enlarged.
May those in whom the wound is not in its place be treated as described, the cause of which is that one is born and the trauma is at the end of the urethra, so he cannot urinate properly; when elevating the penis with his hand above, it does not affect generation, since sperm cannot reach the major second rectitude, and this is a laghid illness.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grasp the head of the penis with your left hand forcefully, and incise the tip of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, like cutting a feather quill, or shave off some part so that the middle of the urethra appears as if it were the tip of the penis, and the wound falls in its proper place accordingly.
And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as you may encounter this; pause the procedure when you cut into the blood vessel, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of the condition known as balanitis, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of its corruption, blackening, and adhesion to the head of the penis.
Such occurrences often lead to this balanitis in the penis and it appears as a soft flesh prominence.
And one of these conditions is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For benign conditions, suspend a fine ligature and then cut off the entire excrescence; and afterwards apply a poultice of Egyptian onion over it; and thereafter treat with myrtle decoction until it is healed.
And if the tumor is malignant and of a threatening color, then you should administer cautery around the base of it and on its sides.
But if the tumor is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise all that is discolored and will likely corrupt or is already corrupted; and afterwards apply a bandage over it with honey, which has been mixed with ground and sifted rye bran and finely crushed iris roots.
And thereafter treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
because cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: it helps with bleeding and also when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and upon whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it must be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bandage dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them delicately, then you must scrape with the spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be pierced easily by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very fine thread, which has already been wetted so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic wine so that it becomes consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as other illnesses are; but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because it specifically pertains to children, it is necessary that we assign the best method and the least harmful way for their safety.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; they use a thread with a needle for suturing and a lancet for incisions.
And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors and thread than in cleansing with a lancet, because many times one avoids the danger above, as the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and what remains below is thin, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain. And in the cleansing done by a surgeon's hand, which is manual, as used by barbers, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, as it easily enters the groove there.
But in the operation with a lancet, if you are careless, you may injure and corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen that myself.
Here is the translation into English:
And the method of the first operation is that you should make the child stand if it is one who understands a little, so that you should only tie the thread on his penis, and leave that for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding. And then make him stand between you in a prepared place, and do not let anyone else be there; and hide the scissors in your hand or keep them tied up, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on his penis and blow on the cord, and pull it until the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
The shape of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of ends be blunt and the others sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not protrude, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
The mistake in cleansing is that you force the coagulum entirely or partly out of what needs to be excised.
Therefore, stretch that part of your finger along the edge of the swelling and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with forceps and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the groin in an abscess, then you should leave it until the abscess softens, and then incise it with ease, according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the groin, for it should not be done on that part.
And therefore, treat that with what the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure from the coagulum, and you follow the parts above, do not note that.
And therefore, treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LIVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the stone is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned and the cause is severe for the patient, then it must be that you administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin like a quill, as fine as a reed pen about half a palm long, to which there should be a fine tube at its head.
And the method of testing the urine with that is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at the end of the wool or cloth for good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any excess wool with scissors if necessary, then insert it forcefully into the tube. And then pull out the siringua gently and quickly.
And place the patient on the chair, and hold his bladder with oil for lubrication, using olive oil and rose water.
And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where you are holding it; and then push the siringua inside until it reaches the bladder, and that tube must reach the patient's cause of obstruction, or else it will go to a place where there is tortuosity.
And slowly extract the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine dries the wool.
And you should extract that and make a cure with urine, and use a tube; do not stop doing this and using the tube until the bladder is evacuated and relief from the pain is achieved.
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or obstructed pus, and you want to administer liquids and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
But at the end of it, there is a blunt tip, which is closed. And on that part, there are three grooves: two on one side, as you can see.
At the beginning, there is a concave part where it is inserted, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with it. If it is expelled far, then as the clampcedra has pitch applied to it in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with it the water that is pushed to the sides, for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the extremity of the bandage into the clamp as we have recommended in the circle; then press with the moisture that you apply, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and the patient will feel it.
The form of the crucible is subtle with which the bladder is treated, and that is its form:
And it should be made of silver or latobium, the head part more like small feathers, and below smooth like reed.
Then take a bladder made of leather, and place in it the moisture you want to treat in the bladder, then tie it tightly between two with strong binding, twice over, and heat that moisture above the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the crucible into the clamp.
Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it is structured properly, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that throughout its entire roundness; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as if it were sealed, so that you place in it what you want of moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of stone removal.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stone and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone in which such operations are performed, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And thus narrating it with such exposition is clear and concise.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, and feels pain during urination, and shortly after becomes relieved. And thus have I informed you of these matters.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals. But in young adults, it is somewhat easier because they are between those extremes.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment more difficult; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes everything that causes stone formation; for such foods sometimes prevent the passage of the stone due to their nature.
Regarding this malady, apply pressure to the affected areas and use substances that cause vomiting so that the stone may descend into the bladder or jump from its place after a few attempts.
Apply that cauterization between the areas you have prepared, and let the substances be placed on the side opposite to them, so that the bladder is made to incline towards those parts.
Then examine that and all of the surrounding area.
When you feel the stone in the space, cut it up immediately at that spot.
And if you do not find it immediately upon examination, then anoint your index finger with oil, using the left hand if the patient is a child, or the right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus. Examine for the stone with your finger inside. And gently guide it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and expel it outward towards the location of the incision.
Tell one assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and tell another assistant to extend the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, near the location of the incision.
Then insert a probe that has this shape: and make an incision between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle but slightly to the left side; ensure that the incision is over the stone and your finger is inside the anus, making a transverse cut so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much of the stone you can reach, as much as possible without making it larger, since your finger in the anus will push the stone out easily after the incision.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them.
And there is one that resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is easily polished.
Then place that one with angles and edges into the fissure.
And if it is not drilled in this way, now you should apply over that one, or press on that with a suitable gesture, the end of which should be like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not avoid it; or insert between them a delicate instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot do that, now slightly move it a little and if you see blood flow, press on it with vinegar that has been triple strength.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you should press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then move it a little closer to that; and similarly do so if they are in motion more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance would be to incise it in a large section, because this would lead to one of two bad outcomes: either death or that it results in continuous urine leakage, because the area has not fully healed.
But administer expulsion until it is removed, or devise the fracture of it with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and press it firmly. And pause over that cloth infused with oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
And then place the poultice on the affected part of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with a decoction of pennyroyal and a decoction of fenugreek until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess should occur, which is adhibited and corroded, and of that nature as if the blood is frozen in the bladder (and for this reason urine is prevented), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar acid, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to the condition for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you should apply both the treatments and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urine is prevented as a result, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, because those treated by this method are rarely accused of needing section; and I know this, for you should take a fine steel probe, which has the following form:
with a triangular tip, sharp, and attached to a handle.
Take some oil, and lubricate the probe below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the instrument into the probe, piercing easily until the puncture reaches the stone. And rotate the puncturing instrument with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will create a passage through which urine can flow from one side to the other; for the urine will be immediately released.
Then press your hand on what is broken off from the stone that has come out beyond the probe, for this piece will be shattered and expelled with the urine, and the illness will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then lubricate the area below the stone with oil and also above the stone with oil. Then place the probe on the stone between two bindings. Then extract that [stone]. Then loosen the bandage and change the collected blood, which was gathered during the procedure.
And it is not necessary to apply oil below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above unless, because when the oil near the swelling of the stone is removed, the pain returns to its place and the illness recurs.
And for this reason, it is necessary for you to apply oil above when you raise the swelling upwards or return to your previous position, and the illness will recur as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One reason for this is that women are more easily frightened.
The second reason is that you do not find many women who are willing to disclose whether they have seen a doctor when chaste, or if they are married women.
The third reason is that you do not find many women who are skilled in this art, especially the operation itself.
The fourth reason is that the location for incision to reach a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision, and this is feared.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek out an experienced female surgeon, but few are found.
However, if you do not have access to such a surgeon, then seek out a cautious and subtle doctor, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable about women's issues, or a woman skilled in this particular art.
Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is frightened, and it is necessary that they insert their finger into her to locate the stone.
Then if you find that one, cut it below the joint, and now order them to incise upon that one.
But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the joint into the patient's vagina and examine upon the stone, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that one with good compression.
Then if you find that one, now proceed to gradually extract it from the opening of the bladder to the parts below as far as the summit of its strength until it reaches the root of the matter.
And then incise upon that apposition at the midpoint of the vagina towards the root of the matter from whichever part it is to them appropriate, and place the stone in that part, and the said joint should not be cut below the stone.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the section according to the quantity which you know the stone will pass from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have edges.
Then you should know how many types there are of them according to what you signify about what you want.
And if you see blood flow, adjust the place with vitriol thrice and let it act on that for one hour until the blood is coagulated, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Take care to prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bind it with powders and a moderate bandage, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the area has become clean, then return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Chapter LXII.
Of section on hernia immediately.
Hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin, which contains the bowel, and it is called a pouch.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared for the bowel to pass through, so that it appears as if another bowel is present; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is not the case quickly.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this substance accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may lean towards citrine or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and foul, or be watery and white, and the latter is better.
Here are the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water such as this one is: for if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then at that moment the boil is round and leaning a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the root appears, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper subcutaneous tissue, then the boil is round like half of an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the root of the boil and the white membrane, then press below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the boil at its deepest part; and according to what is seen in the traces of the deep part, judge about what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bloodletted if that is possible for you, and open the body of the boil.
And let him lie supine on his back on some raised surface, and place below the wound some dry cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who shall extend his finger from one of the two sides to the root of the boil and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and divide the root of the boil at the middle location along its length near the penultimate joint.
And let the section be made according to the rule equally distant from the line which should follow the hair of the armpit, until it reaches the white fold.
And scrape that area, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut it; and your scraping of the place which you are scraping should be such that it is suspended more and delicately examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the fold full of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the fold in both directions; and do not touch the lymph nodes under the armpit, and incise the fold in that manner as is possible for you. And cut that area entirely or in pieces, and especially its inner part finely, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the procedure proceeds from that point away from its lymph node during the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the fold, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the armpit lymph node with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the area corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, and remove the area, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
After you have wiped away the blood, insert wool submerged in oil or rose oil into the sections; then place another piece of wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil over both sides of the genitals and the abdomen; cover this with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these together using a bandage as follows:
Then take two cloths and fill them with crumpled wool according to this pattern; make the edges so that they are pressed by wood or wetted wool, and attach them to the structure in the breeches belt, one end of which reaches into the buttocks, the other at the groin, and two ends on each thigh, and all parts should be tightly fastened to the breeches belt.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; you should take a thin lancet-shaped cautery and insert it at the root of the genitals, ignite it as we have recommended until the white substance containing the liquid becomes visible, and then use a cautery in the following shape: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
Then pierce that substance, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the substance with hooks and scrape it with the hooks, and scrape it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut it as much as you can until all of it is removed; be careful that your hand is not burned by the fire.
And know that this procedure is safer and more distant from blood loss compared to surgical cutting, and better than the operation with a knife.
If there is an abscess or phlegmon opposite the site of section or cautery, or if there is bleeding, then treat it according to what is contrary to it; and follow the treatment as has been described.
If the patient is too weak for a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and you should be certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid-filled.
Now you should have the patient sit on some raised support, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part near the pubic area, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough for all the fluid to drain out.
And then place over the area a bandage and tie it down so that any remaining fluid can drain out. And then treat it until the condition is healed.
But if the condition is contrary to the evacuation of fluid at that time when you puncture it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the orifice of the abscess resists and prevents the efflux of fluid; then place in the abscess a decoction or instrument with which water is extracted from hydropic conditions, as described earlier; or apply pressure to the area around the abscess gently.
And know that the fluid may return after about six months or around that time; and when it does, then puncture it again in the same manner, for the patient will thus spend fewer days suffering.
Chapter Sixty-Three.
On the Incision for a Flesh Hernia and Its Treatment.
Know that in the incision for this hernia, there is great fear of danger in the major dispositions; therefore, it seems better to me to abandon the procedure and save the patient by another method.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitalia are situated, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute, sharp superfluity which is discharged into the genitalia, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And quickly it becomes a stone-like abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no improvement in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those parts as has already been perceived in the recall of it, or by the inflation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
But the one that is caused by the inflammation of a vein does not disperse because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that incision may be made over this type and over other tissues; you should incise the skin of the genitalia, and nearby there are parts above, and extract the white mucus, and free the suspensory ligaments, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligaments after you have freed it from all sides of the parts.
Then if the wound has become consolidated in those flesh areas, now is the time for you to extract that and incise it.
And if there is adherence between any part of the cavity or between what is between the vessels, now is the time for you to release all that adherence and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adherence that is behind, now is the time for you to incise all that which is there, and extract the wound as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and subsequently care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the intestines.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a boil on the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking due to the ailment.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes recovery that caution is exercised.
However, it is necessary to describe the operation as it was performed initially.
And say that the patient should sit on a high stool; then press the suspensory ligaments of the testicles downward; and afterward grasp the groin area with your hands on both sides of the veins that you feel near the penis; and have another assistant hold the opposite side firmly, stretching it vigorously.
Thus, incise along the side with a narrow and sharp cut across in the region where the vessels are exposed.
And then remove completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is usually done on the flanks.
And then place a needle with doubled fine thread in it, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where you have made incisions, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you wish healing to occur, so that the vessels which nourish one of two genders are not affected, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you have made incisions in all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be deprived of nourishment through the cutting of the vessels, so that they are completely starved and destroyed, or for them to cease receiving any benefit from these.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs when the cipha (abdominal wall) is extended over the stomach from the angles at the sides of the navel, causing some of the bowels to protrude through that rupture.
This is the rupture of the hip or dislocation of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: by blow, by jump, by shout, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar causes.
The sign of this, when it is by extension of the hip, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within the area where the hip presses on the gut.
The sign of it is when it is by section of the hip, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it is an abscess different from the usual one near the joint, and this is due to the injury of the gut, and the body part is affected beyond the hip.
And sometimes the intestine is protruded outside with the membrane, and this is called an intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine through which it passes, and here it is trapped, and this causes great pain to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron there is fear, for it is necessary to avoid using it in such cases.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push back the intestine with their hand into the parts inside their abdomen if it obeys its return, and then place him lying on his back between your hands, and lift his thighs.
And then press the joint where the scrotal hernia is located in the upper parts, and incise the scrotum completely along its length; and then insert hooks into both sides of the incision as needed to open it.
And if you make the incision according to the quantity that it is possible for the flesh to heal.
And then carefully shave that area where the cord of the testicles is, until the hard white ridge of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into the place where the testicle is, between the white ridge, which is above the cord of the flesh, and between the next ridge, and separate any adhesions that are in the part behind the flesh.
And then carefully move the cord of the testicles away from the areas behind, and with this extend the white ridge with your left hand, and raise the flesh along the ridge to the area of the incision; and instruct the assistant to lift the flesh upwards as you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped around the hard white ridge. But if you find any cause for concern, then你现在可以继续翻译剩余的部分，还是需要我帮忙处理其他内容？如果有更多部分需要翻译，请提供具体文本。
And there incise in the part below the scrotum, from which section blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and bandage it as we have recommended (and occasionally cauterize the white area, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, for several times this happens); and leave the bandage on so that it does not fall off.
But if the dressing of it is delayed, then hot water should be applied, and bandage it so that it does not fall off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
And the earlier ones said that it should be treated as we have recommended for the hernia that is on the other side; which is to ligature the veins near the section with ease; and then dry it in a suitable place around the abscess that opens it, until the veins fall off.
Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said, it must be cured.
Chapter LXVII.
About the division that is made in the glands.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the glands as we have said, and one must examine the area.
And they do not assign any cause for the pouch to the genitalia; and even if they do assign one, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this condition, a fissure is adjusted in the sphincter where the pouch descends into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter which is in the glands as we have said, and because the cause is that the sphincter is stretched out, it becomes softened, and there is an accumulation and one must examine it.
And the treatment for this is with cauterization as was preceded in the narration of it.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then stretch the white sphincter that is below the groin until it is exposed.
And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points on either side of the cautery at the extremity of the sphincter, and suture one to the other.
From this extract take the extremity of the vein, and do not insert it from the suture completely, nor extend the hook, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And in this way treat it as you would with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert the sutures, clean that area and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the suture is tight and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to healing.
Chapter .lxviii.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is treating this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and insert all of the cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust both edges with the suture.
And if you wish, cut the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and with a firm suture.
And then insert the sutures between the incisions; and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Chapter .lxix.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but because it is read to me that I should remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, one of which is so that when someone is asked about it by a patient who needs treatment, the doctor knows how to treat it; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration for certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting, or by making an incision.
But in the one that is performed by cutting, the way of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and descend. And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are loose and do not appear to be attached underneath.
But in castration performed by making an incision and cutting, make sure you hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory tissues, and make an incision on each side so that you proceed with two cuts.
And then make an incision on those parts that you have each separated. And do not leave any part of the cord attached, but rather the fine cord that is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by cutting, because cutting may leave some part of the testicles attached, causing the animal to desire mating.
About the treatment of the ulcer inside until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: the first appears where there is a space between the testicles, and in that place where it should be male hair, there is instead a female feature.
And in some cases, that part where urine is discharged is located between the testicles.
In women, there is another kind: the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly to one side and somewhat like the scrotum of a man, with two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is that you should incise those tight tissues until the pus or bad fluid is evacuated, and then treat them as you would other ulcers.
And in the second kind of men, where urine is discharged from the part between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of protrusions and elevated flesh due to causes in women.
A mild protrusion that is naturally tight should be treated until it becomes less tense and manageable; in some cases, it may become enlarged in women to such an extent that it protrudes similarly to men and interferes during intercourse.
Then cover with lint the surplus of the wound on your hand or inch and incisions.
And do not bandage an incision too tightly, especially near the root of the razor cut, so that blood does not flow out.
And properly care for that during the healing of the wounds so that it may be healed.
Matured flesh is the flesh that grows in the hollow of the wound until it fills it, and then it spreads to the surrounding areas like a tail (and thus some call this "tail illness"); therefore, we should incise it as we would lint, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Wound Inflammation.
Wound inflammation is when the hymen of a woman has not been penetrated, or when the opening is small. And it can be either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a previous illness, and this occurs either because the flesh was not properly joined or due to a thick or thin scar.
And it occurs either at the root of the wound, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and you must prohibit cooking, intercourse, and childbirth, and rather easily also menstruation.
And the diagnosis of this condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the closure is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it out using your fingers or a probe.
If there is an obstruction due to a small cicatrix and it is near the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
And when you place sponges over the two lips, then apply the bandages that are closest to each other.
And let the woman lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then pull the two lips forcefully so that the small cicatrix is cut and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and have a man guard it for several days until the incised area is healed.
But if the cicatrix is thick and hard, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to a piece of flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and incise it.
And have with you the medicines that stop bleeding without causing inflammation, such as acetum, dragon's blood, and hens' eggs, prepared with raw egg white.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
And then proceed with the other treatment for healing until it is healed.
And in some cases, other tissues may need to be incised according to this method. If this is due to an abscess that causes pain, do not apply anything contrary to the abscess in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins' openings inside, from which blood flows continuously; and when these old hemorrhoids become hard and form lumps.
And now I have described the types of those and the signs of them, and to say which of them can be cured and which cannot be cured.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and lumps when they are in the upper part of the body and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no treatment should be applied.
However, those that occur at the openings of the lower part of the body where sensation can be felt are the ones that can be treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a suitable position and gently extend the affected area with forceps or a rough cloth, and then cut them with scissors.
And then sprinkle on those areas substances that promote the flow of blood from powders such as incised ones like acacia and similar ones.
And then compress the area with a pad for one hour, and afterwards soak it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood continues, then have the area soaked in a decoction of sumac and citrus peels and pomegranate rinds and similar substances.
Take flour of oats and compound it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that water upon the back of it.
And if the blood is clotted, it is good; but if not, apply to both sides with poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
And take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or the juice of lily of valley or the juice of wild garlic with vinegar, and apply it to the place; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the puncturing of the bladder in cases of acute retention of urine.
Various kinds of abscesses occur in the groin, such as boils and stone-like abscesses and ulcerous ones and hemorrhoidal and erysipelatous and phlegmonous and fistulous and hemorrhoids and piles and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the kinds of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
And I say in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the groin when it is one of those that need to be treated surgically, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness in that area and if it feels hot when touched, then do not proceed with puncturing it, and treat it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
During the time when you are to perform circumcision on a woman, place her on a chair that has two seats; and recline her on her backside and adjust her feet towards the part farther down from the belly, and spread out her thighs, and position her arms above her head, and tie some of them with bandages as is appropriate.
And let the midwife follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is made, the form of which will be described in those cases that will be mentioned.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it at the center of the opening of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted from the instrument into the birth canal should not exceed its natural orifice and lead to injury. But if the instrument is larger than the orifice of the birth canal, now it should be that you place cushions over the tissue around the orifice so that the entry of any instrument into the orifice of the birth canal is prevented.
And it should be that you place the spiral that runs along the instrument on the side below, and let the midwife hold the instrument and rotate the spiral until the opening of the birth canal is dilated.
And when the area becomes visible and is touched with the hand and feels soft, now it should be that you dry that place with a dry cloth.
And when the blood is evacuated, now it should be that you place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and place a bandage over the area around the orifice of the birth canal.
Take a piece of clean cloth and place it over the wound after soaking it in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated properly for about two days until the patient feels well enough for this treatment, at which point it is safe to proceed.
And sometimes the wound and the swelling are washed with this, so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which fennel seeds or long-leaved artemisia have been boiled, after which the patient returns to treatment.
And if the swelling is deep within the wound, it is now necessary to abstain from treating it with iron, instead caring for it as we have described in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat male embryos in a way that avoids abnormal development, according to the figure that is not natural.
It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs of it; and it is that when you see a woman press herself towards the parts below and desire to breathe fresh air, and she becomes joyful about what will be born from her, and quickly senses the movement of the fetus, then you know that this birth will be according to natural form, and it is the emergence of its head first, and the second part suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen gently so that the fetus descends gradually, and when its head emerges, the second part follows, and this should be cleaned of any excess with proper cleansing.
He who lies on another part is unnatural and not commendable, for when the drunkard is thrown upon his back and his body lies before his head and his feet behind, or one hand or foot forward, or his head and hand at the side and his belly exposed, and he turns lightly upon his side, and in semblance of such figures are those not commendable.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all such matters and to guard against error and deception.
And there he shows all the figures of those things, and which part is injured in those cases, as it is signified by that and stands upon that.
When the act is performed upon his own head by natural effort, and it is vehement for the woman and difficult at that part, and sometimes her virtue already weakened, then let him do such a thing or women have it, and evaporate the essence of fenugreek boiled with warm oil.
And then the midwife should insert her little finger and divide it with the second one, or dry it with her nail until she draws out what is inside of moisture. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with powder of silk and powder of fenugreek mixed together.
And then command him, after the cleansing, to be bound and make him sneeze with certain conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will soon be expelled.
And if both legs of the patient are fractured at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce them to ease. And if the instrument is not obeyed, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her off it, and then lower the cushion to the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the lowering.
And if the bones are not returned to their proper place and the patient dies, then incise them and remove the contents of the body or tie the body with a cloth and extract it evenly, for it will be fractured.
When the patient is on their back, then you should push them upwards, and then gently turn the patient, and then even out their position, and then take one part of it and gradually extend it.
But when it has been introduced into the things, then you command them to sneeze, and make that person sneeze under certain conditions, for it will be fractured if God wills it.
And if it is not fractured as we have recommended, then you return the patient gradually until you place them in their natural position, for it will then be fractured easily and appropriately.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's flesh and dissolved gum, and pound them together well in the mortar, and then apply this mixture to the woman’s groin, at the base of her abdomen. And having placed the razor in cold water, until it affects the hypochondria.
And when the upper parts of the body are inflamed, then apply the smoke of myrtle and let it act on them. And when the smoke treatment lasts for an hour, then place a razor on a comb, and afterward make the patient sneeze and open their mouth wide, and remove it, and press the lower part of the abdomen lightly, because the result will be expelled soon after.
And collect the expelled matter along the lateral side with one of their hands. Here is the translation:
And if it cannot be done, then place it on the bed and crush the substances with strong pounding, and afterwards apply plasters which I have recommended made of mucilaginous substances.
And if the time of childbirth has come, then make her sit on it, and afterwards study the reduction of the hand, and restore the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command him to compress himself inward so that he may be expelled.
Examine the fetus on its back, extending its limbs and wrap it with bandages, starting from both sides of its larger part. Let the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gently turn it little by little, so that its delivery is facilitated.
And when it is done and the proper time has passed, then place on the wound the preparation we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
And then command him to hold back little by little, and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command him to compress himself; and make her sneeze under certain conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus on its side.
When you decide on the incision of the larger part according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you make an incision with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you make an incision in the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
Here is the translation:
The outcome of twins or multiple offspring. Know that twins are born rarely, and sometimes three or four [are born], but this is strange and happens seldom; yet these causes are due to nature, not the mother.
And among them, whether there are many or few, a second birth occurs, and they are separated by the navel string. They distinguish each of these entirely through the umbilical cord attached to each one. And sometimes it happens naturally quickly as if it were one fetus, while at other times it does not occur in such a praiseworthy manner as we have recounted.
And if some of them have difficulties during childbirth and reach the state we described regarding unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what is appropriate with both ease and skill, whether early or late, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared for the birth, aiming at health.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten. It is worth noting that a woman miscarries after six months, while another carries to full term, and this cause has been established by the measurements of the wise scholars.
And all of this must be known by the midwife as it is very important for her to recognize these signs correctly, and thus she can act appropriately in what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it is not expelled, and you are forced to use surgical intervention at this point, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not subject to any of the conditions for which her safety is feared.
At this point, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
The attendant should hold both of her legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oils and honey, and with a mixture of flax, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks can be placed in the fetus.
And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned so that it will descend head first, and now you place the hooks in its hands, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or at the base of its throat, or in the proper areas of its back, or near its hips.
But if the descent is foot first, then in the buttocks, or in the middle of its back.
Take the needle with your right hand and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the diseased area.
And then place and insert another needle next to it, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
And do this to all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done with the teeth during their extraction.
And it is necessary in the place where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of the things mentioned with oil and insert them carefully and turn what is retained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is dislodged, then the needles should be moved to the place where it is easier; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and afterward, extract it until it is completely out, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the fetus's head is large, or if it causes contraction during delivery, or if it is in the tightly fitting part of the water bag, then you should insert between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And it should be done as if it were being done to a large-headed person by nature: and now it is necessary either to cut that thing which is bound, or to take away that thing which must be removed as we have said; and then extract from the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is raised and is compressed by the clavicle, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the sinews may be effused.
But if it is not complicated and does not rise excessively, then you should cut the head immediately as much as is possible for you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is diseased or is in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that place where the moisture circulates within.
But if the condition is above the pubis, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it towards the mouth of the urethra is also distant.
But if it is compressed by the abdomen and the muscles, then it is necessary for you to extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the muscles so that the fluid that is within can flow out.
But if the other members remain stationary and only the head turns, then place your left hand between them; but if the mouth of the urethra is open, then insert your hand into the prepuce, and search for the head there, and pull it together with those mentioned into the mouth of the urethra, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull it with these.
And if the mouth of the urethra is compressed by an abscess that occurs at it, then it should not be irritated further; instead, you should administer effusions of moist and fatty substances. Apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the condition is on the side of the patient, then as is possible, prick there; and administer the water that we have mentioned in the case of a live wound.
And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And make sure that you do not leave any cause for the second condition.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have mentioned about the treatment for abscesses similar to those that occurred previously.
And if bleeding occurs, then proceed with astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and above the other focus the fetus is also dead. It happened to someone who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became swollen and internally filled with pus, and began to emit pus.
And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Then I applied some causes of strong attraction to them in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Thus, when examining the wound, remove the bones that are present in its various positions, and if you have seen it in such a manner for some time, correct it with a small force.
And do not be surprised if it seems strange, for in this lies the science and assistance to what the skilled physician uses his hand for in administering treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a spiral in which the mother is operated:
This is the form of a clamp in which it equalizes the leaves, to this clamping there are two spirals at the ends of two arms. However, this spiral should be finer than a needle and should be made of copper or the wood of trees.
And the width of each arm should be two fingers, and the margin of each at both ends should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two arms there are two adjustments made of that same wood, which are fixed, their length being half a palm plus a bit more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they are used when you rotate the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form, finer and more lightweight:
It should be made of copper or wood, resembling the form of forceps. However, at the extremity of the bone to which it is added, make an addition as many times as necessary, and the length of each such addition is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
And when you want to open any of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, because that is how the parts are positioned. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, proportionally according to the quantity you want from the size of the opening of the womb until the sounder does what you wish.
The form of dizziness which the ancients described:
Form of an impulse with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of association in which the large head is contained:
And it is similar to forceps, at the end of which there are teeth as many times as necessary, and some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times as necessary, with teeth like those of a comb in which the head is grasped and contained. Form of association for few:
Form of one having a spine:
Form of one having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two ends with which the head is divided:
Form of two spatulas:
With those instruments so exercised, and when the various kinds of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and better for serving people according to their needs.
And you should prepare whatever is needed from those instruments, for the necessity of them cannot be excused.
Of the extraction of the second [incision or procedure].
When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
And if not, then take a hollow object and pierce it through the cover, placing it over the mouth of the mother with herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hollow object, and place it over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there so that the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be quickly expelled.
But if this treatment does not work immediately and it is not expelled, then instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticated elderflower, and insert it into the womb and search for the second birth with it. When you find it, take it out gradually piece by piece. If it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second birth, extract it little by little according to what is appropriate so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against overworking it through repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, what emerges from her to the mouth of the mother should be connected to the woman’s body part, and subsequently treated with cautery and tetrapharmaca; for that will allow it to purge itself gradually over several days and will dissolve and be expelled.
But when it purges, it raises harmful vapors to the head and stomach, and this aggravates the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sublimations and appropriate treatments for that.
But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of natrtle and dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and during her second period:
It should be made of wood or metal.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed among the coals of the fire.
And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed and then repeat with another.
Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Many children are born with their anuses not open, which are small and closed. Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully open the mentioned orifice with her finger; and if she cannot do so, she should use a sharp probe to make an opening, being careful not to injure the rectum.
And then apply a poultice made of boiled wool soaked in wine and oil; and afterwards, treat the opening until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then place a small tube inside for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
And it also happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the hardening of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that hardness, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are often hard and thick, which appear close to the anus or in the area nearby.
And it is one fistula or multiple.
And as that hardness subsides and discharges watery or slightly purulent fluid, and in some cases these fistulas penetrate deeper.
And those that penetrate deeper are known by what is discharged from them during evacuation and by gas formation; and sometimes the discharge indicates a poor outcome, and it is easily discernible whether these conditions will be severe.
Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and similarly, some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one, it is that you insert your finger into the anus, and introduce a fine probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of this nor find any cause for evacuation such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at this point you can proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the treatment involves draining the urine from that area and prohibiting anything that would hinder the healing process, so that the affected site may be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the indication is that the probe passes easily here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have a persistent fever; and nothing works in this treatment, nor does it heal without difficulty.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these involves the labor and futility of physicians, upon which such treatments rely.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing without instruments is hoped for as I will tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises the flanks up from him, the things being inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the place where the probe passes.
And if it is around the anus that the patient feels pain, then you should insert your finger into the anus there.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already begun to penetrate on its own, then what you feel between your finger and the sphincter or flesh, you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment in which help is hoped for, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was described earlier, and insert that burning object into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are now constricted like the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside, say to which part it reaches in the backside; between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula is situated on what appears as the surface of the buttock. At this time, the area from the beginning of the fistula dries up, and you see drying along with the probe, until the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe penetrates, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
And then cleanse those flesh areas affected by the fistula, which are similar to the tube of a bird's feather quill, without breaking any of them for lack of cause.
But if blood flows out when you are operating on those flesh areas, at that time the skillful thing to do and the proper instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: it tightens the adjusted flesh areas and stops the bleeding by drying up the moisture.
And then treat that with cloths wrapped in butter or in three layers of cloth until the place heals, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh remedies which generate and consolidate.
And medicines that have the property of being styptic and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has penetrated inside the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a thin layer of cicatrix or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then at this point there is no operation to be performed except by faith and hope.
The cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce some suitable remedy and proper treatment; and do not delay with drying because doing so could damage the rectum containing the bowel, and act upon the patient thusly without their will; and then cure that which we have mentioned as being light to heal; or extend that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside towards the anus, as we have said, either by hand or by another sharp instrument, and then purify those ulcerated tissues which are visible during drying due to perforation; and then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus openings do not heal, and the fistula remains in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the crack of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
and insert it into the affected area wrapped in five leaves or around them; and then insert the probe with the medicine into the fistula until you achieve the desired condition.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the medicine from that route as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the medicine and bind both ends securely, and leave it there for one or two days, and when you incise the medicine in the flesh, carefully do so inside where those tissues are between the two ends of the medicine and which connect.
Regarding the treatment of the wound, until it is healed and strengthened.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do not force it into the preon, for you must not do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with spikes with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those areas.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal lumps, or they are like grape clusters. And there are small and large ones among them, and the pus flows from these constantly and is one continuous flow, and they appear both inside and outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less moisture, from which clear water or a little blood mixed continuously flows, and this depends on the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you should cover your hands and use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your nails, and then cut those [hemorrhoids] along their roots.
If the hooks do not hold in those places because of their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cork or a flaxen bandage, and extract them with your fingers, and immediately powder some powders around the incision to serve as cauterization for them; or cauterize them as was described earlier in the chapter on cauterizing. And immediately treat them with other methods until they are healed.
And if the pus does not flow out, then make an incision with a lancet in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the bowel so that the pus flows out quickly when it is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your fingernail or hook, and incise them, and then treat them as we have said until they heal.
And for those who require suturing, proceed as follows: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from above at the parts, and make the needle penetrate to the other side at the base, and tie the two ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and extract the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and place that on the wound and order the patient to rest. And place that in a container; and when it is prepared, apply those remedies or another treatment until it is healed.
And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, you should scrape those areas with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and allow the pus to drain from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they heal.
Now you should scrape away the pus more vigorously than at first until some bleeding occurs and the area is inflamed; and then treat them until they are healed.
Know that almehmir, which is crucial, and it appears as small round spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and they appear all over the body but more so in the lower parts below the waist, and from these you feel pain throughout the body.
Then it is necessary to incise what is around the spot, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then treat it.
And if you wish, cauterize the area around it as described in its chapter.
Of warts, it is a small raised rough fistulated round prominence on the surface of the body, and they appear in most children.
The treatment for them is to cut them open and extract what lies within, whether it be fat or hair. And if you wish, cauterize that area, as we have said, either with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Of ant bite marks, they are small raised or large fistulated prominences on the surface of the body often accompanied by pain, and when touched, they feel like an ant bite, and they occur around the body.
The treatment for them is to take a needle made of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place that on the ant bite within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle until you cut out what is around the ant bite, and press it into the flesh so that you eradicate the ant bite from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Let the tip of the needle be fine, blunt (that is, not sharp), wrapped such that when held by the finger, it feels smooth and easy to rotate.
And if you wish to cauterize the ant bite, do so as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are provided for castration.
Sometimes castration is performed with instruments made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are made of small or large instruments according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of young children should be small; and for those whose testicles are tender or painful, their castrating instruments should be smaller.
The form of the large and few castration instruments:
The head of the cannula above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and at the place where the bag is tied it should be as you see.
And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two flanges, and on the other side one flange, and the width of the flange should be according to the thickness of the rays, slightly thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong honey from raw honey, which should be of this amount, or around it; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the head of the instrument between two distinct tight bindings, and then castrate with that each thread: But the quality of castrating with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under him like a cushion or a leather pad; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances. Then gently insert it into the anus until it is fully inside, and the assistant squeezes the bag vigorously so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the instrument from the rectum and allow the patient to lower his buttocks.
And if the medicine induces vomiting, let it continue as long as possible; and if he can sleep through the entire night, that is better for recovery.
But if you treat such diseases of abdominal fluid and vomiting with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and thin catheter, like those used for children's enemas.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on what causes the plagues and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes for which plagues occur are such as stone formation, or incision of sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or stick, or arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which occurs on the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones to those affecting the limbs.
And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recall of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Then I say that when you encounter a simple plague on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and if only the skin has been broken but there is great swelling and you fear that an abscess might form internally, then you must proceed immediately and perform trepanation of the skull without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibitive reason for not doing so, especially if little blood comes out from the wound.
And let the trepanation be on the opposite side of the affected area; and keep the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
But if some reason prevents you from performing it immediately, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow them to consume meat or rich foods.
And be cautious about the plague, if an internal abscess occurs, and apply only rose oil or in a liquid that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure of an internal abscess, then be cautious about the wound, especially if it is fresh and the blood and air have not yet changed the powder that I recommend applying lightly.
And if the air has already changed that, pause at certain intervals until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to incision with a sharp object and the lips of the wound do not come together by themselves, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe concerning suture.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and there is no need for it to be held together except with a small suspender, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the suspender, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are nutritious: meat, fish, and similar items until they recover.
And if you find putrefaction in the suspender and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of that rotten part and remove it, and then treat it.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it does not stop with medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is minor; sprinkle this powder on them, as it will consolidate the wound before the air changes them.
And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sieve it, then fill the wound with it, and secure it with good compression so that it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And apply plasters above the poultices and leave them on without removing them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not eradicate it until it is healed.
And sometimes this cure is done solely when it is not at hand the juice and blood of dragon.
And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them flat and narrow, and for fresh wounds to apply their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then do not apply this powder to their condition, but instead treat them as we have said, placing over them some cold applications or applying flour poultices with water and honey until they begin to rot; and then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head, it is the same.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there should be no immediate treatment but rather avoid any cure that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances which harm the nerves and contract them. Do not pause on any cause of the plague, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if this is the case where someone is treated with mild medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, and other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
But if the wound is severe, then administer sutures, or close its edges, and afterward treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or if there is corruption in its deepest part, then pierce it at the most affected location.
But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if the necessity arises for such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should close the edges of the wound with sutures near the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and afterward strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; then treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already become infected in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not suitable for removal, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the swelling subsides.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula is formed in the wound, now treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its chapter.
If it is a thrust wound from a spear or knife, and you feel its depth, now consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, now apply powder to it during the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain trapped in its depth and return to the heart to injure it, but apply a binding dressing, and change it twice a day.
And if the dressing is not available to you, now place over the wound opening a piece of cloth to absorb what is left of the moisture; and make the injured person lie on the wound so that it can run out whatever remains within.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasms, trembling of heart, or constriction of breath has occurred, and you see other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with bandages and the usual care until it is healed.
But if healing of it is delayed and much time has passed, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a slash with a knife or a sword, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or the flesh, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If there has already been inflammation in the bone, and some of the severed pieces are loose, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment during healing is as we have described.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and it is important that reducing them is more difficult if you do not promptly return them to their proper place, as they become swollen and enlarged, making the instrument for doing so difficult.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, as in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two types mentioned before.
And you should know that stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds of the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and it is caused by some reason in the bowel, and it is difficult to reduce that, then there are two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I do this with one in which there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which hyssop and wormwood are soaked, for by this the instrument of pain is alleviated slightly.
But if the instrument of pain persists near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument used for excising hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and does not require cutting, and there is no need to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of the sharp side of the bone, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of dust, but rather slightly blunt.
And so when the flap is enlarged and lifted from the fascia, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, for that is better.
But when the incision is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, now it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms closer to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place the head and feet higher than the lower parts.
And similarly, if the incision is on one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you should always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
And so you should administer this for large wounds and for smaller wounds as well.
And for small wounds, place what is at hand ready, and then have the one most skilled among you perform it, who should hold the incision entirely with their hand and close the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it appropriately.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a needle holder according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the incision at the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not place thread at both ends of the stitch, but rather between the two edges of the wound interiorly; and when you have brought together both ends of the stitch and both edges of the wound, this makes four stitches.
Take a needle and double the thread around it, and pass two sutures from both sides upwards, then bring together the two lips of the wound and the suture by appropriate joining; then take the thickness of your finger and place another needle in that, then tie that knot as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be medium in coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles enter the flesh quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and therefore it is appropriate that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
And it is not appropriate for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the wound simultaneously, because this would cause the flesh to be cut too quickly and the wound might heal improperly before consolidation.
And do not extend the sutures too much so that the wound is not hindered from proper consolidation.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place poultices spread out around the sutures, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you only need one or two needles or around that number.
However, the second type of suture is common: it involves managing four ends of the sutures, from both sides of the wound and its two extremities, in one go, with a needle that is appropriately balanced in subtlety and thickness.
When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of its division where you began, so that the suture retreats from the pus most remote part to the wound, so that the seam is a thread suture along with which the threads are tightly drawn.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to people.
And in such a suture I sewed the wound that had been inflicted on a man's belly with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the midgut and the disruption was at the center of the limb; then I reduced it after the gut had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated within the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and he was healed; and after that he walked with crutches for some time, and then returned to his usual activities.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any ointment, as it was in a place where no ointment or medicine could reach, but I placed the wound over coals twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two types of suture proper according to the narrative of the Word.
And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place cut straight according to the length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the thread through which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from inside to outside in the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the thread that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside.
And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it with the thread at the extremity of the wound, which is inside, all of it penetrates.
And then start from this side and take it to the extremity that is of the thread on the other side, and extract the needle from the bone through which it penetrates, and then reinsert it into that bone and attach the end of the thread that is on the other side to this end of the wound; and extract it from the bone that is on this side.
And do this one side and then the other, and do this one stitch after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the essence of this suturing method is that you sew with a suture of skins as if sewing fur; in such a way that you sew the thread one time from the side of the bone's extremity, and leave it for another pass until you complete it.
Here is the translation:
Take the needle and place it at the end of the incision nearest you, then insert it into the inner part through that spot, and leave both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside through both ends of the thread.
Then turn each of them around and pass each one from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of another incision on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suturing about which I have just given a description.
This is the speech of Gualia.
And if someone may say that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it is because you insert a thread into each one, and start by threading the needle as you should, and pass each one through the opposite side according to the method used for sewing clothes.
And you should know that when a disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
This is because when you manage a recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the edges and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that naturally form a hard crust and bind the threads, and make sure the thread and dressing are secure; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short while, because it begins to gather pus and forms a crust, and change that twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal limbs, then cover it with wool from a sheep submerged in high-quality oil or scented oil, and place this around the area between the joints and apply it to them.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the bowels, since this often happens, then apply styptic black thyme to it, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and an incision needs to be made into its depth.
And know that what affects the thick bowel is harder to heal than what affects the thin bowels.
And it is difficult to heal when the bowel called “gegunu” does not easily recover from a wound that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that which is fresh, reduce it according to your skill in the same way as you would reduce the bowels.
But if it has passed into the space and already turned green or black, then when you apply something firm over the place that is discolored, so that blood may flow out, since there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
Here is the translation:
Recollection of the injuries that occur in the bowel.
When a rupture occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because I saw one who had been injured in his abdomen by a lance wound, and the injury was on the right side of the stomach, and the injury was old and had become a fistula, with discharge and gas.
Then I bandaged the wound, although I was not confident in its healing, but I carefully examined that part which would heal and where the tissue is solidified.
And when I saw the place already consolidated, I warned about the harm that could come from this bad event in his abdomen; and no one suffered further harm due to this accident by changing their eating and drinking habits, and subsequently taking baths and exercising as advised.
And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small injury in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has its mouth open, on the edges of the wound. When it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and may no harm come to the patient.
It is possible that the gut suture be tied with fine thread made from animal intestine, as it is more suitable for needles; and you should take one end of this gut suture, which is bare, and tie it to one end of the fine silk thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and knot it with the gut, and reduce it at the point.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it involves one of the fine intestines, then at that time there is only a delicate treatment, and not a complete healing of it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is generally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
And a fistula is indeed a felted node, hard and white, at which there is no pain but to which there is a discharge, just as there is a discharge from the sore of a bird; hence it is called a cockle or sore.
And it is in some people a moist sore, which discharges continuously; and the moisture is often excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick and little, and it is coarse or fine.
I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical operation.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among them are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that affect the proximity of principal members and similar parts.
And therefore, among these fistulas that occur in this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not readily receive treatment, and dealing with them requires hard work and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to be easily guided and curved around the tortuosities.
And if the fistula has openings that are horrible or difficult to approach, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then inject through one opening for the others, for the moisture you inject will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire carefully according to the method by which you can know if here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula with openings at both ends, over all this within your strength, within your thorough investigation, within which you investigate the malady, and the invention of the pain according to your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess.
And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you now consider whether it is a fistula that is apparent and near or in a salt location, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places I have told you about.
Now you should treat the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the skin opening or similar, and care for it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, you must incise it as far inward as possible to the prepuce, and then remove all corrupted flesh from it; afterwards apply hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps.
And do this for several applications until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should explore it and dry it out as we have recommended, without prohibiting any cause related to veins or nerves or major limbs, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; therefore, uncover it again and carefully examine its condition and cleanse it thoroughly with your own hand, and then restore it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and therefore you should only dress that area.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is up to you to remove that; then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them behind for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those ligaments or muscles if necessary, and release the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at that moment, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the wound, and leave it be until such a time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and keep the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation remains open.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in hot water with oil, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, because when these ligaments will begin to heal, and the bones are separated from their attachment, and this traction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of an elephant or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that off with a rasp only from behind until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
Here is what is recommended for you concerning what happens to a person in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance regarding your operation.
A young man around xxx years old complained of pain in his body, and the part inside him was affected by an injury involving matter inside the body that had reached the affected area, and this matter formed into a large abscess, and it did not have an external cause.
Then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians, causing the abscess to become hardened, and pus accumulated within it. His treatment was postponed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body were discharged.
Then many physicians attended to him for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; his body was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
Then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and it reached the bone.
Then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they extended to various parts of the swelling.
Then I decided to incise one of the openings and discovered part of the bone that was corrupted; it had turned earth-like, decayed, and blackened. Part of the swelling had also penetrated into the marrow.
And then I used what was shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out not from the bone but that corruption which I had recognized and prepared to remove.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I reopened and exposed the bone again beyond the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
And I treated what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the healing and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I exposed it on another occasion and did not cease to excise the bone little by little specifically, attempting the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I excised around a palm's width of it, along with that portion containing its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became well.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except due to the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffered at all hours from excess of fainting spells and bad evacuations.
And thus he was completely healed, and nothing remained in place of the bone but living flesh; and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned; and he recovered to his previous state and did not experience contrary effects while walking or in any cause.
But if it is a prominent bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone; and order someone to extend that thread; pause with another thicker piece of thread after the first one; and then wrap the thread over the flesh near the bone, extending its ends so that you pull the flesh towards the sides; and thus expose the flesh where you wish to cut so that the scissors do not injure the flesh.
Place the saw or table below the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw on the corrupted flesh.
You should place the saw on the slightly corrupted area little by little, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear to the senses, then force the saw from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you must uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place the saw below it, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing continues from the other part.
Place the saw according to the location of the corruption, as we have said, a little at a time.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not within reason but is extraordinary.
And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then expose that area, and clean that area according to each possible disposition, and whenever an extraordinary case arises, correct it as long as it does not come into conflict with veins or nerves.
And know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
And know that the operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of ways of diseases, then you have by yourself what is appropriate to each of the instruments for every disease.
And I tell you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will place as simples among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment upon the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a needle: Let the head of this needle be in the shape of a star-shaped keyhead, and let its points be in the form of stepped points.
And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with the top part curved upwards and the sharp edge made of iron, and the handle made appropriately like a knife. Form of this:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another smaller pair of cutting instruments:
Form of another pair of cutting instruments; this one resembling a needle, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is displayed in appropriate words in proportion to the bones:
Shape of the ligature which is suitable for the ratio of that which is pierced through the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and seemingly it suits all the causes that we have mentioned about knives, scissors, and saws.
About the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Extremities may need to be amputated either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause; or when you have treated the corruption with healing medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or when the corruption spreads from a member without any reason, then it is necessary that you cut off that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may escape death or serious harm which would be a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign for that to which it happens is that the member turns black as if burnt by fire, or the corruption spreads close to where the blackness appears before the rot reaches the dry part of the limb and spreads throughout the body; therefore, you must perform amputation on that limb.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a bite or sting from some venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, adder, or similar.
And if the corruption or the bite is at the extremity of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should amputate at the joint of the wrist and not give space for the corruption to spread into the elbow joint.
And if you encounter that [condition], then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
And if the corruption spreads around the collarbone, then death is imminent for the patient; and to treat another condition requires another cause in this cure, which is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly, when corruption affects the foot, then you must cut it at one of the joints.
And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you must amputate the entire foot. But if it penetrates to the toenail, then you must cut the toe at the joint of the nail.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toenail, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it is that you tie a tourniquet above the part where you wish to cut, and another bandage over the area; and extend a bandage to the parts below, and have another bandage extended above; and you separate the skin which is between two bandages with about one finger’s breadth until all the flesh is exposed; and then it can be cut or tied.
And it is necessary to cover the patient with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and to ensure that the wound is properly dressed and the abscess cauterized.
But if blood flow occurs when you are working, then you should cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to stem the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Apply bandages to the injured limb as is appropriate, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I advise you to treat the person who is injured in his place, this year due to an accident for which I advised you, an accident that resulted in blackening of the skin as if it were burned by fire.
And that corruption from the accident initially affects the skin inside the finger and tends to spread over the entire body.
And then the person prepares for that year's pus to go out of the member along with the intensity of what is blackened by pain and burning, and he cuts that skin at the joint, and it will heal.
Long ago, this annual corruption affected the finger of the indicated hand.
And then it happened to me, and I had to remove that excess according to what I prescribed for the treatment of the hand with regard to the cleanliness of the body; and the excess was not removed, and it began to spread to another finger on the same hand.
And he asked me to cut off the hand, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the removal of that excess, and fearing that cutting off the hand might lead to death, as the power of the poison was very strong.
And after he left me, he returned to his own land, and I was told that the man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he healed.
And I have included this narrative only to assist in understanding the nature of this illness and to provide guidance on how it should be treated.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is extended inward so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not yet reached corruption, nor does it impress upon bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space extends inward so that corruption impresses upon some member, now it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it has been formed, and especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus passing through the skin, now you should treat it with enemas.
And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm that you are using smells foul, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, vinegar, and rue in equal parts, and mix them together in a vessel, and cook them over fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; use this to administer an enema to the sinus, plug the opening, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
From there extract that which is held in little regard; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
And on some occasions it is administered as an enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present at your disposal; and you should take the ashes of wheat, put them over the water; and then filter that, and administer it as an enema until you are confident that the sinus is now closed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed thoroughly three times; and administer it with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this on some occasions and become confident that the sinus is now evacuated, then administer an enema with something that promotes flesh growth.
And you should take of the decoction of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or administer that along with some medicines and other decoctions which have the properties I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the enema tube to be received, then you should gradually widen it with a small instrument, and pause in the procedure wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon decoction until it is widened.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should bring together the edges of it with a suture and leave it in such a way that the enema can be administered without addition.
And if the opening of the hole from which the arm protrudes is raised to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus base located where the arm runs below, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus beneath around the pus base as you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member for the preparation by which the arm protrudes lightly as you are equipped and without any cause detaining the arm.
But that which is over the sinus opening, which you must change at all times so that it dries what is inside the arm. And so that you may know whether what protrudes from the arm is much or little, or whether it is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess present.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material placed over the sinus opening has adhered or will soon adhere, then on the third day loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, change the cloth to another one and renew the ointment.
If the sinew is very close to the skin and the pus is thin and subtle, do not despair of its adhesion, for it will heal properly. For there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their sores takes a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
And if the sinew remains separate from the skin for many days and is still indigestible, then you should know that the sinew does not adhere. And if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and this is due to a prolonged cause, then adjust in drying the medicines; and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they must be dried as well when it is adjusted, for there is superfluous addition of grease.
And when the pus is to be treated, take what has been purified and dissolve it in rose oil. Then apply it over the wound with another substance that has similar properties, and use it accordingly.
And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no skin, to take purified substance and honey, and when it is cooked so that it thickens, use it. Or take myrrh and aloes and sendes, mix them all together, powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and bind it; or apply the honey you have cooked until it thickens, sprinkle it with powder over a cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes it is administered with long-leaf artemisia and seeds of lilies (and celestial lilies) and flour of oats and centaurea, using those simple or prepared ingredients, mixing them together, sifting them, powdering them over the recommended honey; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its root, and it has spread to the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; now treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
On the treatment of boilings and chafed nails and the cutting of an added finger and division.
A boil is an abscess that typically arises under the nail of a toe or finger, and it can also occur in other fingers. If it persists and its treatment is delayed, or if it is an abscess caused by cautery, or if it becomes corrupted, it may secrete pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail. It often corrupts the entire area, sometimes spreading to the bone inside, causing a foul odor, and rendering the end of the finger or toe useless, turning its color dark.
And when you have applied the treatment as we described in the division and it does not improve your condition, then you should incise with a scalpel all the superfluous tissue that is decayed under the nail and immediately cauterize the wound, for immediate cautery is beneficial in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have withdrawn and the flesh around it begins to hurt and inflame, then you should place a fine probe under the part of the nail that hurts the flesh, elevate it, and incise the flesh with ease. Then apply corrosive remedies to what remains of the flesh until it is completely removed; and afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you should incise the bone and extract it, because it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to where the pain is felt, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a puncture or abrasion on the nail and it causes severe pain, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and afterwards dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would lead to the formation of excessive scar tissue in the area; and then treat the affected area with something that alleviates pain.
But in the case of a swollen finger, which occurs in many people, it is often full of flesh, or it is soft on the bones, or it is often in the nail.
And some of them arise at the root of the joint, or it is the swelling in some joints of the fingers. But the one that arises in some joints of the finger is not serious, and the one that arises at the joints is more severe.
And for those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is shallow, and you should make it behind the base with a broad instrument.
But for the one that arises at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
In that which is described about nuts, you should incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and then treat what is within so that it may be healed.
In the case of consolidation that occurs between the bones due to scarring from injury or because of the person's birth, or due to consolidation from illness or fire damage, then you should treat that consolidation until the mentioned parts return to their natural form.
And then place between the strips of the enfused in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of the mentioned parts on the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the limb.
For incisions of veins, these are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose when they are swollen and full of melancholic humors that flow to the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel, work, or carry heavy loads.
Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times to strongly expel it, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment for them involving iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and completely extracted.
The section of the procedure is as follows: at the beginning, place a basin under to catch what comes out so that the thick blood is resolved, which is sediment in the basin. Then apply the basin to the most pus-infected part of the wound below the bone with a bandage and then make an incision wide in one place or two places or three. Then lift the black blood with your hand from below the basin up into it as much as you want and as often as is necessary until the quantity of blood has been removed that you wish and that the patient's constitution can bear.
And then give him some food and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
However, the elevation of it is as follows: if you see that the patient's basin has hair and then place him in a bath or apply hot water to his basin until he blushes and the veins are swollen; or have him exercise strenuously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
And then dry the area on the side of the vein by making an incision either at the end or behind the bone, or at the lowest part near the ankle.
And then scratch the area with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and it should be observed that as you treat it, it gradually turns darker.
And thus when you examine it, look for the white part that feels firm.
Place then the knife upright so that it is raised and angled from the rib cage, and suspend it there for one hour.
Then cut another section near that section for three reasons, and then peel the rib cage above the vein that appears.
Then raise that and incise it in the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or farthest from all sections, until it all exits; then incise it.
And if you do not manage to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and pull it out, or insert the knife below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is dislodged. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that piece, and the patient will suffer from that harm.
And when you have completely removed it all, then apply to the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and plain oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with twists for which it has a covering in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each twist of it and at the places where it is covered, and then suspend it for an hour until you raise it completely.
And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
It is not to be made as sharp as a scalpel nor with a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should have great flexibility, for if it were delicate, it would cut the vein because of its delicateness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
Of the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the camels in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India where no grass or food grows.
And similarly it is generated in other parts of the body besides the camels.
And its gestation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body of serpents and other creatures, generating between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein causes inflammation in the camel; near the location, blisters appear; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
And when the extremity of it becomes apparent, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and secure that area, leaving the lead suspended from the camel.
And so many times when you need something for the parts outside, wrap it in lead and attach that. And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which is ragged until it has come out, for if you cut that which is ragged it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulceration.
It is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains nothing of it in the body.
And this vein is found in some people extending to the length of five palms and I have been told that it has reached up to twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate that which is long in the body until all that is inside the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days; and afterwards treat that as you would an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes to multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because at times it appears among cattle and is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is shown through the sensation near the affected part of the member by member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
Regarding the generation of worms, it is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and maggots and pinworms in the belly.
It is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, then suddenly a very light wind blows in it and enters and destroys the heart, and thus many deaths occur.
And when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it is done only by means of the movement and appearance of it to the senses, and at that moment you should press what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and immediately dry over it and extract that.
And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not find it, then you should pause and cauterize with fire over the place where it resides, and the main cause to be feared is the corruption of it by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrows with strong constriction, and immediately dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
Regarding the treatment of nasal illness.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then it is transferred from one limb to another.
And I have already seen that as I will now recount to you. I went to see a sick woman in a village, and uncovered her arm, where I found a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After removing it for about an hour, I saw that this swelling subsided as quickly as wax melts under heat, but more rapidly than could be expected, as if it were living silver flowing from place to place.
Then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
And then it quickly moved to the other side of her body and reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was moving throughout her body just as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by the change and the speed at which it moved from one limb to another. And I had seen this before in my own patients in the manner described, but I have never witnessed such rapid pain moving from one limb to another. But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
And I thought this was due to the fact that the woman was elderly, with weak limbs and exposed veins, and in her, this windiness appeared as changing sensations.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with engorged veins.
And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, immediately apply heat to that area as we have said, then press firmly on it until the confined windiness is expelled, and cauterize the location.
If you do not apply it to your wounds, then treat that with massage of the body and with what expels windiness, and anoint those with stinking pills and with Serapion pills and similar things.
Of the extraction of splinters.
Splinters are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge, for their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, concave or blunt, solid ones as well. And there are those with three angles, and among them are those with tongues; and also slender pieces.
And the signs of the brain when struck by a splinter and it penetrates the bone, and exits at the fontanelle which is above the brain, are caused by severe heat, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the wounds, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Moisture similar to flour exits from the affected area, and the appearance indicates an abundance of fluid in the flesh.
And so if I recognize these signs in you, then refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Note the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel how it is lodged in a hard place, not soft tissue; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse movement, and there is black blood from the wound, and the extremities become cold, and sweating occurs, and fainting; therefore, you will know that death approaches very soon.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the patient's complexion changes, and they exhale a great breath, and crave for fresh air.
And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the legs, and the pain at this moment is near the small ribs, it causes great distress and severe pain and sighing, and there is no movement of any part of the limbs.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very quickly you will see that the wound expels any undigested food.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is lodged there, you will see some opening from the wound, or the membrane, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for recovery from the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and some cause of infection spreads to other parts externally, and quickly there is pain over the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
Thus the other members as well as in the face, the neck, and the groin, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the ribs, and similar parts of the limbs are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment.
The reason for this is that an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind only the grey matter of the ear, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in him at the grey matter of his eye, leaving behind only the eyelid. The arrow was already concealed and could not be completely removed except for a small part to which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron tip that did not have barbs.
And the Jew recovered, and no harmful incident occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs. Then I incised around it between two grooves, and it was already submerged in his groin. Then I carefully removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it. However, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition regarding the arrow, I incised around the arrow and removed it carefully, and he recovered without any harmful incident occurring to him.
And in one man an arrow was embedded in both sides of him, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years the arrow emerged at the root of his spine.
And there was a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it internally, and she did not change in any of her conditions regarding it, and the woman did not suffer any discomfort during any of her natural functions.
And there was another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face and the wound had healed over it, breaking off the arrow, experiencing no pain hereafter, and similar cases are like this.
And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had penetrated just below his nose, and it had slightly shifted towards the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed beneath the skin.
And I was called to treat him regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully with a probe, but did not feel anything with it; however, he felt pain just below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the area containing an ingredient that attracts and digests foreign bodies, hoping that it would cause the location of the arrow to become apparent so that I could operate on it.
And no significant change occurred in the area that would indicate the arrow had reached it; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident; and meanwhile, the wound healed, and he complained of pain from the tip of it after some days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me about this.
Then I applied a sharp corrosive medicine for several days until it reached the bone, and when I tested it, I found that it had penetrated to the fine extremity of the sinew, which adheres to the shaft.
Then I adjusted the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until it became visible to me clearly where the tendon ends, and it took me some time, over a period of four months, to complete this.
And as the wound reached a certain size and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did not immediately remove it but rather continued to refine and devise methods of extraction until one day I began to extract it using specially made forceps, according to the form described at the end of this chapter; and then I restored the wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the wound healed properly, and the patient recovered completely without any further cause for concern.
And I advise you about the quality of extracting certain arrows in order to establish this rule and its significance regarding what I have not mentioned, since the parts of this art and the definitions of them are not comprehensible through mere narration or without referring to the book.
And skilled artisans compare with a few words; and with what is present concerning what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes foreign to the art when such occasions arise.
And therefore, I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
Of that which is wounded by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is drawn out and removed.
And if he does not obey the order to remove it at the hour when he catches it, you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals, and reduce its traction and its exit.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey the order to remove it, you should leave it for some days and gradually reduce its traction and movement each day until it can be removed.
And if he does not obey the order to remove it for some days, then you should perforate around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the place is enlarged around the arrow, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already hidden in the body and has escaped detection by sensation, you then probe for it, and if you feel it, you now direct it towards some instrument which is suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise around the wound so that it is enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
And if it is held by the ears with those parts attached to it, then remove the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as you can; and work on this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh at the fracture of the ears and twisting them until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from wherever it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it obeys; and carefully with the utmost care that the arrow does not break and that it be made easier to attract it and extract it.
And if you cannot manage this at your current time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less swollen and try again when the situation is more favorable. But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the relevant chapter.
And guard against cutting into veins or nerves, or tendons, and administer treatment in every possible way to avoid cutting the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I have advised you.
Therefore, you should bend the probe according to the figure of the patient's condition so that the fire of the cautery may be applied to it in a more beneficial manner. If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
However, for probes that are removed in the opposite direction from the other side, or if you have already processed some part of them outwardly, or if there is hardness near the end of the probe due to tissue above the bone being pressed and you lift that area; then you cut it there. The cutting should be according to the quantity taken by the forceps, and then pull out what has been cut since it will now be lighter in this way.
However, if it is retained in the bone, now twist the probe in the opposite direction to which the probe entered into the bone, and widen as you remove it, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then attempt to remove it when the condition improves.
And if the shaft of the probe is in it, now push it out with force.
However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, now insert and use it, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that it fits into the curvature of the probe's head and then push it out with force.
However, if the probe is concave, now push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it into the probe, for the probe will be easier to remove with this.
And if the bandage is poisoned, then you should change all the flesh in which it was placed, if that is possible for you, and afterward treat it with what seems appropriate.
And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and is so adhered that you touch it with the probe, and if it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve, and extract it, and afterward treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which bandages are removed:
Let the ends of them be shaped like the beak of a bird so that when they grasp the bandage, they do not let go.
And from these are made special hooks, large and small, according to the size of the bandage and its thinness or thickness, and according to the width of the wound and its constriction.
Like a rod so that it aids in the instrument entering the curved bandage and is pushed with it.
About phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which the blood is commonly drawn are as follows: xiii in number, and there are sixteen in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins close to the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on each temple; and two veins near the tear ducts under each eye, which are called aspicientz; a vein located at the middle part of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins in the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these latter are called algelic; — and there are also two veins beneath the tongue. Here are the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms: one of these is cephalic, and it is called wild rose; and people call it "the vein of the head," and sordas, and it is a median vein, and it is composed of one branch of basilica, and another branch of cephalic; and they name that one people "vein of the whole body"; and basilica is a vein which is placed on domestic rose, and it is called "cubital," and common people call this one "vein of the belly"; and flexor of the arm, and it lies over the humerus, and it is in that one in which bloodletting is performed, and it appears above the wrist by a manifest appearance; and savattella, and it is the vein that is between the thumb and the smallest finger, and it runs along both sides.
And in the foot and the ankle there are three veins: one of these is behind the curvature of the elbow of the wild rose; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the heel of the domestic rose; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the heel of the wild rose; and in the ankle there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic illnesses, emigrations, scabs, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; then strengthen the patient by holding their neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations near the ears appear in two places on the back of the head; and you must do this with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is when to proceed.
Take the lancet knife, and that is the one you should use, and then insert it below the vein into the bone until the blood flows to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the upper parts and incise the vein with an appropriate incision. And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers adjusted or around that amount; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And then apply powder and apply it there until it is healed.
And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cautery have been described.
But for the two arteries, the purpose of phlebotomy is to treat migraines from ancient origins and severe evil headaches and persistent acute discharges to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: instruct the patient to move their arm until the two veins become visible by clear appearance and feel the pulse below your finger; then proceed to test.
And then raise the bone above the vein to the upper parts with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below, and lift the vein up; and incise it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient's restraint, and place your finger on the vein for one hour; then place it on that spot and apply powder and bind it tightly above with firm pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
Thus is preceded the remembrance of them, and from that the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein of the forehead is appropriate for phlebotomy from the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and to migraines, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; so that the patient should sit with their arm bound in a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, whose shape is as follows:
Place the puncture point at the tip of the fleam above that vein and press it down with the hand or for another reason in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; and then release the patient from the procedure and bind that area until it is healed.
And in some cases, it is opened with a phlebotomy on the lat (side), but it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should be blunt. Perform that phlebotomy acrosswise since the bone is close and strong, and it would easily break if the phlebotomy were too fine.
But the benefit of the two veins that run along the tear ducts of both eyes is for treating itching of the eyes, stiffness, and excessive secretion in the eyes, and also for diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient sits with their arm bound in a bandage, and then you perform the phlebotomy on those veins while you are standing over the patient's head.
And let phlebotomy be performed transversely along a short stretch, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the vein is fine, the extremity of it will easily break off.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those knots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent chills, and for diseases of the face and migraines and stiffness that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own neck and then with your left hand hold their nose at its midpoint, and take a fine lancet and place it in the middle of the head of the nose along a straight line, for the vein does not appear to the touch here, and the blood will begin to flow soon.
Move your hand slowly and gradually with the small phlebotomy tool and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins can lead to constriction of the eyes and the beginning of leprosy and many diseases and impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those veins is that the patient holds each one below their own neck with a band; and let the practitioner stand over the patient's head, and let the patient sit on a chair.
Regarding phlebotomy of the long vein, make a small incision gradually larger as needed; and draw blood according to the season or quantity required by necessity; and then treat the other veins similarly.
And then remove the bandage and gently separate the two veins at the constriction so that the patient is not overly distressed, and leave it inside until the illness is healed.
And for the benefit of phlebotomy of the larger veins, it applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and its surroundings.
The quality of phlebotomy for these veins is that you should have the patient facing you, and secure their neck with a bandage. Then, pull back the lips to examine two veins: one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each vein, and this is especially true because in the area around them are small black veins. At that point, you should incise each vein carefully.
But if you are in doubt and do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the larger of the two veins, and from the more evident pus.
And treat the two veins that are above the lips similarly.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is in phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for headaches, diseases of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
Of the quality of phlebotomy in that it follows the patient between your thighs before the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below his tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to proceed too far in the phlebotomy of these, for below these are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend where it is customary to do so in all men, and the phlebotomy of these is done in two ways, either they place a phlebotomy mirror with a blue or olive color tending towards subtlety; or use a sharp knife for phlebotomy, and feel if it hurts, and this is the form of it:
Let the cuts be made as needed, and it is appropriate to open the veins that are concave, full, and have obvious thick roots, and those that contain thick clotted blood.
And this veinotomy is of lesser width and has a more delicate tip, and it is appropriate for veinotomy of finer veins that contain thin, clear blood.
But the benefit of veinotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that burden the head and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing veinotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to act with great caution, as there is an artery nearby. If he makes a mistake in the puncture of the veinotomy, he may cut into that artery and cause excessive bleeding. Therefore, one should not perform veinotomy on it with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutter like scissors.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another, or seek any branch that might be present; or perform veinotomy at the end of the arm, as this vein is clear there. And cut that with a veinotomy cutter as we have said.
But if you want the veinotomy of the median cubital vein, then it is necessary, before the constriction of the arm, to touch the location between where you know the location of the wrists, and then press over a firm area; and then stretch the arm and cut the vein in a concave manner with a veinotomy cutter as we have said; and be careful not to injure the artery by pressing too hard in some spaces near its location.
When you see, as you bandage the cloth, swelling in the place that you marked with a probe, then that swelling is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and thin, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you cut and pause your hand above that for a long period of time; and soon after, press your hand there, and if the blood is cut off, how many times it has been cut off, then you bandage the arm and leave it like that.
And keep the patient away from any mucus coming from them, and let them be in overcautious fear of it and do not allow that for several days until they are healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and you are without proper medical assistance, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of them is contracted, and the blood has been cut off; or take a piece of cloth, and fold that, and take one half and bandage that around the place where the vein is constricted with a tight bandage and with powders on the other day.
And now if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then treat that with what has been prescribed for stopping the flow of blood at the location of the powders.
And the cutting off of their blood is difficult in many conditions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful in extracting blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; as we have said, this is composed of parts of basilicum and parts of cephalicum.
Here is the translation:
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And here precisely, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to an artery nor a nerve.
However, it is often the case that an abscess exists in some people, even though phlebotomy was not performed on them in the first attempt, and you should not neglect to address that abscess.
The first of these is about understanding that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and as a precaution against the onset of diseases. It should be performed on one of the veins located in the arm, which are: cephalic, basilic, and (likely referring to another vein). Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in both spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of congestion appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
And let phlebotomy be administered whenever convenience and necessity require it, by night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, nor on a woman who is pregnant before the fourth month and after the seventh, and elderly women who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And when someone wishes to be bled by some method, it is appropriate for them to cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a laxative enema if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not redirect excess fluids to the phlebotomized areas, which are purified, and so they do not burden the principal limbs.
And do not bleed patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, nor those in the early stages of illness or intoxication until these conditions have subsided, nor those with dropsy. Also, phlebotomy should be avoided near the onset of colic, vomiting, and abdominal issues, as well as after excessive labor, exercise, fasting, or vigilance, and from any cause that weakens either bodily or animal spirits.
And before considering phlebotomy, take into account the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick, by means of food and drinks, and medicines if that is possible.
And before proceeding, take a bath if there is no prohibiting cause, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
At the pause of bloodletting on that day, it is about the hour of terce, as we have said.
And you should ensure that the day of that operation is guarded from all harmful animal incidents, such as bites, anger, fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive work and pain, and similar risks.
And at their bedside, one should have present the causes of pleasant aromas and scents, as well as balms and similar items in quantities according to what is possible.
And the bloodletter should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who needs to be bled.
And then draw back their arm, and clean it with his hand twice or three times; and then tighten the tourniquet with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And the constriction should be timely, for if the constriction is not equal or if it is excessive, then it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, then it allows the blood to flow improperly.
And after the constriction, have the person who is to be bled rub their hands together vigorously among themselves until the veins are swollen and become clearly visible.
And then the bloodletter anoints their lancet with a little proper olive oil; and then places the index finger of their left hand on that vein, at the place where the bleeding is intended, so that the vein retreats slightly, and the percussion is firm because among the veins there are those that feel like a fleeing cord for bleeding, and these are full of air, and when you press the lancet onto that one it contracts away from the lancet, and the bloodletter is deceived; and the lancet does not pierce the vein, and if it does, that one is narrow.
Therefore, let the phlebotomist be fixed in place and attentive to all these causes.
And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, that is good; but if not, then try another place, or wait a little while and return to it later, especially if there is inflammation at that location.
And if the area is abscessed or if there is pus, then you should leave it for one day or two, and do not bind it tightly, because it will strongly attract an abscess if bound too tight, nor should you enter a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then repeat the phlebotomy at that spot carefully and adjust the incision slightly, and do this quickly before the location becomes abscessed, because the location often becomes abscessed with just a slight incision.
But if you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it will be of no benefit to you; and apply some part of the mixture of oil on it, as it facilitates the flow of blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in every phlebotomy where you phlebotomize veins that are difficult for blood to flow through, and use this mixture when you pause from one of them on the location, because the blood is refined and becomes thin when it is thick.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which happens often, especially to those who have not been bled recently or only slightly, and then you come upon it, apply a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and leave that on for one hour, because it dissolves.
And cover that with the dressing of the blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if after some days in that place there remains any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to it some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or calamine or something similar.
And often there occur abscesses and swellings that require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
And so place your hand on that area, and if you find softness upon compression on it, then that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to apply any of the things we have mentioned to it, for blood may easily flow from an artery.
And apply a plaster that has astringent properties to harden the area, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
And it is necessary to draw blood from a person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and likewise, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is reduced.
For those who are healthy and strong and have a need for bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and let the bleeding be slow.
And for those who are frail, do the opposite of that, and let it be done in small amounts at different times, and let the bleeding be quick.
And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should cure them before the phlebotomy with a little bread infusion instead of lemon seeds or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
And if they are anemic, then take before the phlebotomy bread infusion in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic honey seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in a fragrant and sweet syrup.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of sweet blood, then take drinking water of meat and a subtly fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with sugar, and let them drink it immediately.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve his blood for a second time, it is appropriate according to that which phlebotomy is for mild evacuation, and the strength of it is fenugreek, which gradually evacuates the blood in small amounts, as is according to the quantity of the strength over continuous days.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and take out his blood for a second time, and whose body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But for one who wishes to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction from the side toward which it inclines, it should be opened on the second day or the third.
But in the case where there is already hot and thick blood that causes fever, it should be drawn once in large quantities until fainting occurs, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to prevent death instead of fainting, as this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to open the vein and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, as this is harmful.
Handle the area carefully so that it can be phlebotomized a second time; or massage that place with the heat of the phlebotomy that has caused coagulation in the vein's orifice; or apply something of turpentine, or sage, and press gently until the blood is out.
And if the vein is inflamed, at that time do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And when the vein called "the rope of the arm" is incised instead of the fossa or basilica, if they are not obstructed or hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of the phlebotomy there is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water until the finger turns red and the vein appears clearly.
And then apply pressure on that part with a tight bandage; and then perform phlebotomy according to the small transverse vessel, not laterally or longitudinally.
And let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy on that which you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand be a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from putting your hand in cold water, and similarly, cooling the blood in cold water is paused during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because here there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tie your hand or someone else's hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the observer; then cut across that vein; and if you do not incise it entirely, this will not be effective.
And do not release your hand after the phlebotomy, for leave it so that the nerves of the aforementioned area bare of flesh are exposed.
And then immerse your hand again in the hot water and let the blood flow freely there, for if you do not immerse it again in the hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and the flow will be obstructed.
And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then press on the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not seal up immediately; and similarly, you should do this for all such procedures.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein on the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in this phlebotomy as you have done in the other one.
And the benefit of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar ailments.
Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient immerses his arm in warm water and makes friction thereon until the veins appear; and he places a cord above the joint of the arm where it bends, and the place of the vein to be opened is apparent below the said joints, and from this spot branches extend over the surface of the arm like little branches.
And so, phlebotomize the largest branch below the bend beneath the joint of it, for it is better and more effective.
And if you phlebotomize that on the surface of the arm, then be careful of the nerves which are below that on the surface of the arm, and pause your phlebotomy when you feel one, as if you wanted to cut across it.
And so the phlebotomy is completed.
But if the emission of blood is prohibited; then immerse the arm of the patient in warm water and allow the blood to flow there until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly above or below it, for the location is effective; and do not fear this error, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the phlebotomy of the other arm in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the joint behind the thigh.
And the benefit of phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the hip when it is caused by excess blood.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into bath, and hasten and tighten the skin of him at the breadth between above the heel above four fingers in a bandage thin, for it appears not save by this.
And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle that is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or sever that by section, for the place of him is salt.
And it is in words a man weak; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand behind the finger auricular and the finger anular.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
And then loosen the bandage and pause over the place of the phlebotomy cotton and tighten the place, for lightly it is healed.
Of bleeding and of the qualities of using those.
Bleeding is usually from veins, or arteries, or vessels.
And bleeding is done according to two methods: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without incision.
And this bleeding that is without incision is according to two methods, for it can be with heat or without heat.
And for the veins that are usually administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, among which one in which bleeding is paused is called alnocrati, and it is at the back part of the head; and another location is near both sides of the neck; and bleeding from the chin below the jaw next to the mouth; and bleeding from the two cheeks; and bleeding from alohoster, which is above the earlobe; and bleeding from two small veins, one on each arm; and bleeding from two tendons; and bleeding from two skin areas.
Of bloodletting do not extract the blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by that you do not capture the virtue through those, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done near fire or without fire in any disease caused by retention until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some times.
And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that bloodletting be done after two or three hours have passed from midday.
The benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it alleviates heaviness in the head and what causes sinking of the eyes; but it should be done close to when the entire body is evacuated.
And this incision is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not appropriate to use that which is of full circumference, or in which there is a catarrh, because it causes great harm.
And for that reason, it is not advisable to use those that are old, and in which there are usually chronic illnesses.
But if it continues to be applied continuously over it, forgetfulness may occur; and for that reason, you should command the operator to pause their hand a little above the cup at the edges, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But cupping on the nape is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for that reason, it benefits asthma, constriction of breathing, rupture of the respiratory organ, coughing, and congestion.
And it is necessary for the cup on the nape to be raised a little, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And cupping on the back of the head benefits pain in the head and ophthalmia, headache, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And it is necessary to command the cupper not to press his hand near the incision so that he does not injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And cupping below the chin benefits alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and symptoms similar to those diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Make the ventilation which is made with the two spatulas according to the caphtan, which is made by an abundance of heat.
And the ventilation of the two parts inside the focus should be done with vigor for the phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventozator not to proceed with incision, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it so as not to harm the nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventosa with which one applies suction over the hemorrhoids and uses it for ulcers while leaving them exposed.
And it is necessary to command the ventozator to use a large ventosa and let it be of medium size, because the area you are treating requires strong suction; and after applying powerful suction with larger ventosas, use smaller ones gently and perform incisions.
Use ventosas of the smaller kind with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body, and apply them to chronic pains in the loins and back, and to the bladder; they also induce menstruation and are used for bothriosis and ademil; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphena veins, alahorcoben, and two cavilha.
However, they weaken the entire body and can cause syncope in some people.
And for the alahorcoben ventosas, the vigor applied should be proportional to the vigor used with the two-sided ventosas.
Regarding the quality of the position of the cupping vessels, place the cupping vessel at the beginning and draw it off promptly, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but place them gently, and leave them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site by event. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the hardness of the blood becomes apparent.
Now you should make small incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and then carefully observe the condition of the body.
For the person with tender flesh and few pores should be scarified only once, not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to enlarge the scarification slightly and prolong it a little, and apply suction with ease and facility.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first session the path for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second session, proceed with the acquired scrutiny for extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is murky and contains impurities, then perform the third scarification so that it achieves the desired result.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform prolonged scarification.
Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the cut is only so much.
And if the one whose cut is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or olive of mustard seeds, or chickpea oil; and if it is in winter, narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be henna oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
But if the cupping vessel has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for this, the areas around where the cups will be applied should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or chickpea water, or borretia water, and similar ones.
And for the one whose blood is of thick moisture, wash their cupping areas with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar ones.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their cupping areas with old vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar ones.
And it is necessary that the cupping be done before bathing; it should be administered immediately after bathing within an hour or two, and it is advisable to rest after the cupping.
What is needed so that bleeding may be regulated after phlebotomy before cupping.
Consider this at the beginning: if the venesectionist or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is wind over the hot blood with inflammation, then it should be that he takes cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
And pause their food such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and things similar to these.
And for the one whose constitution is cold, he should drink rose syrup, or syrup of saffron from seeds, and sumac, and a mixture of moderate strength between noon and night; and it should be recommended to him to use little drinking and eating, and to pause foods such as poultry and canaries and sparrows and small birds and dove.
And it should be that on the day of venesection and bleeding, drinking should be more than food.
And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac alpharab, or medicine of musk, which is nutmeg, or alcelita before venesection or bleeding or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood becomes refined; and they should not take those hot substances.
However, the venesections that should be done without incision should be performed on areas above the abdomen, over the liver and spleen, and at the navel, in the places of the ribs, and the pectoral region, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
And this is not sought by those means but rather attraction of blood from a limb, just as we use a cupping glass on the breast in the disease of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve the flatulence which inflames and thickens the limb, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it up and removes the pain by resolving flatulence.
And it is applied to the sinuses when they are obstructed or diseased, for by virtue of attraction it raises obstructions and eradicates the disease from its location.
And similarly it does when applied to the liver and bile due to flatulence, which is enclosed within them.
And these cupping glasses are administered only with suction; and some are applied over fire.
And some cupping glasses are administered filled with hot water in diseases of the bile.
And this is so that the cupping glass may be full and larger; it can be hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of the cupping glass administered over fire: let the width of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of its body shall be half a palm; and in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, let it be half of it, the thickness shall be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
It should be made of ox horn or citrus, with thick edges, lion skin, sealskin, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
And place a candle across the middle of the lamp or iron, where it is set by the fire.
And this large suction device is greater than the one we have recommended; and its size should be adjusted according to the illness and the condition of the person using it.
And the suction devices for children and those who are weak should be different from those used by young and strong individuals.
And the quality of placing this suction device over the fire on the limb is to extend the tube over the wood fire moderately in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it at the middle part of the cross bar in the proper location of the suction device, so that the flame is lit around the lower part without burning the patient's body.
And it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the tube should be on the area we have mentioned, such that when we have the suction devices and do not want to hold the tube and allow the vapor to rise over that area, the suction device will dissolve quickly.
And light the tube according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
But in the suction device used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or tube, and it is administered only by being filled with water and placed on the limb.
And this is the form of it: This suction device should be larger in size, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter xcviij.
Bloodletting should not be administered in movable parts but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping because of their smallness, such as the gums and similar areas; or on fleshless parts, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the clear waters downstream from clean places.
And then leave them in clear water day and night until they are hungry, so that no cause remains in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on the affected area.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if suction from the area with cupping is possible, it is better for improvement.
And if not, now wash the area with warm water and then with moving water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the blood vessels near the leech bites become extended and there is residual blood, now place a cloth on cold water, and apply it until the residue is absorbed.
And if the blood is flowing excessively, now sprinkle powdered vitriol or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or place masticated fava beans on the area, and leave them until the beans stick to the area, and the bleeding stops.
In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspending, at that time it should be washed with fresh blood or place a needle in the spots until blood flows; and then they should be paused, for those which feel any blood will immediately stop.
And when you want them to stop, powder over those a little of ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will stop immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is repeatedly necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations, accidents involving the bones.
Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the unlearned, as well as those who for some time have not regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time, nor have I acquired what follows except through prolonged reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my knowledge and upon which I have passed my experience; now I abbreviate it for you to free it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of clarification; and form many forms of the instruments used in that, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of what is necessary for the treatment of fractures of bones, from which a preliminary understanding is required before we begin to recall the parts of broken limbs and their various types. Therefore, let us begin with the prologue of this chapter by summarizing the discourse; and the chapters will be such that at their beginning it is necessary for the practitioner to stand firm in the truth of them; so that you and those like you, who wish to know or learn this noble art from others, may do so promptly.
And so I say that when it happens to someone to have a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to decide at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to bandage them, or both simultaneously, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it is a child who has happened to them, or an elderly person in debility, or if it is a time of extreme heat or cold.
And let them be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure that there will be no abscess or pus formation, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And now return the patient to their original regimen, which they were accustomed to before.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, now it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, hens, fresh pork, and similar foods, and with this regimen the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the bones in children as well as in old age and in the first year of life cannot be set or consolidated by nature through the drying up of the members.
However, nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone for all parts due to a cause similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens until they are completely conjoined, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting it from completing its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to avoid heavy foods and viscous foods that are thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the arm is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the thigh; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
And you will find a description of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
There is diversity in the nature of fractures themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for one type of curved fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft and splinters and non-continuous breaks, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, there is a fracture due to plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration, of which there will be a separate recall in their respective places.
There is a sign of a bone fracture. And by water it is known whether there is a fracture of the bone: its twisting, and that elevation and appearance which are felt by touch, and what happens when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no visible twisting or swelling, it must be done by touch: when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be twisting or a small fissure, therefore do not press that with your hand and by compression of the whole area; however, place something upon it from among the medicines which are mentioned shortly before the moment when you will treat the location; and nearby it should be narrow due to subtle constriction.
And you should know that the place where it is bent and not split into two or more of those that do not occur in its damage, as is described throughout this part of its comparison, then you should begin from your time to correct it, provided there is an abscess near it.
And if there is an abscess near it, then leave that for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it in whatever way you can with lightness and care.
And you should know that the restoration and alignment of it are easier than for the bone in which such damage occurs.
And then strengthen that according to what will be recalled next.
But if there is swelling in the bone due to damage, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or by your hand if the member is small; or by two cords or one cord and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb in a location equal to its natural figure, while the parts so extended from the broken limb compel you to return those additions to their origin and according to each way that you can in their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm falls upon the patient because of your operation or injury; and compel yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is fitting that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you find any divergent cause, correct that and equalize it according to the measure of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish surgeons often cause an abscess to occur due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen due to their careless operations.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of each one.
And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
And for those that are thick like the thigh or the calf, it is necessary that in these a wrapping of leather and something hard be used, because the leather wrapping connects the large and strong limb with tightness from all sides, so that nothing harmful can enter.
And immediately after you begin, after your evacuation of the wound, pause conveniently for this, on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four as the limb requires; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
And then bring it to the uppermost part of the place of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your binding does not hurt the place where you have tightened the fracture. And then extend the wrapping of the place of the fracture a bit, and loosen the binding little by little, until you reach a large part of the area.
And then take another bandage and wrap that place of the fractured area again with a wrapping, and then go to the lower part of the wrappings from the fracture; and let your work be in tightening the binding and loosening it as we have said about the first wrapping above.
And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of cloth or linen on which the curvature of the fracture is equalized, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made shortly thereafter if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time pause using what causes the abscess to form and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the plasters.
Let the splints for the middle of the reed shaft be well made skillfully; or let them be of oak wood; or of palm ribs; and let each splint be of this size and shape:
However, the splint that is placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; then bind the splints together with a bandage as was described in your first dressing, and tie it above decently as we have said about dressing, and it should be that your dressing is tighter at the place of the fracture, and the farther it is from the fracture, the looser the binding.
And the threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be soft; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some people's bandaging with cords made of twisted thread, it is a great mistake, for when you apply the dressing unevenly, it causes problems.
And similarly, very fine threads are not appropriate, for you will not achieve with the dressing what you want, and it should not be less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient complains of pain at the ends of the splints near the dressing in those places, then place soft wool or knotted cloth underneath where it does not cause injury.
In some cases, a fracture is accompanied by bruising, and there may be disruption in the bone, and I will recall this in that chapter according to its particular nature.
And you should know that not every broken limb is dressed with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on splints until about five or seven days later, or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of swelling.
And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of a plaster made from bran for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complete bones and mostly for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered bran, which is the fine flour that comes off the walls of the mill due to the movement of the millstones.
And prepare that as it is, but sieve it with egg white, and use the preparation neither too thick nor too thin.
Another method for a plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe includes asafetida, lapidanum, acacia, hyssop, migraach (which is the seed of wild millet), each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half a drachm; alochil two drachms. All should be powdered and sieved and mixed with almond water or egg white if the condition of the injury is hot; then use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, suitable for men.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe includes migraach (seed of wild millet) and myrtle bark each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half a drachm; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole two drachms.
All should be powdered in a mortar with a crushing tool, then sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and applied.
Method of applying a plaster to joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for pain resulting from these and for cracks and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil and place it over the site.
In this plaster, there is no restorative virtue, but it is useful for suppurating sores and properly expelling pains.
Another method of a plaster that restores a broken bone: take leaves of the mulberry tree and leaves of the wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of a quick plaster to be administered after the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take root of plantain, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all ground and boiled in vinegar, if the member is not inflamed.
But if it is inflamed, now mix that with coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess after the restoration of the limb: take root of plantain and seeds of linseed, and buckthorn, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, of each equal parts; all should be ground and boiled in sage water or in warm water or in vinegar, whichever suits the condition of the limb and the color of it.
But Hippocrates does not say in his book to apply it to the broken limb after its restoration except for wax made of wax and oil and nothing else; and recommends that it be midway between coarseness and fineness.
May is used from Gaulish wine which it is seen that they place over the broken limb after restoration due to the drying effect of its slight heat just as myrrh, and similar to those causes which we have recounted.
Method of making a plaster for injury and pain: recipe using egg white, linseed, human hair cut or bird feather, oak bark, and salt, all in equal parts; they are ground, sifted, mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
The amount according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains and should then be loosened is such that you consider whether there has been no accident of pain or swelling, nor is the bone broken or displaced; therefore, do not loosen it for several days. And if there occurs severe pain or swelling at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a piece of cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in cold water, with which you wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for one hour; afterwards place on it pure wool submerged in vinegar and oil or scented oil, and bind it over it for a night until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it is relieved.
And then iterate that gentle wrapping and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first constriction, and gently treat it until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all such occurrences have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and wrapping, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause occurs to the member of those we have mentioned, then you do not loosen it but after three or four or ten or seven days; and sometimes all this is left loose for twenty days according to what appears to you in the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it becomes accustomed to the coagulation of flesh over it.
And now adjust in the constriction more than in your first constriction entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was previously mentioned.
But if you see the location of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is appropriate, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, apply tepid water to it every time you loosen it; do this for all three days; ease the constriction a little, and through this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it will be healed quickly.
But what those foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as appropriate and is restored according to tortuous methods, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear, and if this were true, it would greatly enlarge what the Ancients wrote about it in their books and warned against.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do this.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a hard object, which removes all the bone inward to the suture, leaving behind only that part of the bone, just as it would in wood; thus this type is called an incisional fracture. Or a hard object cuts some part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not penetrate beyond the surface; this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
This is about the severity of these two fractures, either major or minor, and of a fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion by something weak or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the periosteum below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is either major or minor.
And this is a fracture that affects the bone in its subtlety, in the small fibers, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is called capillary.
And this is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by being struck with a stone and similar circumstances, which causes some plate of the bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it occurs in the concave location as well as when such things happen to the bones of the arm when they are struck and break inwardly.
And this is more commonly done in the bones of children's bodies, just as with the heads of infants.
And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately. And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
And you can recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their symptoms and the appearance of damaged flesh that is on them.
And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned and examined with a probe, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that they signify by manifest indication fear, as is vomiting in anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and similar such symptoms of the intestines and hardness of them, and likewise with other major dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of them.
The cause of which is clear if it comes to you as a complaint in the beginning as it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, since what is around the bone may become corrupted by pus, and for the symptoms we have mentioned to occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the scalp covering the head and is in small pieces and scattered, then it is necessary that you incise the comminuted and scattered part as I will relate to you.
And you should shave the head of the patient who is injured, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best as possible according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone, bleeding, or an abscess requires caution, then you must be careful with what is necessary, and it is that you cover the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides, and you are sure there is no further bleeding; then proceed with circumferential treatment of the bone and its removal.
In this way it should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you cut the bone with an incisor of such and such a shape, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor to it, somewhat wider than that; and this is the form of it.
And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
And it is necessary to have various incisors, some wider than others and some shorter than the rest; and their tips should be sharp, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that you do not injure the head and cause pain to it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the incisors with the chisels, which are called non-profound chisels.
And they are called this only because these do not penetrate to the end of the bone of the head as far as what is adjacent to it, so that the chisel has a rounded tip or margin on top of which is the part below the head like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these chisels, each of which should be suitable for the sharpness of each bone, so that you are present with all the parts of the head where the tip is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should correspond to the sharpness of this part.
This is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the trephine to another location, and continue this process throughout to the amount of the thickness of the rib or around there.
And then incise with the scalpel what is between each piece of bone, and make it as fine as possible at the end for lightness, as we have said, until you remove the bone, either by hand or for some other reason due to preparations made for this purpose, such as tools like probes and fine forceps.
And you must be careful that the scalpel does not touch any part of the brain.
And when you have circled the bone with perforations, it will be separated from the brain if it is continuous there, and you will extract it; you should smooth and equalize that in the roughness of what is in the bone using a tool similar to a scalpel, but it must be thinner and finer than other scalpels.
And if any small pieces of the bones remain and you are concerned about them, now take that with ease using the tools appropriate to you; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac greatly praised; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, whose form is as follows:
And so the lens-shaped part is solid and does not split for any reason, and the acute part splits it into two sides along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part fits to the bone with the cutting surface being sharp against the bone.
And therefore strike with the saw on a small part to see if you can split all the bone with ease as it revolves, and be sure of the tissue that no accident happens in any way, and even if the physician were the most foolish of all people and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Now if any cause is attached to the bone of the tissue in some places of the bone, it will split that which is at the end of the saw that is lens-shaped, and deliver that which is with ease, for it is delivered without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue, and what is split off or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains rough with small irregularities, now you should file that roughness and eradicate those irregularities with fine razors for which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them appropriately at any location during your operation on the broken bone according to its shape.
And you should apply in your proportion at which you file the bone at the beginning with the broader of those razors, and then use progressively finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach applying the thinnest and finest of all.
In each of the other small, slender fractures and subtle fractures, you should provide care according to what is required for their correction.
And it is true that not all who have studied in that art are capable. And this is about what we have written concerning large fractures.
And if the fatty tissue is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in wine and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the swelling; and afterward apply a bandage to it, but tighten it only enough to cover the wound.
And keep it like this for one day or two until you are sure that no abscess will form; then loosen it and afterward administer medicines that are too drying, such as linseed poultice and flour of oats, and powder of vetches and of aristolochia, and similar ones.
And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is finely ground and apply them to the wound as dry powders; generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and it should not become infected or worse; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is pressed against the fatty tissue of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens it, and thus a serious illness may occur due to this malicious condition.
And it affects the swelling of the head, as when the bone is cleaned and especially when pressure is applied to its treatment, and there is discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider whether it leads to the illness we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful without any doubt.
And if the darkness does not come from the medicine that is placed upon it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine which causes the darkness, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and thereafter treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken in more than two parts at once above, or one of those rarely, because there are two bones there, since the part below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only ulceration, distortion, and swelling occurs to it.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce your finger into the socket of the nose, and align that fracture within with your middle finger, and press from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned at the end of a rod with some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And attempt the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then do so around the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
Insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and let each piece be large enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
One of the ancient restorers said that the pieces should be dipped in butter and changed every day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is advisable to dip the cloth in albumen from a cooked egg mixed with powder of flowers of malt; and then place it inside when the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, a piece of ox horn wrapped in linen cloth may be inserted into the nose instead of pieces of cloth, especially if the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do so, and if you prefer, use pieces of cloth.
And if another piece becomes inflamed, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or cotton dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or with honey water.
But if it does not become inflamed, now you should apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powder of flowers mixed with egg white; and then place it over a linen pad, and do not treat the nose with any other substance.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should dissect around them and extract them with instruments suitable for that; and then close the wound, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
And if it happens that there is an abscess inside the nose, now you must treat it with poultices and administer lead tubes within so that it may be completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not have an abscess, now observe if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
And you should therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right thumb; and press against the swelling of the fracture inward with ease at the outer part with your other hand; thus gently restore it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, now you should administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
And if there is concussion of the teeth with disruption, now strengthen those that you expect will break with gold or silver or thread; and immediately apply cerate on the fractured jaw, and then apply a double cloth, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of sole leather equal to the length of the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your binding method and convenient application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food that is easy to swallow.
And if you think that the shape has already been altered in any way, then at that time you should cut it and loosen that on the third day; and immediately correct what has already been altered by it and plaster that with powder of myrtle, egg white, or flour of cumin, once you have laid the cerate on it, and place over the plaster lion's wool.
And then as you apply and adjust that plaster over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for usually this fracture is cured in three weeks.
And if on another occasion an abscess occurs, then administer what we have mentioned often for its relief until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or embedded; then you should carefully extract those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the removal of such instruments.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount needed.
And then when you have placed those splinters, and none of them will be drained, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose until it heals.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Most often, the clavicle is broken in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without affecting the function; and it is easy to restore it. Or it happens that the fracture affects the function, and its restoration is difficult; or it is such that the fracture involves a condition.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture involves a condition, is such that you make two assistants present, so that one holds the patient's arm and supports the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
And then adjust the fracture with the fingers so that its shape is made according to what is necessary, and it should not have a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle to the outer parts, so that it reaches the preon, then the patient should be reclined on their neck, and place under the muscle a pad about half as large.
And the assistant presses the muscle below so that the bone of the clavicle is elevated to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with your fingers.
If you feel pain from the furcula and its joints, now is the time to cut into it and extract those irritations easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, now use your ingenuity to make an incision with one of the scalpels which you have prepared for this purpose, since you paused below the furcula with the instrument that serves as the ciphac; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
And it is similar to the hollow part of a bowl, whose shape it resembles; and its width should be according to what you need, depending on the size of the bone or its scarcity.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two ends as you see fit, and one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when extracting the irritation from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form a boil or cauterization, now you should approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form a boil or cauterization, now you should treat the wound with plasters and powders according to the extent of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess or cauterization occurs, now apply a plaster made of vinegar and rose oil mixed with vinegar, and place it over that area.
And do not let the splint be loose over the broken bone; and therefore see the patient every day, so when the bandage is loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
And place the patient's pillow on his neck, and below him a cushion to raise his sleep position slightly during the night; therefore, in this way, lift the support of his chest, and thus elevate the fracture of the collarbone by raising the muscles; or bind his arm to his neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless you find an abscess in the area immediately or within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see his face turned to it, and adjust around the constriction and restore it until it is set and the collarbone fracture is healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The bone is broken in the middle and not at the edges but along its sides.
And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is known only by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare him and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
And then pause over the place where you sprinkle powdered egg white and apply a lion's head bandage; and then pause with double-layered cloth powder; and then pause over the wound table, finely sprinkled according to the quantity of the spoonful, either all or at least a little.
But if you leave the wound table slightly concave in some places of the spoonful, then you cover that concavity with a lion's head bandage, and then press the wound table evenly.
And then apply a linen strip above with moderate tension and secure the wound table so that it does not move from its place.
And consider the bandaging each day; and every time it is loosened, reapply it and tighten it evenly if the wound has moved from its place.
And place the dressing on its usual side.
And the wound will be healed in xx days or in .xx5.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know for certain that it concerns the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone piece and place the chain below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle, should suppuration or cauterization occur here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of foot fractures.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains thus; but the extremities move as cicatrization and comminution occur.
And of the accidents when the middle of it is broken, it inclines towards the internal parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, weakness, vomiting blood; and a cavity is formed in the broken bone and it is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs by two or more ribs, and delicately perform the operation and the reduction in every possible manner suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
And then place over it plaster and cotton, and place beneath thin splints of wood or reeds or similar light materials, after which you wrap that in cloth; and then gently bind that above the broken bone without pressing too hard; and go around the binding several times along the back, and tighten that with moderate firmness; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it has softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in the area, then you should cut it out and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred by this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster, if you apply it to that part; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they join; and at their extremities, near the front part, compression does not affect them because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during the examination of the aforementioned ribs.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture of the aforementioned ribs according to the possible method, until it is set as necessary, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, as with the pain that happens when one weeps, and because the bone pushes against the membrane; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood result; and this is difficult to treat.
And the Ancients were skilled in treating that with powerful remedies.
And what they say is: it is necessary to pause from foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Let us proceed with what will not be a cause of easy generation of an inflamed abscess if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help is given for that.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and close to where the strength is drawn; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is full, making the bandage fit according to the roundness; and treat the ailment near where the lung disease from food and medicine is cured.
And if the cause of the ailment is forcefully constraining it so that it cannot be tolerated, and if the bone is pushed against the membrane with a puncture point, we fear for the ailment; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument that secures the healing process, the memory of which precedes, and that they cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should treat it and apply poultices in rose oil to the area, and treat the ailment with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let him lie supine on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae and the collarbone.
In some cases, there is a fracture in the bones of the collar, and treatment for them is similarly applicable to the vertebrae of the back. And when it happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at this time consider, for if you see their limbs already softened, stunned, and dead, unable to move them or extend them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no pain felt in those areas, then you know that recovery is not possible, and in such conditions it is fatal.
And if you move those areas and feel constriction in the said places when pierced with a needle, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck showing similar symptoms and want to know if they will recover or not, then at this time consider the patient's condition.
If you see that the limbs are already softened and observe similar symptoms as those affecting the arms, and when lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and sometimes they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at this point, there is no need to work on treating them.
But if none of those symptoms occur, then the cause is better and farther from being fatal.
And the treatment for them is to apply poultices to reduce the abscess until you place warm olive oil or boiled horse chestnuts on the affected vertebra; apply this repeatedly over several days until the abscess is reduced.
During the hours of pause, apply one of the soothing and restorative plasters, and bind it over that limb; and command the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where there is pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the callus of the bone has detached or for some cause it is separated from it, then proceed to scrape it over the wound and extract that piece of bone; and immediately bring together the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and afterwards treat it with one of the preparations that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is fractured and it is the tip of the finger, then proceed to insert your thumb of the left hand into the cavity, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and afterwards apply a plaster and splint, if you require those, and bind it.
And if you feel detached fragments in it, then proceed to handle that area, remove those fragments, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the Restoration of the Wound.
The bones of the arm are often fractured, and when they are broken, then their fracture is not simply a communication at the ends but are split along their length and deviate to the sides; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the location and puncture, and movement is restricted when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand in such a way as to bring it into alignment with the figure of the fracture until it is set.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as suits you by alignment so that it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the long bone that declines toward the lower parts, then have the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture. And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane next to it, and bind it tightly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any piercing of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity so that it fills appropriately, ensuring that it takes the alignment evenly, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an acute abscess occurs, then stop the extension of the limb and its restoration until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what is necessary to treat it as previously described; then return to the restoration of the limb, and bind it as appropriate.
And if the bones are displaced or fragmented, then you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary bone.
The auxiliary is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which involves taking a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from a high place.
Let the patient lie on a bench; then place the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the stick is attached.
Then suspend something heavy from that, so that the patient extends it to the lower parts; and then the physician should place the fracture along with its parts above, until the fracture returns as needed.
And another method is that the patient lies on their back with their neck, and suspend the patient's hand from the neck with bandages; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture along with its parts, and the other to hold below; and each of them should pull in their respective directions.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap bandages over the fracture on one side and over it on another side, and each of the two assistants should pull in their respective directions.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
And do the same with ease and skill, and when it is adjusted as needed and properly applied, then wrap it tightly without causing an abscess or injury.
If an abscess occurs and is cauterized, within seven days there will be no stricture, so pause on the linen soaked in vinegar for six times and rose oil so that the abscess can rest, then proceed with strength.
And the method of strengthening that is to apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap it with a wet cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand upon its own muscle.
And place the cloth and wrap it tightly around the support for the arm so that the arm remains in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture the splint that is widest and strongest of the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And then wrap around the splints with the bandage as I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture be tighter there. And when the fracture is more elongated, the bandaging should be lighter.
And thus, when you arrange the splints and bandaging as we have said during the time you restore the limb to its proper position, then proceed with it.
And if you fear an abscess may occur, then leave the bandaging and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bandaging on all sides for three days so that it does not happen in the place properly or inflammation; or it is prohibited food from reaching the member by disposition of excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will happen, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and place pillows under their head so that it is raised above the stomach.
And place a pad filled with wool evenly over it, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandaging is too slack; thus correct this all according to your skill.
And provide food for the patient according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; and then gradually increase the quantity of food.
For it is customary for the bandage and dressing to be tight for forty days; and then they should be loosened, a bath should be given, and treatment should be administered with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is still rough and irritated, then do not loosen the bandaging and leave the splints on for one day or even up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is the bone that lies under the little finger, and the other is larger and is placed below the smaller one, towards the thumb side.
If only the larger focus or the smaller one is broken, and if they are broken together.
And when the smaller focus above is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the focus below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse still is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller focus above, it is appropriate for the physician, after its restoration, to allow a short period of rest and ease until it is healed.
But if the larger focus is what is broken, then a more extended period of rest is necessary.
And if both focuses are broken together, then it is necessary to allow the most rigorous period of rest.
And it is necessary to place the hand in a cast after its restoration and extension laid flat on a pillow, with the wrist above all the fingers, so that the thumb is lower than the other fingers, and the patient lies on a sloping bed.
And there should be a pillow in front of it at the height or level of it, so that the patient does not have to work to reach it.
And one attendant should extend the arm from below toward the hand or with a cloth, and another attendant should extend it from above similarly.
And the physician should set the bone so that it heals in the best position possible.
And if in the setting of the bone you stagger, then at that moment reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
And if it appears in the injury that the bone is disjointed and it is not within your hope for its restoration, then at that moment act upon it and set it as we have described above.
But if the fracture is with an injury, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerot made from olive oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and place a bandage over it with gentle pressure so that the abscess yields; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powder mixed with egg whites; and afterward place strips; let the strip that is placed over that fracture be further away and tighter.
And know that the number of strips for the arm depends on the major disposition, or rather, whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones together.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is necessary to have less tension above the fracture or below it, apply the bandage a bit looser as was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is wrapped should be of a medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days. And if any cause arises for which adjustment is necessary, just as promptly the injury to the limb occurs, you should immerse the limb in hot water until that pain subsides.
And do not constrain the limb until it rests, and then return to the bandaging.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen them for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then the patient's arm should be suspended by their skill in making agitated movements, and let them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill of the practitioner.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist and the bones involved.
Know that a fracture occurs at the wrist and the bones involved, and if it happens to them, they usually require multiple treatments.
When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at that moment it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the arm on top of it extended.
And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should adjust them until they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless an abscess occurs which requires cauterization; and then place a bandage over it according to the size of the area, and you should have wrapped that in cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, and at that moment make it appear like a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold it with their fractured palm; then secure it with cloth.
And let the bandage be applied with cloth in such a way that it is raised, so that the palm can apply to the hand; and secure it as needed.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then it is necessary to place one bandage above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight; and then secure it, as when the hand is rotated at the wrist with the fingers wrapped.
And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a thumb, adjust it as needed and then secure it to the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then it should be adjusted and wrapped to that specific finger; or all should be wrapped continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of abscesses cut and opposed — both the warm operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone, in many cases, is broken and is felt according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies face down on their belly.
And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their proper position according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be extended toward the armpit at that point, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the armpit, then the bandage should be extended toward the armpit, and the extension should be towards the points below.
And the physician should align the bone on both sides so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper conjunction; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off any excess; then wrap the joint so that it reaches to just above the wrist and down to the base of the thigh.
And insert the bandage between the limb and the splint near the bottom of the joint, so that the ends of the bandage extend beyond both sides, and then roll over the splint and the limb any excess from the bandage.
And then place over the limb at the location of the fracture splints, and lay one strip on top of the bone of the splint.
And then fill the spaces between the splint and the limb with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is snug.
And then begin the firm bandaging starting from the middle at the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your wrapping should become looser, lighter, and softer.
And then extend both ends of the bandage downward to the ankle joint, and secure both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandaging is not loose from its position.
And then leave the bandaging in place as it is, so that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur to the limb; and if any such cause does arise, then cut it away from the binding immediately, and correct what has occurred right away, as we have said previously.
If there is in the bone a splinter of bone which must be removed, then you should cut around it as much as possible; and if not, place something over it and massage that area, and treat with whatever remedy preceded the memory until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by these pieces being fixed to it with bandages, as we have said about the assistant and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb that has been treated in this manner, a bad limp does not occur; but if it is restored alone, or without the other side being similarly applied, then it is necessary for the person to have a limp permanently.
And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that the fracture of the kneecap often occurs in this manner, but it also happens frequently due to trauma.
However, if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is due to injury or several injuries, and all of this is based on the sensation experienced.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be cut away, and then reunited with the said parts until they are joined together as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and fabrication.
Apply the plaster and place it on that round bandage if you need it; and apply something above it tightly as is appropriate.
And consider all the positions that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, so that whatever opposes any incident is appropriate to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a jaw fracture.
Know that in the jaw there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the jawbone; the other is slender and is called the finlike bone.
And some types of fractures that occur in the jaw are similar to those that happen in the two bones of the arm, and thus its restoration is done as with the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
And if two bones are broken and come together incorrectly, the jaw is distorted in all directions.
And if the finer bone is broken, the jaw is displaced forward.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it will be below, and such cases are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, alignment, and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
However, be careful if the jaw fracture is jagged with sharp points, as the extension should be gentle and done with great caution.
And when there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and you have straightened out the bones and completed all the necessary work, at that time take pieces of wood from pine trees which are prepared from materials stored in the ground, and make them similarly from palm branches; select those with slight grooves, not too wide, and let their length be according to the length of the arm, and place one end into the skin below.
And then wrap around each piece of cloth in two coverings according to its length, and place one at the beginning of the arm on one side and the other on the opposite side, with one end inserted into the skin near the wrist.
And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the arm is prevented from tilting to either side and thus remains in proper position.
And now apply a wooden brace according to the length of the arm; and place it in such a way that the arm can maintain its necessary movements.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a bruise as well.
And then consider the arm each day and study it carefully as per previous studies, and you should guard it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, at that time take action on it so that it may be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the ones mentioned.
To the scalp does not happen total fracture; but to the bones of the foot sometimes happens partial fracture; and to the said bones of the foot rarely happens fracture, and to them only happens healing in months of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and times those bones be raised above themselves between them, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared thus as mentioned.
And then places one foot on what is raised of those bones, and then steps on them, and presses, and binds them until they return to their proper places.
And then applies a plaster and stops above it, and below the arch of the foot places a small board with two flat ends.
And then strengthens that with the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, or broken or dislocated, and the procedure with them is as you know.
But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and align them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the bones of the hand. And then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly longer; and below the foot place the board as recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper positioning.
But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each finger a splint of its quantity wrapped in soft cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and make it stand on one end of the board below the arch of the foot so that it remains well secured.
It is fitting for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have spoken about; and prepare yourself for every circumstance with this one as well.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the coccyx in women and of the bone of the penis and of the shaft of the penis in men.
When the coccyx of a woman is fractured, at that moment make that incision in a reclined position, and shortly after incline her to one side slightly, and let her be held from behind.
And shortly after, the midwife fills the coccyx with cotton, and it should be done in the cavity as if it were intact; and then the woman should be bandaged, and her back should be raised little by little, for all of this is to ensure that before long she will be in front with the fractured part of the coccyx as if it were intact and the broken bone returns.
And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she has urinated, reduce and return that part according to the method by which you managed it at the beginning, and then return it to its original poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is then restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stitch to its mouth a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and then blow through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for this will cause the fracture to return.
Let it be filled with cotton and placed for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, administer at its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who studies and uses this my book; for such a fracture signifies to you in the major positions through straightness in its restoration and alignment, and thus you understand well.
But in the penis when it is broken, take a splint of wood, and place the penis on it; then bind it with cloth wrapping, and let it be bandaged, and afterwards left for three days or about that time, until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you treat them and perform bloodletting as soon as the conditions for bloodletting indicate it to you, as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then it is appropriate for you to treat it by restraining it in such a way that you powder on it finely sieved turmeric, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
If an abscess is cauterized, do not resume the restoration of the inner part until the ninth day, after which the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days either, for you may cause adverse effects.
If the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must act to reduce and align it with ease and in a short distance.
If the extension is not within your reach and the alignment cannot be done with your hands alone, then reduce it using this tool; this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such tools in various sizes suitable for treating all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round, and let it be in slight curvature so that it does not bend during compression upon it at the time of the operation.
And let it have sharp ends with margins at its extremities; and let the upper part be thick, while the middle part be narrower.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "λάβρα βουληντζ ἀτελέρμ", which means a slightly curved palette.
So that the extremity of it can be placed steadily with the affected part elevated above the protruding bone.
And apply it in one motion until the bone returns to its place, and is aligned with some degree of accuracy.
Therefore, try to align the ends of the broken bone between them, and if the end of the broken part is delicate and does not accept that tool as a good option, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert that part with one of the chisels which we mentioned; or saw that part with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains rough on the bone and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient still feels intense pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and at that point do what will greatly help the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer; do not place cerot or any other substance with oil on the wound, so that it does not cause decay and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the appropriate time for the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be careful at all times not to touch the wound with your hands during the fracture treatment, for many times inexperienced doctors have done this, causing death or chronic illness or severe harm to their patients. And if the swelling is soft, loose, different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the swelling is large or is a bad swelling, and you fear some of the maladies which we have recounted, and you feel pain in that place, then at this hour it does not suit to pause on those splints, but make an enveloping bandage of hard cloths instead of splints and lay them there.
And when after one day or two days the swelling begins to subside, indicating that the heat has been generated in it, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it, and soon apply poultices, among which are those according to our custom used for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
And it is convenient for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling each morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it should be such that the suppuration can run from it to the lower parts with ease.
If several days have passed and the swelling has not consolidated nor has the heat subsided from it, then you should know that here you are struggling with small issues for which you need to examine the swelling with a probe. And of those issues that are separate and removable, remove and extract them; but for those that cannot be separated and cause pain when the limb is moved, proceed to incise them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if the swelling becomes inflamed or infected, which is a sign of pus formation or some other form of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to proceed with one of those treatments that are appropriate for the cure, as described in the preceding narrative of the relevant chapter.
And when the bone is cut, it protrudes above the limb like the bones of the chest and shoulder and similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume traction on it, nor its extraction for four movements (or times), as death often occurs because of this; and then allow that one inside which can heal, for it will easily fall out in about twenty or thirty days; and meanwhile treat the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of stiffness that occurs as a consequence of some fracture.
This stiffness often occurs as a consequence of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and quite easily prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Then consider whether the stiffness is recent and administer medicines that have a binding effect, such as aloes, henna, myrrh, saffron, colocynth, and similar ones; take some or all of these, and combine them with either vinegar or egg white or plain water, and apply this mixture over the stiffness using a bandage and bind it tightly.
And leave the binding in place without loosening it for several days; then loosen it and apply another one until the stiffness is alleviated; or place a sheet of lead gently on it, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in limbs.
But if the stiffness has already turned to bone and is tight, and the necessity requires that it be removed immediately, then cut it at its weakest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some instruments until it is alleviated; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are restored and adjusted according to the natural position of the limb, gently and carefully.
When a fracture is restored and the limb is gently and carefully adjusted, it happens for several reasons: one of which is too much loosening or improper bandaging of the limb; or due to excessive tightness in the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of poultices; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their body soft so that blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply poultices and lettuce on them.
And placing plasters on the limb is appropriate, as the plaster draws nourishment to it, or continuing the application of warm water poultices, so that nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent the necessary operation from being performed on them.
When it happens that a limb, already restored near its healing, shows deformity, swelling, and knots in the broken bone, and thus appears to be recently fractured due to this condition, although the limb is not prevented from performing its natural function, you should not accept the opinion of those who believe the limb has been newly broken.
Let us know these states and conditions which the doctors and restorers have performed here; and this operation is highly reprehensible leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
If lameness and limping are recent, it is now appropriate to apply embrocations with tepid water in which soft herbs are soaked, such as althea roots and linseed, and melilot; and let a poultice of softening be made properly with dough or olive oil, and it should be applied with that; or let mucilage from linseed root be taken and mixed with egg whites or olive oil, and apply with that; or take fat figs and grind them with dove's milk, and similarly for the medicines called consolidatives.
And in some cases it is dissolved through frequent light friction, which should be applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is firmly set and has become hardened into bone and necessitates treatment with iron, now it should be that the pus above is evacuated and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and it should be cut away those superfluous parts of the knotting of that tissue with the bone with subtle cutting instruments, and ease in that should be administered through diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On Dislocation
Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of one of the joints from its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, causing severe pain and great injury.
Therefore, when an accident of a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it immediately so that it is set, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it then becomes difficult to perform the reduction of the dislocation.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate to move or stand during the time of inflammation, as doing so often causes spasms and pain in the teeth.
But when this happens, it is necessary for you to proceed with the incision of the abscess, and then allow it to rest until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, the limb should be bathed in hot water and oil, and then reduction can be performed with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with whatever remedy will come to mind for its care.
And thus I have organized the chapters on dislocation as they were preceded in fractures; starting from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in being treated; and the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their places by slight movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully separated, to the point where they are soft at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and where it cannot be closed, and the tongue is wrapped in its place.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its normal position by itself with minimal intervention.
If the dislocation is complete and perfect, it must be reduced immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should take the lead in error, and insert the physician's two fingers of one hand into the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both hands' fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other said movements be done equally with them; and command the patient to cease their jaw movement and allow those to move from each part; and the physician should equalize the jaw and push it in until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so when we return them and they are equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then apply pressure on those small pieces of cloth covered with wax, and let it be made of beeswax and oil softened; and afterwards it should be applied gently with ease using straps.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be placed between both ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food cut with scissors until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are healed, then allow them to eat as they wish.
And this should be administered gently, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not returned to their places, fevers frequently occur and continuous sweats, and the belly of the patient is easily distended, and vomiting pure bile occurs easily.
And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and frequently such a one dies within seven days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest within; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is apparent by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply a plaster and powders and strengthen that area.
But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you have prepared.
And then apply a plaster, powders, and bandages, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated to the rear by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front by the nerves.
It is most often dislocated outward below the tendon, and more frequently in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick muscles, it remains dislocated with difficulty.
And it often happens to some people due to a blow or fall that the muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and as a result, it is likely to become dislocated.
Then it is necessary for you to understand this while you are in charge of the case, and from there proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is below the tendon; thus, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you find a depression at the head of the muscle below the tendon upon touching, and the injured person cannot move their arm to their ear, nor perform such movements.
If it is dislocated below the tendon or above it, you will then find a clear and obvious touch, and it is not concealed.
Of this dislocation there is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand to the upper parts; and then places gentle pressures below the joint, lifting the articulation firmly into its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand, and extends it there; and then lets it go when it returns lightly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and the pain of the initial dislocation persists for several days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and a poultice be administered to soften and relax it as if for rheumatism, using rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let this be applied.
And then the patient is positioned on their back and placed below the joint while waiting for wool to be softened between levity and strictness, and then the physician places his thumb over the sphere, lifting the muscle upward with force, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, and another assistant holds the patient’s head, so that it is not hurt below, because it will immediately return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: which is that you make a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the affected limb, and insert their muscle below the joint of the patient and lift the joint upwards to suspend the patient in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below their abdomen. But if the patient is light, it is necessary that another person support them, so as not to strain that side, because the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is reduced in this way according to another method: and that is planted in the ground a long pole whose head is round like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, and then it is placed near the patient; once you place over the top of the pole lion skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched out towards the sides behind the other side; and his body is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that is you take a pole whose length is two braccia, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is tapered at the tip according to this form:
And then over the round head place lion skins so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then it is placed near the patient's tip, and his hand or arm is stretched over the pole towards the sides, and the pole is wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a ladder step according to its width, and the hand is stretched towards the sides, and the other body is suspended from the other side, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the instrument is completed according to each method that is possible for you, then place under the tip a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrtle leaves and egg white over the entire muscle, as it has been described above, and then bandage tightly around the tip with proper tension; and wrap the bandage around the plaster, and attach the patient's hand to their neck, and leave it like this, and do not disturb the patient's hand for seven days.
When the food of the sick person has been restricted for a short time, so that the member is strengthened, it is easier to achieve healing.
And when the food is given more frequently, every seven or five hours, and movement is exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to frequent exposure to moisture that occurs or for another reason, then it should be treated with cautery three times, as was said before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and compression are reduced several times, yet it is not firm and the hand cannot be raised to the sides, then you will know that the nerves of it, which control the muscle, have been severed or extended or softened, and you will understand that the joint will never again be fixed in its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
And the other compression should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur as healing progresses, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. And the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when it is seen below the view or below the touch according to some figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated one, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess due to heat, for if it reaches that stage, its reduction is difficult, and it is not easily healed completely; especially when it affects the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people die because of it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended by two fingers, and the arm be expanded, and the physician's hand should be on the collarbone below it, and he should press the joint with his fingertips or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is forward, then it should be returned by bending the hand with the palm, until it strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong motion.
And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both sides so that it is not moved during the extension.
And so the arm should be turned round on every side, because it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth or bandage.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may be for those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint and ease of movement; and then press the joint forcefully inward until it returns.
And so for the reduction of the dislocated shoulder, place it on a splint which has stiffness and stability with an egg bandage, and bind it tightly in a descending manner, and hang the arm from the neck, and leave it like this for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you may untie the bandage of it and leave it like that.
And if you see the joint not properly firm, then you should reapply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is bound up; and then loosen it.
But if it happens that there is swelling around the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer hydration through bathing and gentle friction, and compression, until it is calmed; or place cold applications on the joint, as this is a condition of inflammatory movement; and then bind it up, and leave it like that day and night. And then lift that, and place it in bath water; when dry, you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply cold applications, as this is a sign of inflammatory movement, once, and the second time, and the third time, respectively. take an instrument for bathing, enter where it is clean.
And if you want, place a poultice over that moist and inflamed wound at the border and apply it; do this for several applications, since that area is moist and reduce it to its proper condition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
The dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of this dislocation is easier compared to other joints. However, it is important that there be speed in reducing it at the hour when it happens, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the patient’s hand. The surgeon then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently presses it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If so, the patient should place the backs of their hands on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is towards the front of the hand, then the position of the hand should be such that it lies flat on the table, so that the surgeon's hand can apply to that vicinity of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then apply a bandage to reduce the swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this, for otherwise, you will neither endure nor be able to perform the reduction after a few days.
However, if the joint remains stiff according to its tortuosity; and you do not notice any other cause for pain, except that the muscle is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or severed, and at this time no remedy can be applied there unless it be hardened by cauterization, which also helps remove some causes.
Then when the pain has subsided, you should pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it remain and harden for five days; then afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
However, if the movement of it remains restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then treat it gently with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joint.
Sometimes the said joints are dislocated completely.
And when any of them is dislocated towards the thumb or towards the palm, then straighten the finger and apply pressure to its dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and let it be so for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened on that day.
And when it is night, bandage it according to the aforementioned instructions, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and bandage it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
If it appears thus, if it is dislocated from the palm of the hand, and join that to that part and do with this the first operation, until it be healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck that they are completely dislocated and the bones move out of their places, then there is no treatment for this, for death is feared for the patient.
And the sign of this is that the movement of the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of them or one side of them or two arms or one of these become weakened; or a vertebra is out of its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes it returns to four places.
Then when it is moved to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
But the treatment for this is that you must consider whether the kyphosis occurred due to weakness, because then there is no cure and it cannot be fully healed.
But in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients have described methods of treatment at length, from which I will summarize what is essential; but I will abbreviate that part for which a little explanation suffices because of my proximity to understanding and exposition, with which I have made this clear and structured using various instruments different from those used to demonstrate and explain it.
And of those, it is not cured except for that which happens in the two properly as I mention.
And it is that the patient lie extended on his face on a bed equal to the wall, and be stretched below the operating table so that the legs not touch the ground.
And near a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed by its head, and another pole around the feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister holds the pole, and it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And near wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a strong bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the pole which is behind the head, and tie that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the knees bent; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole which is behind the feet.
And then the minister should extend the bandage to the side of the pole, and do not move the two poles and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not too tight as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to position, or place upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until they are in proper alignment.
If the patient does not return to this method, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and dig in the wall near where we said the patient lies a place into which the end of the table can fit. And place the middle of the table over the spine, and the physician places his weight at the other end, and gently strain it until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open a ring that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head between the heels of two poles, the length of which should be one arm, and behind his head place the heels of two more poles in the same manner; and ensure there is a palm’s distance between each pole, and attach each pole to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be a round pole in which is the ring, and it should be wrapped around the two ends of the two poles.
And at the end of it there is an end around which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is wrapped; and on the other two poles there is something similar to that.
And then strain the ropes that you tied to the patient's feet at the end behind his head, and the ropes that you tied around his shoulders at the ring behind his feet.
And then behind each ring should be a minister who turns the ring with his hand, and the physician should straighten the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is necessary to apply a poultice of hot flour paste, and then cover it with wool; and afterwards place over the poultice a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should be equal to the extent of the swelling, and on both sides of the spine.
And afterwards wrap it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use mild nourishment until he is healed.
And if any stiffness remains in the area at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and lubricate along with the prolonged use of the board we have recommended; and a sheet of lead may also be applied to that location.
And at times stiffness occurs in the posterior part of the lower spine due to displacement; and that bone is such that it can lead to death if pressure is applied to it with this treatment, so one must be cautious not to do so.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with small movements and concavities.
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is more seriously dislocated towards the interior parts, and slightly towards the anterior or posterior parts.
The sign of the dislocation of the thigh towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the healthy side, it is longer and the knuckle is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their affected leg without pain, which is due to where the pus from an abscess has accumulated because the head of the bone has already reached there.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation outward occurs is that the symptoms are opposite to those of the aforementioned condition.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation towards the anterior occurs is that when he attempts to straighten his leg according to its full extension, it does not bend due to pain in the joint, and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so towards the front; and his urine is retained and his swallowing is affected by an abscess, and he walks on his heel.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation towards the rear occurs is that he cannot extend the joint, nor can he bend it forward as much as when swallowing, and his leg is shorter than the other, and his throat is softened, and the head of the bone is in that location.
However, the reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already settled in its position, so you administer reduction according to its disposition, but then it may not be entirely cured; therefore, it should not be expected to achieve full recovery at that time.
In the case of one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, place your hand so that you can turn the joint and extend it to the parts within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns to its place and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare someone strong and extend the arm from its side towards the rear, or place your hands under its armpits, or use a bandage which is laid over the upper part of the arm; and another person should extend their hand above and place their fingers below the elbow joints; and immediately apply a lion's ligature tightly around the shoulder joint, while having another person hold the end of the ligature.
And this extension of the arm or from the part inside to the angle of the shoulder blade, or from the rear part to the side.
And make the extension of all these in one motion while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all types what I will say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place bandages around the shoulder joint at the location where the head of the humerus and the area below the angle meet; and then extend the bandage from the part of the angle to the farthest part of the shoulder blade.
Let another strong minister take the limbs of the patient and firmly grasp the place near the joint that is diseased and extend it forcefully to its parts outwardly through extension, for it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of the quickest cure among those to which this member is reduced compared to the others.
But if you excuse yourself and do not obey the treatment for this species of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient together with a strong, quick bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each one be the quantity of four fingers, and let the diseased side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the patient be suspended over the top of the beam, and hold it with his hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be the length of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the limb, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth pulls the limb with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outward part, let the patient lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down; and let the bandage be tightly applied to the diseased side properly and over his feet.
And then two beams should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then place beams adjusted to the middle of the body laid upon which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the beam being between his limbs, so that during extension downward it does not pull him.
Let each attendant extend his part, and the surgeon with his art bring about the reduction.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended quickly, and according to this method described, lie on their back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's thigh, and with one hand grasps that area firmly, and while doing so, extends the leg from the rear part towards the front.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, but rather raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that they lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when the hip joint is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about positioning the body on two planks; and it should be on their side with the limbs extended, as we have said, for there to be healing.
And it is necessary to apply compression to the table at the location of the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of hip reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see them equal and the patient extends their leg freely without pain, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust two things and apply a bandage to support and immobilize with a bandage so that the hip is not harmed in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Now, if you see those marks on the skin, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and dress that area, and apply it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
Then undo that [dressings/bandages], and allow the patient to delay in walking on each [affected area] for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
The knee can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward toward the heel; it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of knee dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply pressure to the side; now you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all forms of dislocation is to have the patient lie on their side, such that they can extend their leg as much as possible; place your hand against the affected area, and put the heel between your hands; then hold the knee with both your palms, and pull those firmly around the knee with strength, while another assistant extends the leg so that the knee returns to its proper position.
And the sign of successful reduction is that the leg adheres to the side with ease and without laborious effort.
Apply the plaster to it and make the cup adhere to the wound, then bind those with a bandage for three days or four, and afterward loosen those.
And do not use the limb for movement for some days until it is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the thigh to the trunk is unnecessary, now administer extensive treatment with bandages, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation of it occurs either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle becomes swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment for its displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease and gradually returned to normal once it begins to heal.
But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, ensure that the limb is placed correctly, and let the patient have a strong and capable assistant behind him at the midpoint of the affected area.
And then place your right hand on the most superior part of it, and your left hand on the part below the foot at the location of the joint.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two attempts, and then extend with your left; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand around the cup with effort.
In this place let two ligatures be made as we have counted.
And then press the feet of the patient to the third ligature, and you will be at the nail.
Therefore, if it returns in one ligature or in two according to this method, and if the foot becomes swollen, it is good; and otherwise, at that time repeat the operation, for it will return.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce the swelling as we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a roller firmly on the ground under them, so that it fits between their buttocks, and you have wrapped them in a cloth so that they do not slide.
And then the attendant should hold the patient's body, and another attendant should extend the leg with their hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should stretch it as they see fit, and the roller should be placed between the patient’s thighs to keep it in place so that the patient’s body is not pulled downward beyond its extension.
And then the surgeon should manipulate the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy limb below, as the dislocation will return with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and tightly bind that with bandages, and secure the foot with bandages to the board.
And be careful of the nerves that lie behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
Let him stay like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, remove it.
Then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if he is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not respond to treatment.
And if it happens that the abscess is cauterized, now you must administer according to the description in our narrative concerning the place for treatment and application, in another location for care and dressing, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the said foot joints.
It is necessary that the one who is dislocated rest with some extension without work; and what is not difficult is best done quickly.
But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the two feet, now you must have the patient lie on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and place them as if they were walking.
And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot on the joint that needs to be corrected, and then press it with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, and see that it is now in alignment and does not appear raised.
And then place the foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it with proper and firm bandaging for three days; and then untie it and have the patient rest from walking for ten days, until it is healed and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Concerning the kinds of dislocations that occur from plague or fracture or any such conditions.
When any cause of those conditions occurs, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of it, often death results.
And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, with long practice, merciful and compassionate, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and use medicines at first that only ease swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but turn to him whom you hope will bring salvation from destruction or relief from illness, where some hope appears. And then strive to reduce it as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a dangerous swelling.
And then if the member returns as we wish, immediately administer a regimen that reduces dangerous swelling and treat the injury with what is appropriate from among dry applications.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you should proceed with their management as we have said concerning simple injuries in those parts.
And guard and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as my teaching has preceded; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful for your true body, which will be in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them. Amen.
