O, my children, now I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine. By its completion at the end and by its exposition, and by its explanations, it seems to me that I have rendered comprehensible to you the treatise which pertains to my practice, namely surgery.
For surgery in our region and in our time has been almost entirely deprived, except that the science of it was somewhat visible, and its traces remained; but we would know little about it beyond small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered many things and led to errors and hesitation due to their obscure expressions and weakened strength of the art.
And it seems to me that I should enliven this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as is necessary through addition of explanation and preparation, which cause is essential.
But the reason why a good practitioner is not easily found in our profession in this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be trained in the science of anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their numbers, and their positions; and of the pulsating veins and the static ones, and the places for their incisions.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name it is much, but in practice little, and even less in the art of the hand.
We have already said this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will inevitably fall into error through which men may die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that with no knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut into some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died as a result.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who was suffering from bladder stones, and the stone was large. He came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
And I had already called to remove that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew beyond a doubt that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land to perform surgery. He came to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the plaster over the fracture before it was ready, applying poultices and splints with too much force, not allowing the wound proper healing time.
And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon after he relieved him, and after some days commanded us to remove the bandage. And thus it was that the thigh and leg became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
And I was called to attend him, and I prepared to remove the bandage. Achieving some relief, he was thus freed from his pains.
However, once the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient's danger increased.
And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated near the armpit, until the malignancy greatly revealed its evil nature to lord so-and-so.
The cause of this is that the malignant condition is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect all parts equally, but rather it affects the member which can withstand being its host.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
And I have already discussed this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave aside this, so that the pages do not lead me to speak and thus dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what causes you fear, so that hesitation does not undermine your faith and reputation: for more remains for your glory, and after in the world and finally to your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered regarding the head and neck, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning incision and puncture, and of cupping, and of plasters, and of the extraction of arrows and similar things, fully chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered regarding the head and neck, and the forms of the instruments.
I will speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movement of cautery and of its instrument is long and verbose, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise men have spoken much about it, and they are discordant among themselves, but for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing to be protracted.
Therefore, I say that cauteries conform to all complete formations universally, whether they are made of material or immaterial substances, with the exception of two formations, which are tail-like formations without material substance.
In the tail-like and dry formation made of material, it dries out; for some say that cauteries are helpful in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauteries are not suitable for a disease which is due to quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate that a tail-like and dry disease be treated with something that is hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite are mistaken, that cauteries are beneficial in every tail-like and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, for when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
And I say according to the words of that person, that through experience I have already discovered this myself on several occasions.
But it does not suit him who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cauteries through previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human constitutions and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span of them.
But in other formations, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all doctors are now in agreement about these, and they do not disagree regarding the use of cauteries in them.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cauteries with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other members adjacent to it except for slight discomfort.
Here is the English translation:
Take the fire, by its elevation and goodness of substance, it does nothing but superfluify [sic], and already it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book at this place hidden secrets with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion process by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your possessions.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental circumstances is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted through cautery, and especially if the cautery is performed due to necessary pains or inflammations, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that such conditions could lead to greater malice, which is worse than a small harm entering with the times.
And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors, is that for the disease which is cured by cautery it is not suitable at all times, and they pause at the consequence.
And the reason is not thus because they think about it, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of the pains.
But yet, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of the speed of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the patient's constitution and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what has reached him through his acquisition in food and similar causes; but if it is a subtle illness with few superfluities and humidities, such as cautery for toothache and similar cases, it may not return that pain, but this applies to small matters.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of a craftsman, not what those who understand it say, for I believe there is no cure that benefits either from medicine or any other cause before applying cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment for certain illnesses, where other medicines are ineffective, and at the end of the cause, one applies cautery, and it benefits in such cases. And here from what was said before that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common and faults of foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have experienced this and have found that it works differently on different bodies; cautery with gold can be better than with iron as others claim. However, when you use fire to apply gold for cautery, it is not clear how much to prepare, since the hardness of gold requires proper adjustment; if you set it over fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and placing some plates in the fire helps the craftsman work with it.
And thus is made the cautery of iron, which should be applied lightly and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those for the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the seeker who asks for what they desire.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness that cause accidental headaches due to these two causes, which are caused by sweating and a large amount of rheumatic flux, called coryza, affecting the head and ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for the head cleansing, for three or four nights, according to what you deem necessary based on the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him to sit on a reclined bench and have him rest his head on his own hands.
And then place the palm of your hand above the nose, between the eyebrows, on the shaved area. But when the heat of your hand has reached that place, mark that spot with a needle, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
And then pause that which is sewn with thread, in such a way that it descends, with the membrane of which the wound must be gradually constricted, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of bone already exposed, as much as the quantity of grain in one ear of corn, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cold, until you can feel the bone which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place and let it be for three days.
And then sew around the wound embedded at the edge and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
And they say that when the plague ulcer opens spontaneously, it is better and more helpful to let the arm be so.
And some of them say that the cord should be cauterized to the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly against the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpechini (small burns): And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head emanate.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cautery used generally on everyone out of fear; and leave that one alone, for me it is better to be healthy without it. For the head is delicate because of the solution of continuity of its veins as we have testified in other parts of the body, especially when the nature of the patient's head is weak.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and with that one I can work more safely.
Chapter Second.
About cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head, and this is prolonged in the patient despite the use of plasters, compresses, decoctions, poultices, ointments, and other remedies, especially if cauterization with a previously used cautery has not been beneficial for any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution and not weak. If there is no significant tenderness, proceed to cauterize with another type of cautery below that one slightly. And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut the pain and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the vein is located. And take care in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient from this would discover great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And here I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is fitting that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Recent Wounds.
When severe pain is found in the upper part of the head, or if there is persistent pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that purify the head, and the other treatment which I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp combustible medicine, or with iron.
But if you use a cautery with a combustible medicine, then take a piece of wax, and burn it by extinguishing the ends of it from both sides. And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet, deeply enough for it to be done properly below the skin, so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with bandages by tightening them securely, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then loosen it and remove the wax, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and afterwards place a poultice on it soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
For the treatment of that which is inside, let it be healed with medicine.
And if you wish, use some of the medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
But when you cauterize with iron according to this method, use fire for the cautery, and this is its form:
and it is called a nail clamp, for its head is in the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small protrusion.
And then press on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered—and turn the iron slightly little by little with speed.
And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below does not adhere, so that there is no bleeding.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and afterwards apply honeyed bandages, and subsequently treat with internal medicine to heal.
And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radius according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this ancient procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cauterization of an ancient ulcer.
When you treat an ulcer as we have described in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, neither the first cautery with medicine nor the cautery with fire is sufficient, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the site of the pain in a line along its length, which is half the width of your finger or slightly more; and then hold your hand steady and press firmly so that it does not cut the artery but penetrates to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is curved due to mastication, and that the lizard [muscle] does not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it does not become spasmodic.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in its cutting there is danger, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
And here I will come to the reminder of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
And if you see this illness does not respond to these cautery treatments and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you perform the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, this is better cautery and more effective.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, which is called puncta. Here is its form:
And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part if the pain is in that part. Take the cautery of the cutting of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery of these points in the entire ear, and wherever it is needed, and take care of the places inside until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of the turtle.
The one for which treatment and cautery are not used is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of tumor with jars and capipurgi and gargle treatments, and if your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
And pause your cauterization at the opposite part of the diseased area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side at the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then above the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of a thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the amount equal to half the thickness of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type of knife, the form of which is set forth above. However, even more subtle is that which you see only slightly; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness, somewhat delicately.
And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on top of all the temples of their head; and one cauterization on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization on the nape. And the method of the cauterizations is done as mentioned above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and then proceed to treat it as appropriate.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization for forgetfulness done with live coal.
Give the patient large doses and pills of theriac at the beginning.
And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the nape as described in the chapter on plasters.
And apply it several times, for this is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the method I have already described.
And if this treatment is effective; otherwise, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which should be located descending from the highest part of the head towards the neck. And wait between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and then proceed to treat the cauterized area as appropriate.
If you apply it to the ulcer and it is able to tolerate that, then now make the cautery in the middle area; and if you want a greater effect, now cauterize it over the two horns.
Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and let the cautery be in the shape of an olive as given before.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed as you would in the cleansing of the head according to what has been said and what we have mentioned; then shave the head of the patient, and afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all the parts of the head, and with a cautery on the rear part of it, and with three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to do that and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside so that it is covered by the skin, and raise the heat moderately. Then proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And so you should cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of medications.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, at that time administer gargles and mouthwashes to clean the mouth, for two or three days, along with the purification of foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize one area with a cautery at the proper location on the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the occiput, and over each corner of the head he should cauterize. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize with the cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive cauterization as has been described previously.
But if the patient is a child, then proceed with a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization for Melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted and flabby tissues, then cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned, having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards melancholia, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what has been described previously in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a well-made trepanation around the circle, and proceed with that at the proper location on the head.
Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use the grease of sheep. And heat that over the fire with moderate warmth according to measure, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied. And then place that in the middle of the head of the patient in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this once a week for the wound, and follow the regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points according to what is necessary, but have your hand with a cautery properly arranged: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain with moderation.
And then apply that powder mixed in grease or in chicken fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
When it is clear to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what purifies his head, and guard against all humidity for him.
And have that person sweat in baths for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Cut and cauterize all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cautery at a distance in the region of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation and caution against bleeding.
And in some cases it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old wounds.
When tears from the eyes are old and frequent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious part of the head, it is verified that this is due to cold phlegmatic excess; then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries at the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries at the neck below two bones. And if you need addition, then cauterize that across the entire area of the eye socket above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward shave their head, and cauterize them with a moderate cautery using an olive-wood cautery. And so cauterize that part with a cautery in the shape of a trefoil, using two cauteries above the eyebrows, leaving the hair a little bit.
And be careful of the archery so that you do not injure it.
And this is the shape of the trefoil cautery.
Chapter XV.
On Cauteries for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On Cauteries for the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hairs Turn Inward and Poke the Eye.
When the hairs of the eye turn inward such that they poke the eye, cauterization in those cases is done according to two methods: either by performing it or by using a combustible medicine.
If you cauterize the wound with fire, command the barber to shave around it just as one would for those which are mundane, entering where they are extended and evened out; and if you grasp that of their growth, then wrap them with a bandage so that nothing is left before the hair grows back.
Once they have grown back and evened out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and gently press upon the eyelids over the wound with a probe, marked as according to the shape of a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
And then place a small piece of linen or mucilage of fine flour on the wound.
And then apply the cautery, which this is the form of.
And then cauterize over the figure that you have marked, little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the area which is like a myrtle leaf is completely burned through properly.
And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hair around it raised above the puncture.
And then raise your hand and lay it upon that for three days, and afterwards place a piece of cloth over it until the scar is remedied. And then care for that until it is healed.
But if the hair around it becomes affected near its growth and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
If there are hairs inside the lower eyelid, then at that time cauterize it so that it is raised to its natural place and healed, and that the hairs do not touch the eye.
You should cauterize with a burning medicine in this case; command the patient to pull out the hairs until they are long and healed, and then make it from paper or cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take known soap and one ounce of a living herb, or something similar to it, and mix those ingredients well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper which is made as the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and place under each eye wrapped in clean cloth, and have the patient's head in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for this sting is like that of fire.
And when the patient perceives the stinging sensation, then remove the medicine and wash it with your finger; once the stinging stops, then wash the eye with water. And now check if the eyelid is raised as it should be; if so, you can proceed with cautery or incision, for this is good progress. If not, return to applying the medicine to a different location where it has not been applied yet and do not allow it to darken until it heals and the eye returns to its proper state.
And then place it on the affected area at the border until the condition of the irritation is eradicated, and then treat it with healing medication or another remedy until it is healed.
It is necessary for you to guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye. And if after some days the eyelid has become softened and any cause of hair pulling in the eye, then again apply your medicine to that place where the eyelid has softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and soon within it will be healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this, your treatment is adjusted.
And the way to truth in this art will not be hidden from one who studies in this field.
Chapter XVII.
On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Lacrimal Region of the Eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold the patient's head steady between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
And then place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour over the eye of the patient.
And then heat the cautery, which has this form:
which is made of copper, similar in shape to a reed or the quill of an eagle, with one end shaped like the cautery.
And if you wish, enter into the other extremity. And if you want it to be as soft as a sponge.
But he who is concave is better for the task at hand.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and let it drain and dry it out. And if it is not open, now open it and extract the corruption from it.
And then press on it with the cautery which should be well heated, and place it there but a little, so that you do not miss your hand or the wound become agitated, and now place the cautery in the flesh of the nose and burn that.
And thus if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, now repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then press on that wound gently and around it apply a drying agent until it is healed.
But if after these days it has not healed, now apply to it acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as necessary according to its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which they first described as follows: enter the location of the fistula and clean it, and then place in that fissure finely powdered material according to its form. And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and with your hand gently but firmly, so that the wound does not become agitated because the melted lead should not reach the flesh around it; and ensure that you press on the wound’s surface covered in egg white or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is well; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer nasal trephination and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterization of the Fistula of the Pouch.
Often such fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
And let the heat of the cautery be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Apply that heated point carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When an abscess occurs on the uvula or palate or on the gums near the teeth, and it bursts, and then becomes inflamed, and forms a fistula, and when you treat that fistula and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and then place that heated instrument into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the hot iron reaches the depth of it; do this once or twice; and then treat it as we have said about treatment until it is healed.
Therefore, if the sinew is cut and heals, it is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone as will be explained in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, and you treat them with medicines and do not confine them, then place the tip of the cautery in its proper position, and immediately ignite it so that you place the tube over the tooth and insert the cautery quickly into it; leave it there for a short time until the pain from the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and shortly afterward repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which he can spit it out, as the diseased tooth is now restrained, the softened gum has become firm, and the corrupted moisture has been dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or vermin, or if you do not confine the treatment with medicine, then the cautery can be applied in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
The cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cotton and wrap it around the heated end of the horn. Then immerse it in cold water, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it is cooled.
From there, apply hot cloths until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you do so, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place that on the aching tooth, and place over it an iron heated until the iron reaches the pain of the tooth's root.
However, for cautery with fire, you should attend to the thickness of the skin or flesh, and place it in the middle of some thickness so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the desired temperature, and place it on the tooth with your hand until the cautery is rubbed on it; do this several times as long as the pain persists either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good broth due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is how the cautery should be used.
And cauterize as much as you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you wish to gently digest them, then heat the cautery according to this form, which has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place it heated on the abscess once, or another time if necessary, until it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and afterwards leave it for three days and pause upon its edge within which is moistened what the fire has consumed.
And afterwards take care of that which was touched and bandage it until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cauterizing the soreness of the voice and constricting the throat.
When the venous moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize there the root of the navel in the place below.
And be careful that you do not reach the navel with the cautery nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize there with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra. And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
And afterwards take care of that with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterizing the disease of the lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease come from cold moisture and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the collarbone in the lower and upper parts; and with another cautery at the middle location of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous form.
And if you want, let your cautery be sharp-pointed with the cautery that is called puncta, the shape of which precedes in the piercing of ear pain.
And let there be punctures within the edges for those; and then treat that with what is applied so that it may be healed.
And let there be the cautery having three steps for which the cautery is for that: in one instance you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of the polyp, which is at the head of the helper.
When the head of the polyp is displaced due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement within which it should be in the fluid it usually returns, and then by a slight movement it is displaced again as it must be, as we have testified, at that time you first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is laid on his back or on his side; and then raise the part where the polyp is above the mentioned parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then use the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four tips after the cauteries.
And in some cases it is appropriate according to this method and for the cauterizations .viii.
And therefore pause over the burning properly away from the salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dispersed and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When blood flows into the stomach, mix and stir the moisture until that substance of its composition and so multiply it in there, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming it, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their limbs and their belongings, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger with a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below each side of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle; and space them out so that they are not too close together to prevent rotting.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let it be cauterized the stomach pricking at that which from this cauterization is frightened: and it is that you sense upon the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish one attempts, and then cauterize that one with cauterization on the points; and then treat that one with the treatment which precedes until he is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On Cauterization of the Afflicted Kidney.
When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas such that it is expelled through excessive evacuation from its usual condition, and the illness is treated as we have said without compression, then the patient should be placed on their back with their head raised, and you should apply three cauterizations by attempt over this area according to this form and quantity, placing them below the kidneys near the hypochondria, as shown in the position of a person lying down.
And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauterizations be in length according to the right side of the body.
And do not compress your hand while applying the cauterization.
And if the quantity of water adhering is half the length of the spine, and it is not more tightly fitted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having already extended their belongings, and raise their arms.
And it is within your capability to perform these cauterizations with cautery, when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that you do not proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and let it adhere to the thickness of all the vessel so that it adheres throughout the body and reaches into the pouches, for the vessel here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess of the kidney with a cautery.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the kidney and wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the kidney or in its tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the kidney, the patient will exhibit heaviness and pain without acute sharpness.
And if it is in the tunica of the kidney, then the pain will be sharp and great, and often it exhausts the efforts of physicians to treat it.
Therefore, have the patient lie on his back; and then identify the location of the abscess by probing; and subsequently use the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire vessel is consumed, until it reaches the sinus, until it causes healthy tissue to grow.
And then treat that patient with the treatment for other abscesses until he is healed.
And it is not suitable to use this method of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who has known many illnesses; but even then, after experimenting a few times, be cautious with this procedure, for it is safer.
Chapter XXIX.
On Cauterizing Pustules.
Take the cauterizing sticks for pustules from the roots of artemisia as follows: you should take a stick about as long as your finger and as thick as your thumb.
And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at the place where the clavicle meets the neck; and two small cauteries below that, slightly inclined toward the part under the beard; and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another in the middle of the feet; and another above the stomach; and three at the rear parts; and one where it is between both shoulders; and two from the side of the feet below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And you should not apply the cautery to your own body, but rather have someone else do it for you.
And some ancient authors also say that sometimes men use a cautery made of iron resembling a needle and heat it to apply it to the place between the ribs until they reach the abscess, as we have said regarding the abscess in the testicle.
But in this puncture with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident happens at the place where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the melesa.
When you treat the disease of the melesa as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three methods, all of which are surgical. The first is that you make three or four cauterizations along the length of the melesa according to the shape of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has been described previously.
And there should be a distance of the thickness of one finger or a bit more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for cauterizing the liver.
And do not compress your hand during the cauteries; and if the disease is above the thigh, it should be treated similarly.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries vertically twice, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder, which is in line with the melesa where the left side of the diseased area lies.
And your elevation should be such that when you raise the shoulder along the length of the body, cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both vertically, ignite one of them, in the place where it penetrates the shoulder from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are completed.
And if you wish, cauterize with one cautery held vertically three times.
And so you should treat the cautery for pus that is lingering too long, for it is more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cautery for hydropics.
Cauterization is not used for hydropics except in certain specific cases.
When you treat the hydropic according to the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is appropriate to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cauteri over the stomach, and another cauteri over the liver, and another cauteri over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cauteri on the right foot, and another cauteri over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
And it is appropriate to use a moist cautery so that it takes effect over a long period of time.
And do not delay the treatment of the illness appropriately with the cautery using what is necessary so that they are combined for two purposes, and it should be hastened with the aid of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the shape of a nail as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be in the shape of an olive according to its preceding form.
Chapter XXXII.
On cauterization of the foot and other matters.
When the feet are affected by hydrophobia and are full of purulent water, it is necessary to cauterize them above the second toe, which is between the ring finger and the middle finger; raise your hand with the cautery but do not twist it there; then raise your hand, but do not return it completely, because the pus will drain.
The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauteries on both sides, and at each side let a cautery be made at the tip of the cautery knife. And the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb: place one below the joint and the other at the lower part of the limb; and on each side two cauteries.
And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that some water can drain from it.
And then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by irritation and humidity that weaken its functions, which are digestive and retentive, located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with methods of treatment and not with conferring; at times the patient suffers from cauterization to exhibit strength, so you should cauterize it heavily over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel in a circle, along with a subtle cautery shaped like a nail; or use two large cauteries on the alar region, or two cauteries.
And if you remove the excessive humors and the patient can tolerate water, then cauterize that area above the navel and over the bellies, and lightly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division but do not conform to the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the small and small triangular vertebrae, and two of these are placed above the navel.
And if you find that the patient’s stomach is not being properly stimulated and the food is not being digested, and the face of the patient becomes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; apply one cautery to the liver, and another to the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery; leave this cautery for some time, and subsequently treat so that they are healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the Cauterization of Hysteria Near Its Removal.
When you remove the uterus, then use cautery that resembles a ray. Near the incision, apply the cautery to the removed uterus, and ensure that it reaches the place where the vein through which blood flows is located.
In one or two days, for if the swelling persists, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards cure those with what applies from the medicines until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On Cauterizing Fistulas That Are Made in the Rear Part of the Body.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of this, let it be healed with a cautery.
When someone has a fistula in the rear part of their body that is old and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then what is most worthy to do is to probe it with a fine instrument, and afterwards determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then heat the cautery until it is like a red-hot needle. Then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the extent to which the probe penetrated.
And repeat the cautery inside until those corrupted substances are burned up completely in one instance or two or three, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, then be cautious of all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
And if the place is sealed and the substances are separated from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances do not adhere to the bone, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the corrupted bone, or falls from those causes of which there will be mention later.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the cautery of wounds.
When pain in the wounds arises from rubbing or excessive inflammation, and thus the patient's condition is worsened, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with an instrument suitable for each wound, of which a description will be given later.
And wait a short while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three intervals between the cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Chapter xxxviii.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When debility and softening of the bladder occur due to rubbing and excessive moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it near where the pubic hair begins, on one side to the right and on the other to the left.
And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the amount of moisture; and cauterize it once in the lowest part of both sides, or twice if necessary.
And let it be a cautery of the nail as is prescribed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On Cauterization of the Navel.
When there is blood and moisture in the navel, and because of this it is forbidden to attempt anything [with it], and menstruation becomes corrupted due to it, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to its occurrence; therefore, the area should be cauterized three times around the umbilicus, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries above the place a little away from each other, or two cauteries, and it should be a cautery of the nail as has been prescribed.
Chapter XL.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
When moisture and pus are effused in the vicinity of the joint, and this is caused by reasons for its displacement from its place, and the sign of it is that the part is extended over the other when they are compared. And the location of the dislocation is treated where it hurts.
Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two cauteries in a circular manner, after you have marked around the part as it is rotated, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And let it be the cautery whose form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be performed according to the quantity of the spicitude of all the wound; and then treat that part which needs healing.
Chapter XLI.
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the joint, and its cause is friction and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have mentioned and does not conform to other methods; at this point, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using foul pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with combustible medicines, or cauterize with fire.
It should be done according to two known methods: one of which is that you cauterize that area over the part of the joint with three triangular cauteries as follows; and do it with good depth. And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
But in some cases, the cauteries should be on top of the middle location above the joint so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a circle whose shape precedes the cautery for the dislocation of the joint, such that the circle encompasses and burns the entire wound.
And this is the method of cautery when pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
If it is spread inside the wound, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the wound above the place to which you will direct the malice that is the pain; and with one cauterization on the nail for four days a little beyond the fleshly part.
And if the cautery cuts, and its depth is according to the quantity of the sharpness of the bone.
And if the malice you will direct that the pain is spread in the place near the said soles of the feet, then cauterize there where you will with a cautery at three points or four or more if you need it.
And if the malice you will direct that the pain is below the navel near the wound, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and that by this you harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the nail and ended the cauterization, and the bed of fire swelled inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And as a result of a severe abdominal injury, and from that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said about the cauterization of each cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let it be above the skin opening according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
And in that circle make another third; and let the space which is between them be the quantity of the thumb’s width; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those cords be one or two thumbs, and fasten those margins of iron decently prepared in the circles; and this is the form of it:
And then set it alight in the fire so that it glows and throws sparks, and then place it over the part of the wound, the malath[colic or pain] placed upon the skin. And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
And then let it be for three days; then apply a bandage to that area and leave the wound open for more than ten days; and then treat that area with medicine until it is healed.
Al-Bucasis says: Oh, sons [of my disciples], we have seldom used this type of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have we found those who are knowledgeable about it.
But for the very cauteries, to him who endures them, and find the place of it [the site of application] on the body.
But cautery with adhering medicines is such that you should make two circles having a perforated armula in which the opening of the iron door can fit; let the length of the sides be according to their nature, one or two walnuts in size.
And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them contain each other according to this form:
And then pause over the place of the wound, and let the patient sit on the lap, and take your hand over the place of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be as little fire gradually increasing, and in that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the biting and the adjustment thereof — for that torment is biting as well as burning — until such time as the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the wound with cool water.
And then leave that for three days and pause over the edge of it until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run with pus; this is last in aid.
And then care for that with dressings until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or the armpit, treat it with the statue as is done for the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for a fire that is not extinguished from both parts one, and mix them and pause in a new bowl of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the treatment.
And pause below the bottom of the bowl another inverted bowl, and pour over that alkali and living fire with cool water which rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good pressure, and leave the hole through which the sharp water descends from the lower part to the inverted bowl.
Then adjust all that water, and add it to another living cause and another renewed alkali, because at that moment it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizing other members, for this operation makes use of fire.
And for some medicines with which one is cauterized widely, such as vinegar and honey mixed with natron and a cause with soap, so that they are mixed.
And Galen recounts the operation and cure for treating pain in the sciatic nerve and vein of a patient from the ancients, and he praises it greatly as being excellent, saying that no other treatment is necessary, because it heals with one application as described, since the method involves bathing and using medicine.
And it should be taken in a vinegar solution, and if vinegar is not available, fresh figs should be used; mix them with a little flour and apply to the affected area of the leg, or to the buttock, or to the hip, and bind it.
And let it remain for three hours or for the amount of time that the patient estimates as necessary for the adjustment.
And then place him in a bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and let the cauterization be done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the affected area.
Take a dried goat's bladder and fill it with water until it becomes carbonized; then place it on the wool and spread it out so that it is extended. And continue doing this, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Pain in the Thighs.
In some cases, pain in the thighs is caused by various reasons, such as falling or impact or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
And cauterization is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of corrosive matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance with fine pills and similar remedies, place them on the thighs where the pain is, three lines according to its width. Then apply five cauteries in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
And let the cauterization be performed with pointed cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cauterization as follows:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization for the Beginning of Chilblains.
This disease often affects young children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure around the navel with elevation and movement.
And you find in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes that it already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that spot with a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows: that you apply the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two lines or three away from it. And let the points be close together.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
But be careful not to administer the cautery in areas of inflammation that are caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by the friction of humors that are distributed to each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to refer to this as gout properly.
And therefore, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and the pains do not subside, then use cautery to relieve them.
And you cauterize that place of evacuation in the vicinity of the joint at the breastbone with cauterization.
And let the cautery be in the shape of an olive, which is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the breast fascia, then proceed with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the joints or other articulations, and this happens frequently, then cauterize each joint with three cauteries or four from all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you must use these cauteries and find them necessary, then cauterize that area but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, only around the circumference of the cautery.
And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains remain only in the muscles and are called cramping, then puncture around the edges of the muscles as it revolves, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the edges of the muscles at each node and on the joint of the hand.
And if the pains rise near any of the joints in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistant's help.
And do not evacuate the malady without proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and the harmful substances are evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter XLIV.
On cauterizing fractures.
When you suspect a fracture in the groin and intestines, and the bowels are exposed before the cloth, at this point it is necessary to instruct the patient to fast on that day and use laxatives so that the opening from the abdomen closes.
And then have the patient lie down on your lap with their back up against you, and instruct them to raise their legs so that either the cloth or the bowels are exposed.
And then return to the patient and indicate with your hand where the fracture is on the bone of the pubis, marking its end which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
such that it is round and emits sparks. And then return the bowels or cloth to their original position, and then place your hand over the area to prevent them from escaping.
And once you have placed the patient between the sheets and left one sheet over them, another should be placed under their buttocks, and another under their feet, while they lie on their back.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you feel the bone of the pubis in the middle; repeat this several times if you did not succeed on the first attempt to locate the bone.
Observe wisely the condition of the bowel at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that bowel such that it does not bring about death or some great harm to the patient.
And be aware that when you perform the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And take care of the site of the cautery for three days, bandaging it so that the fire scar heals.
And subsequently take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the wound healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the duration of the treatment period during which the inflammation of the abdomen occurs, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
And subsequently, when it is time to remove the dressing after forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that area bandaged for another forty days.
And let them be restricted from work and overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this complete regimen of healing, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let it be as much as is taken from the cord, as one third of it. And subsequently treat that as we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
And some of the earlier writers said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked with a template:
and a line is drawn which you follow latitudinally on the abdomen above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is faster and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Torticollis.
When you find in some members due to falling or striking there is pain that persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the torticollis and the pain.
If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured from one member to another nearby one, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured with what we have mentioned in the division and do not say it will not happen, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption may spread throughout their body and complexion, then cauterize him on his head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another lower down; both above the ears; and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
And lastly your hand should apply the cautery a little inside where it presses upon the bone, thereby displacing the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated from there; and cauterize over the wound as is necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and apply one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two on each cervical vertebra, six on the dorsal vertebrae, a large one near the lumbar region, another on the buttocks, two on each thigh, one on each ankle, two on each elbow, one on each wrist, and two on each calf muscle; cauterize it also over all the joints of the hands and feet, as well as on each heel, and at the axillae.
And be careful of the nerves that run over the heel so as not to burn them.
And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you apply cauteries appropriately, the more helpful and beneficial they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because the body is already numb.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as dictated by the nature of the tools.
Regarding the treatment with cautery, use flour of oats mixed with honey. For the other cure, ensure it leads to healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the cautery for stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb using cautery appropriate to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the heat of the cautery be moderate, entering slightly beneath the surface. And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that extends deeper into the muscles and vertebrae, as well as along the course of the nerves that control that limb, to alleviate the numbness.
But do not proceed with this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limb and the course of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cautery for wounds that become paralyzed.
When an old wound does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize over that area using a cautery slightly heated according to the quantity and nature of the tissue until the whiteness and color of the wound are alleviated, and its color changes.
And subsequently treat that area with flour of oats and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove blood or swallow blood, taking an equal part of each and thoroughly mixing them together. Then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter I.
On cauterizing ulcers.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in the form of a circle around it as it appears.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen in some cases.
It is safer to cauterize around the affected area in a circular manner as we have said, or in other words, use cautery around it.
Chapter II.
On cauterizing abcesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation due to excessive moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, such as being old and weak, having little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small punctures using a cautery; and afterwards it will mature more quickly.
But if you want to pierce the abscess with a cautery, then choose a cautery that is suitable for this purpose; and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied to a location that is further away to spare the arm from excessive pain; and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter LII.
On Cauterization with Corrosives.
Corrosives are a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite and cauterize small and large areas as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
And proceed to cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then dress it for three days, and apply poultices to the cauterized areas thrice daily with an oil mixture until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for these are suitable as an alternative to cautery. But cauterization with fire is more quickly effective.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicines in the division, and therefore use that when you find it necessary.
Chapter LIII.
On cauterization of wounds and other similar cases.
Most often, in the parts below the knee where a condition called clau maladie occurs, which is caused by thick and hardened flesh that affects the foot; and one should cauterize it in two ways, namely with fire and with hot water.
The cauterization with fire is done by heating the cauterizing instrument concave in shape like a ring, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clau condition throughout all parts, and it should be finely polished.
And then place the heated instrument on the clau, and then move your hand with the cauterizing tool around the perimeter of the clau until the cauterization reaches the depth of the clau. And let it be for three days until it begins to form scabs. And then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt to it, and leave the poultice on for one night, as this will help eradicate it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the muscles and skin, then you should administer cauterization with hot water. This is done by taking a small tube made of earthenware or iron or ring-shaped, and place it on the clau; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold your hand around it tightly, revolving it with compression from all sides, and apply the edge of the tube to the root of the clau, allowing the hot water to penetrate through the root of the clau; wait for the malady to be affected by the heat of the water for about an hour, then remove it, as the clau along with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus place one against the other until you come upon all of them in their proper order in the body.
And place next to the care of those abscesses that the roots of the nails have been eradicated with the help of those medicines which cause the flesh to grow.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for tremors.
When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever caused by irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then necessary for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the joints of the legs, and over the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
And the tremor subsides and the health improves quickly from the irritation of the illness.
Chapter LIV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When there are accidental wounds in the body that have become pus-filled and cracked, formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is exposed to fire; or with the long thorns of erestologia; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess matter that causes these issues will be disrupted, and thus they heal from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Chapter LX.
On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that originated inside, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, it is difficult to remedy this.
When such a situation occurs, quickly apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to hold the clot inside until the blood flow stops, and do not let it escape.
And then place in the fire olive coals, both small and large, for many pieces, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one of those coals, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and place it quickly over the vein after you have removed your hand, so that the cauterization stops and restricts the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your hand and extract the cauterization tool, then take another coal quickly from those coals which are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood flow is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible then to restrain the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless one employs one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction, because when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is restrained; or let it be bound with astringent medicines, or let it rest upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be strengthened with poultices with moderate pressure.
And let him who administers moderate binding with bandages and compression with cloths or by the position of burning materials and similar methods not hurry but proceed slowly.
And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then gently place the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that due to great constriction within, the blood remains in the upper part of the wound, and the finger should not be moved from the artery; and above the artery it should be sprinkled with cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed with cauterization or medicine as necessary.
Of incision and puncture and wound treatment and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similar conditions.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterizations; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head among the parts of the body.
In this procedure described in this chapter by that method, may God bless the one asking about it, at the time concerning what they have asked.
And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is by fear as it is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood or pus, which can endanger life due to the application of heat on a vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an exit or purging of a plague or extraction of a splinter or stone and similar procedures. And with all of those actions, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their danger, death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is mentioned in the context of danger, for some times such cases can be caused by methods used by people dealing with many types of illnesses. And among them are some who become enraged by their illness and die quickly because of the severity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and this illness brings fear which signifies death.
And among them is one who gives away his possessions and says, "I hope for health from this," while their actual illness is fatal.
And therefore, you must not consent to those who come to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any reason for it beyond certain knowledge that confirms what affects you, and to which a reputable succession of practice attests.
For the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication as to which one is likely to be cured, for in that you will have assistance in acquiring fame and reputation, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His power.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other things, so that you may be pleased with what you seek regarding this and what you need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appeared to me as a fatal condition.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the size of his head was so enlarged that he could not control it due to the greatness of his head, and before long the moisture increased within until it caused death.
And this moisture is either accumulated between the skin and the bone, or it is accumulated below the bone on the skull.
For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the boil, which is small, you should cut in the middle of the head with a slit in length, and let the length of this slit extend two fingers' breadth where the moisture flows, and this is the form of the spatum:
And if the moisture is more increased and the boil is larger, then at this time there should be two slits according to this method:
And if the moisture is deeper than the bone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your finger at the sides but not from underneath. You should cut in the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
and immediately the incision should extract all the moisture; and then dress the slits with cloths and plasters; and subsequently apply poultices of oil and vinegar over them for five days, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and dress the head symmetrically; and eat food that is dry with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the boil appears and the swelling of the water, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid excessive bleeding, for the illness may worsen due to that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Second.
When I come to certain carbuncles or boils on the thighs or in the genitals, and if it is old and not responsive to treatment with medicines, then at that time the last resort is to cut into those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries, have the patient raise his hand and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and examine where the vein can be pressed; these locations are near the ears, but they may vary in some people.
And then press on the artery with your finger, and then incise each one with a sharp scalpel, piercing into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when an artery is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, often spouting frequently.
But if the artery does not appear upon inspection, then measure three finger breadths from the ear, and then press with your finger to find it, and make an incision into the bone.
In order to extract and treat pus from a wound, take one ounce of vinegar, and it is light enough to pour out like wheat or bran, and all this is according to the quantity which appears appropriate for the strength of the patient and the fullness of the vein.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of pus above the bone, now incise that so that it does not become an abscess from cauterization.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterward care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of veins that are in the temples.
When it happens that someone suffers from migraines or acute headaches due to excessive humidity in the body and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if they are similar severe conditions, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to these diseases the extraction of veins in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and identify the visible vein in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to the force of friction.
And if it is hidden from you, then tie the head of the patient with some cloth; and afterward rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible. And now you take the spatula which has this form: And then you peel the membrane in such a way that you reach the artery; and there remove it and extract it to the appropriate places until you extract it from the membrane and reveal those tunics which are underneath, from every part.
But if the artery is fine, now wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut off a part according to the quantity by which the ends of it are stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not thus divided the blood would not rise.
And then remove the blood from the wound in quantity of one ounce up to three.
And if the artery is large, now make sure you tie it in two places with a very strong thread or cords at a distance, and do not allow it to become putrid before the healing of the wound and prevent the flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess which is between two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife cautery until the ends of it are divided, and this will serve as that work.
And it is better to do this when the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that help to dry up excessive moisture, and therefore it is better in such conditions.
Concerning the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place where it will be done is clean and proper, and let them lie on a decently prepared poultice, and nearby have medicines ready that cause flesh to grow and bandages so that it may be healed.
And if while you are working some other place bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should proceed to constrict that blood, either with cautery or by filling the place with cloth, and press your hand in so that the blood may be restrained. And if none of those causes are present to you, then press your hand over the place until the blood is congealed, and cover the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as necessary.
And what is most important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked both places with a needle, and then place some ignited material inside until it reaches the bone and severs the vein at two points, so that you can stretch what is between its extremities, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted. However, if the sharpness is such that two knives are better, for if as sharp as two knives approaches each fracture, and do not cut through the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut away quickly.
And this method is better than all methods and faster.
And let the space between two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When such acidic tears occur, and the cause is from those veins which are above the head on the outside, and if there is no clear reason for the treatment with medicine, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and a sensation as if ants were crawling in their forehead can be felt, and the eyes are so weakened that even their eyelashes can barely be seen, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient practitioners used to treat such cases with this procedure without delay.
And you command the patient to pluck the hairs that are on their forehead, and then cut three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little behind the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal duct, and the third on the other side.
And guard against the beginning of the arteries, which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three such adjustments.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision as follows: which is from the first part of the template to the second incision. Excise from there all the tissue that is between two incisions at the suture which is on the bone, and then make this median incision to the second incision. And then place this spatula and insert another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, into the first incision.
And place the sharp side on the flesh and adjacent tissue, and the blunt side against the bone, and insert it until you reach the median fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But ensure that the incision continues to appear on the tissue, and then make this in the median fissure to the other fissure.
And when the flow of blood is equal in quantity, press the places where clotted blood has collected.
And then place small pieces of old wood in each fissure, and apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil on them, and bandages so that no abscess forms by cauterization.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer great infusion of hot water or terebinth, and afterwards treat with an ointment of basilicon and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of tumors by catharsis and the expulsion of humors descending from the inner parts of the head.
When there is acute and continuous bleeding from catharsis, and the humors of the patient are exhausted and small, and their care shows weakness, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss in their place, and there is sharp pain and extreme drying at the forehead, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come except from veins proceeding from inner parts.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: Command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision at the middle of the forehead (beginning from the midpoint between the left temple and the right temple; ensure that this incision reaches the bone; extend your hand from the temples which are far apart due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then apply a mixture between the two edges of the incision with yellow wax or strips of cloth. And then apply dry powdered herbs mixed with wine and oil on top so that it does not lead to an infected wound.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, mix them together, and make a plaster from it to be applied to these wounds where new flesh is growing.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: it may be a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, such as iron or wood; or it may come from a plant, such as thorns or beans; or it may be a fluid-like substance, such as water and vinegar or similar liquids; or it may be some kind of animal.
And when a stone is lodged in the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or are embedded in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and shortly after induce sneezing with appropriate conditions, and plug the nose at the moment of sneezing. And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the upper parts, as this treatment is often effective for such causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer an extract with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which is a subtle tool of this form:
And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer an extract along with a slight amount of repeated application.
And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
If it is not forcibly done in this manner, then take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught, a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap around that knot gently placed. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not forcibly done for all the causes that we have recounted, then you should proceed to cut in front of where it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you first lance the vein called sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards above, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear where it is most pressed. And let the cut be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the cut quickly at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the gristles that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this method, then take fine wax as follows: and administer the removal of that gristle which is lodged in the ear.
If you do not want to use water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the air, place it in various positions, and draw out therefrom with hooks or subtle gestures, or as we have said concerning incision, for the extraction is easier.
In the water that has entered the ear, it is useful for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning with certain preparations, and fill one side of their ear with some old cotton, and place on the affected ear, if by this method it is expelled, good; but if not, now take small pebbles or stones according to the length of a finger, and heat those in the fire for a little while, and the patient should insert one of them into the ear canal and jump with one side of their body onto that stone and strike another stone on the stone inside the ear. Do not remove the stone until all the water has been expelled.
Do not remove the stone until all the water has been expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or wool, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over fire until it is partially burned.
And place another piece of wool and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and then probe it with a cannula as was said about the stone extractor.
In the extraction of an animal that has entered the ear, if it is a small creature, treat it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a larger one causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with gestures and hooks, and the cause of this is more urgent than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary to expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears, then extract it with gentle movements or subtle instruments; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow below and wide above, and this is its shape: And insert the delicate end into the ear according to the amount that you can bear; then suck with force using that instrument several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this instruction, then pack and seal around the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, which you will find described in the tractate on distillations.
And make your application with the instrument through which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, and this is its shape: And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, with a small tube and a flat top.
And it should be like pressing against the concavity of the cannula where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its end neatly with cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth at the top and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And let that which is to be inserted into the ear be first heated over the fire a little. And be careful that the cause for which you will distill into the ear is not too rough, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the most difficult conditions to heal.
And in that case where you can see clearly, place the ear of the patient in the sun and observe it. And if you see a blockage that is apparent, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
If the end of it where the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two thin sides so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the excess flesh inside.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat that in the fire for a little while, and then place that into the ear canal.
And if you feel an obstruction with what the patient identifies as easy to reach due to hearing difficulty, apply pressure to expel it; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the mass that you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the lesion; or take something and dip it in rose water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then you should remove what was there and replace it with another piece wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then continue treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the bleeding, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of inflammation that occurs on the eyelids.
Inflammation that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes is sometimes moist, and at other times it is dry.
Therefore, you should have those available in small jars or containers, and grind them finely from their roots, and then apply them as a powder to the affected areas.
If there is pain and bleeding from a vein, then at that hour you should cauterize those places with a cautery of fine antimony.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and troops that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a condition that affects the eyelids.
Recurrent causes are hidden in the eyelids, some of which resemble a severe condition in their strength and hardness, and therefore this severity is called.
And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both below and above.
Therefore, the operation in such cases is to consider at that moment whether the condition has arisen from what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of it is superficial.
Therefore, apply something over that place along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it from all parts with ease until it is clean, and then suspend it with an ointment and cover it.
And if the condition is severe, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is mild, it will not cause harm because the warmth of treatment restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should lift up its surface, then hold the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, another that you need from the beginning, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid because of incision is lengthened, this do not notice in any way.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Swelling occurs in the area above the eyelids, mainly affecting children, worsening their wounds and causing them great pain; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously flow from their eyes.
And because of this, you see them lying with their faces covered all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and above their lower eyelids are moist eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and there is a clear sign of swelling in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel swelling inside.
And there is a method of treatment where the patient places their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains blood from all parts, and then place it on top and press with your fingers all around so that swelling aggregates at the center of the circle, and then apply moisture to the center of that area using a spatula inserted into a small incision along its length, but ensure that this incision is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
In the middle of the incision you should cut the cartilage completely until you reach the pleura, for in major operations the pleura is exposed by a rupture according to the form of the rib cavity.
Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths between your fingers at the parts from inside until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to probe into the rupture so that you do not reach the lung, and avoid doing that.
But if the pleura does not appear at the beginning of the rupture, then probe into the rupture slightly with ease until you encounter the pleura; and then extract it as we have said; and then dip cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and press them down with dust.
And some people use salt and place it in the deepest part of the rupture so that what remains is dried by this humidity.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with gentle plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the lung.
When there are growths on the membranes of the lung that extend below the natural hairs and when they cause issues such as continuous tears and inflammation of the membranes, leading to damage to the lung known as examining or touching the lung, it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or through canulas, as I will explain.
And so cut that you place the edge of the wound in the suture; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into one of the follicles below the eyelid, and pierce the needle through the root from above, and this should be near the margin of the eyelid where the hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that one towards the light.
And then apply to the inner part of the eyelid below the hair, adjacent to the lower canaliculus into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of cork or cloth, and then bandage over the eyelid with a pad, and it should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is varied in people, since there are those whom you need to cut away a great deal from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid has been softened.
And then apply to the canaliculus along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the lower canaliculus into the minor lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hair as it is the thickness of the king.
Take the ounce and place it in one of the two angles of the collarbone, then scrape that area entirely. Next, fit the incision with the edges of both lips using fine wool grease, and clean away the blood. If you want to do this, apply what is excessive from the ointments over two eyebrows for certain viscous reasons, but if not, do not worry about it.
Remove the stitches from the ointments after three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you wish, remove the dressing without stitches and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of blood; however, stitching is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
But let there be careful attention to the wound itself, and it is of good practice, and not from fear.
And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid by three uncia units separated and gathered according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do this with the uncia units, now take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the figure, and insert the other ointment near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second ointment near the smaller lacrimal gland, and adjust between these threads the ointments evenly. Then lift your hand with equal elevation and lift the entire area marked as we have recommended.
Next, bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in your incision or wound, you should cover that abscess with wax or something similar, and then bandage it.
And in some cases, if the eyelid is involved and its hairs are turned inward, then you should proceed as we have described for incisions; but suturing is more artificial in such cases.
Disinfecting with reeds is done in the following manner: and this involves turning the eyelid and dissecting the area as I have recounted; then, using artifice, make two reeds or thin sticks whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width should be less than the width of the pupil. And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each reed gently to what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and tightly bind the reeds in each section, and leave it for several days, because the irritated tissue will die off and be rejected, and new tissue will form until they fall out on their own.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and afterwards treat the wound until it heals.
When it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs no longer irritate.
And this is the method for making two reeds that you should prepare in this manner: and the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of hairs in the groin with forceps when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly in the groin, then you should take fine forceps and place them on that part gently and carefully, adjusting the extremities of the hair so each is grasped subtly. And let the length of the forceps be about the width of one palm.
And then you prepare another fine forceps briefly, and grasp the extremities of that hair if you wish.
And then place the patient in a suitable position in the light, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the grasped hair which requires extraction, and make it penetrate quickly until you pull it out from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert it into an alcohol solution, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is completely removed along with the alcohol solution from the root of the natural hair.
But if the alcohol solution is drawn out and the hair is not removed, pull the alcohol solution away from the surrounding area with the forceps you have prepared for that purpose, so that it is fully extracted along with the excess tissue.
From the wound of the eye, one should first remove any foreign bodies and fragments from it, and then allow the edges of the wound to heal together with clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres at its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then you should take a longer hair from among the natural hairs and place it there, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate length, and then lift that hair.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a boil that appears on the upper eyelid.
When a boil appears in the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor healing of a wound, surgery, or cautery, it is called leporine. This boil may be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, surgeries, or cauterizations, or similar neglect in treatment.
The method of the procedure is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not advisable to use treatments that dry out or constrain the area; for if you do this, the boil will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften and mollify, such as fenugreek; boil it in water along with its seeds or juice from the plant, which is dissolved in some oil, then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it to the area.
The treasure of your cure is that you should pierce every bud that is not consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the halezacrati that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of ehacrati which is performed on the lower eyelid.
This alzacratium which is made on the lower eyelid, which is properly called alzacratium; and it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.
The accidental one is caused by trauma or by a cut or by cautery or by other similar causes.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh at the parts above with the needle and cut along it with a broad spatula. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take a rod and place it in the cleft, and with it convert the eyelid, and sew the two openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at the two corners of the incision you have made where they meet, and let them form an angle so that when they come together they make a proper figure.
This is the Greek letter: lambda.
And cut the flesh there in the amount equal to the length of the upper eyelid before it, that which will heal as the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
And if you need to incise across a crack or suture or cauterize, now it is necessary for you to make an incision in a straight line over the eyelash follicles as was described. And then separate the poultice between two layers as we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it run according to the operation, as it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way that is feasible within him to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and it is prohibited from its ease of movement and natural functions, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, and lift it up with it, or extend it with forceps.
And then you should cut the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not sharp enough to cause pain from the cutting, holding it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the tissue without scraping the wound with its sharpness.
And let your cutting be such that it gently removes that adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form, and ensuring that all of the adhesion is healed.
And then you should put salt water on the wound with which you wash it; or distill in the juice of rosemary dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a cloth, and apply on the wound linen infused in egg white, and on the third day use healing substances until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On cutting of nails and of flesh growth near the tear ducts.
Know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and resembles hard dry skin; or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched by iron, can be forcibly removed without any residue being left behind.
And both kinds do not begin except at the larger tear duct, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and the movement of the eyelid.
But the method of working in cutting it is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail by slightly doubling it back and extend it to the parts above. Take a needle and attach to it a horsehair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread. Gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the center of the nail, then penetrate with the needle and bind the nail with thread; extend it to the sides above, and shave off the hair along the side of the nail where the pupil is. And in this way you should follow the hair to the back of it.
Then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and allow the tissue of the tear duct to heal naturally so that by doing this it does not cause continuous tearing.
And sometimes the nail is placed in the sun once it has been extended or with thread, as we have said, and then shaved with a lion-shaped spatula of which this is the shape:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue so as not to cause a rupture and have the pupil perforated.
After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or clean linen made of sinew in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with what is needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot place the needle in it, nor has it been placed there previously, then this kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as mentioned and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the malady and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape described: Of subtlety. And if you take that and rarefy it and confound it and put it in the aforementioned receptacle, then distill from your hour in the morning until the heat is done making mischief or until it becomes clear or salted three times, and filter the liquid into another vessel on the following day.
And thus iterate upon that operation until all of it is consumed, unless the opposite abscess appears in the liquid, for then you should leave that and begin to treat the abscess from its start until it is healed.
And thus iterate your operation on that according to the reason until it is healed.
The excision of the lacrimal flesh, if it causes great harm in the liquid, should be suspended for a month; and cut away part of that flesh, but do not complete the incision where it would cause a flow of tears.
And thus distill in the lacrimal clear and pure until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of gangrenous tissue and what is born of tight flesh in the liquid.
In some cases in the eyes, clear flesh is born and it spreads until it covers the pupil, or approaches or extends over the eyelids and draws them tightly together at the edges and is gathered like the edge of a balcony.
The procedure is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at convenient times with a forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with scissors, and be careful not to let any fall out during your operation.
And let your incision be with the scalpel which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which hair is collected according to how it will appear near this chapter.
And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been scraped away, then fill the wound with salt water, or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over it a poultice of egg white until it is secure from abscesses.
And if any cause of inflammation remains and there is bleeding that needs to be controlled, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever cures that abscess, and afterward proceed with the operation when it has healed, and similarly do for the flesh that adheres in this kind of wound.
But you must be careful to keep all healing of the wound clean by natural or accidental means, use instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of hair in the wound.
Hair often comes from red veins that are hidden in the wound and prohibit its removal, and the wound should be left to heal over several days.
At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is hair is strong and if there is no other illness but hair, then you should remove that hair.
And it is that you instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and then press those veins for one or two seconds according to your judgment; let that pressing be gentle and gradual according to this form:
And thus one ounce is gradually applied to another in this form:
And then gather those veins with subtle force, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood bit by bit until those veins appear empty and are reversed.
And be careful that you do not lead the air to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning under the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you will distill in the air pure green or red vapor so that with its sharpness it corrodes what is empty of blood.
But if it is not possible for you to gather all at that hour, then you bandage everything with what alleviates the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of being free from abscess.
And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp medicinal burning as described and not healed, then do not let it generate in him but cut through the abscess after its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within him until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone and flesh are exposed and corruption or blackness is present, then you should apply a tool of this form:
It is called a rough head, and it is made of iron, and the head is round just like this one which is punctuated by small punctures with a nail or awl (as shown in the following form).
Place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press gently with your hand until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in its place, and the pus has stopped flowing and remains quiescent for forty days without being renewed or forming abscesses, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then what remains is to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a chisel or an acute instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply three such instruments as follows:
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should be gradually narrowed towards the tip as shown.
And then place it on the bone, and have it near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand slightly and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the resistance as air escapes when you do this.
Then at this time restore the place with astringent medicines that dry up as you have seen fit.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, then the matter that was discharged to the surroundings returns to the source, hence this is quicker for the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the belly.
When the belly protrudes in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs through vomiting, then it is necessary to purge the patient, and subsequently follow with fasting; and then apply windy poultices on the head without scarification and rub well; and then place a liniment on the belly made of colocynth, aloes, cyperus, and myrtle glue, and afterwards strengthen the plaster on the belly using dust.
And the method for the dust is that you take linen strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; and make the powder from these strips.
And then apply those plasters one on top of the other according to the quantity that the belly requires. And then strengthen them with a thick cloth tightly wrapped around them; and repeat the windy applications with rubbing without scarification; and then remove the wind poultices and bind the belly tight day and night.
But if in the meantime the binding becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
And then remove the binding during the day and night as we have said.
And if the vein has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply the plaster with the powder and the ligature and the cupping vessels until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
When you find a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it protrudes like a raisin grain between the eyelids with a human face-like appearance, and you wish to incise this, then perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards. Then place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal part, and allow it to penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the location of the double thread and lift that portion of the uveal tunic around the needle, and strengthen this motion.
Then withdraw the needle and place over the wound lint infused in egg white, and leave it there until the thread falls off with the uvea.
Then treat the wound with whatever will comfort it until the injury is healed.
And sometimes it is advisable to apply a circular piece of cloth around the wound on all sides to cover a large elevation, and then pierce it with a fine needle so that the wound can reach the pus within, allowing the albuminous fluid to drain, and the wound will subside quickly.
Then strengthen the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias.
This illness that is called hernia is not the one referred to as an inflammation that descends like water but is otherwise different.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move that part where you see the swelling descend to below, so that it becomes dry and does not descend further, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as he did.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the swelling does not occur as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it over the pannicular area just below the continuation of the conjunctiva towards the cornea at the crown (into the visible area), so that the swelling is expelled.
Once it is expelled, then you should apply water that has been boiled and in which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the abdomen.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which should be punctured, as explained in the previous discourse, according to the patient's condition.
Now you should have the patient lie down on a mattress and raise his arm, with the limb slightly bent.
And place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left one; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
And take hold of the probe with your right hand if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if it is the right eye.
And place the tip of the probe near the edge along the thickness of the white of the eye from the inner corner, and then gently push the probe in vertically and rotate your hand.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the curved part.
And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the space from the pupil to the edge of the black part, which is the edge of the eye; for you will see through it with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And then place the probe into the area where the fluid is, and then pull it out once again; thus if the fluid comes out immediately, you will see the patient's relief from the condition that had impaired their vision, and remove the probe from the eye.
And then wait for a moment; if the fluid has come out, you should pull out the probe after waiting a little longer.
And when it has stopped and no more fluid comes out, you should then gently remove the probe, rotating your hand little by little. Dissolve a small amount of rock salt in water and use this solution to wash the inside of the eye. Then place a piece of cloth, or a stopper made of wool infused with warm oil and egg white over the eye.
Let us and those of our time pause over that which is written in the thin white paper book.
And if he does not obey the almond-shaped instrument because of its hardness — for it is one of those men whose urethra is hard — then you should take the spatula, which is called alberid, and this is its shape:
And thus perforate at that joint, and do not stop your hand in the movement, and it is nothing but making a subtle almond-shaped location.
And then insert the almond-shaped instrument as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for rest in a comfortable room where he can sleep on his back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of water to smooth his nature, and do not turn his head right or left at all.
And the bandaging should be according to his condition on the third day.
And then undo that in the dark room and show him the clear sight, and let him see some causes, and then re-bandage on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the hour of healing or soon after infusion. Handle this so that the water can flow easily and quickly due to great and strong attention.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should undo the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
For four days you should cover the eye with a patch and place it over the mouth through which breath is drawn, so that it remains in the greatest darkness.
And then gradually expose it to light and converse with him about its causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from certain visions, and now you should be bold about the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are knowledgeable about the art, and some have said that they make fire in the Ajrad, a madam perforated through which water is sucked.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of madman for which one is considered such when ignorant of these:
And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their extremities are crafted with this subtlety, triangular in shape, the sharp end as such being the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that are attached, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion made of soft words, or to a sea polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature. And one is cancerous flesh, pale and dark in color; the other is fleshy growth, not dark in color.
Therefore, in the case of flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient sit between your thighs and expose it to the sun, and parch the surface of the wound with a heated iron. And then extract the parts from behind, and then incise what you have identified with a sharp, fine spatula in such a way that you know all the flesh has been separated; if it remains intact for any reason where the division is possible, at that moment you should cut it with one of the finer instruments with ease so that it does not remain attached for any reason. But if you are dealing with an abscess that is accompanied by bleeding or pus from a cautery, then you should pause what needs to be done; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then you should cut and cauterize that part where the blood has been divided and all the cavities have been separated.
And then apply dressing near the nose close to the incision with water or vinegar. But if the nose is swollen and you notice moisture reaching the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh that has remained attached to the excessive pus-filled bones to which the separation has not reached.
Therefore, now you should insert some substance into the area that has swelling, and wrap it in cloth strips, placing a quantity equal to the width of your finger or less between each strip. Engage the patient and insert one end of the cloth with the substance into the nostril either directly or through another means as is possible.
Of pus that is made with air, let the odorament be thrown into it so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be sprinkled over its surface, for troops accustomed to this action do so with the children at school, and it is a light cause for him who wishes to perform it.
And then pause the two extremities of the probe, one extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then administer a flesh clamp to the nuts that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is already on the nuts of the probe.
And then extract the probe, and place in the nose near the bleeding a cautery, and do this for three days or more until it has corroded everything that remains of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for about ten days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a drying cure, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon covered, like a small cup, with the opening similarly shaped.
And if you wish, make a tube with a joint like a cane, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, so that you can hold it when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
About thorns in the nostrils.
Often thorns become stuck in the extremities of the nose, and after being extracted, they are bandaged and ointment is applied for several days during which one must be careful about proper care.
And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and heal all of it. And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied burning medicine, which was there before it.
But if the incision is delayed until it has been bandaged, now consider whether it is hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a chronic abscess. For often, when you incise this abscess, great harm will come to the one who suffers from it.
And if the abscess is easily touched and not dark in color, and when incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the patient's illness and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On to sew up the nose and lips and ear when the continuity has been dissolved by plague or similar.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some men.
Therefore, when dealing with any cause of these conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or involves the loss of flesh and blood. Then sew together the two sides of the wound, and subsequently treat what lies within so that it may heal.
And if the edges of the continuity dissolution are already separated and each side is clean, then you should scrape each part of its apparent edge until blood comes out. And then sew the two edges together with stitches and strengthen them. Over these, apply powder of dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster. Let this remain for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus has stopped, and subsequently treat internally so that it may heal.
But the method of sewing is that you may join the continuity dissolution either with needles as we have recommended for sewing the abdomen, or you may join it with thread as you see fit.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two edges in their internal parts.
In many cases, men develop hard swellings in the partitions inside their lips, resembling horse fat, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Then cut the lips and divide each of those hardnesses from all sides, and after the incision, fill the place with finely chopped wool so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with something sour and treat the area with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
About incising the flesh attached to the gums.
Often there is flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called "albulus." Then you should suspend that with a thread or whatever you have and incise it near its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
And then apply finely chopped wool or other drying powders to the area.
And if that flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
About extracting teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the inner and outer parts, and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, tartar deposits, and sometimes darkened areas that turn yellow or green, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth tartar-covered.
Therefore, make the patient sit between your legs and place his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth in which appear such tartar deposits and causes similar to sand until there remains none of them, and do this for the blackness and yellowness and for the others until they are cleansed.
Therefore, if it is still in that of the beginning of the treatment, it is good; and otherwise, then you repeat the treatment on those on another day and on the second and on the third until it reaches its final stage as you wish.
And know that the teeth require various tools of different forms and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the razors with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in its entire extraction, for there is no reason that suffices to replace it when it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime wherein lies the necessity of its extraction.
But when the patient is compelled to have that tooth extracted, you must firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for sometimes the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but shortly afterward the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of practitioners.
Thus when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gums entirely, and then pull it out with your fingers or with fine forceps gradually little by little until you have extracted it.
And then use strong pliers for good leverage or force, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that he does not move, and then extract the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it around the tooth from all sides with ease and endeavor to remove it as was done initially.
But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then you should wrap that fracture with cloth and secure it at the tip with a thin thread so that it does not break during your constriction on it with pliers.
And you must operate extremely carefully when incising around the entire gum area and guard against using too much strength so that you do not break it or leave part of it behind, and return to the patient with care lest the subsequent pain be worse than the initial discomfort.
And be careful that you do not act as some ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and audacity regarding the extraction of teeth; for they often fail to administer what we have recommended. Many times this leads to great harm to sick people, making it much more difficult to remove them later, or leaving the roots of the teeth exposed, or causing you to extract them along with some bones of the jaw, as many instances have testified.
Before the removal of the tooth, let the mouth be washed with hot water or vinegar diluted with salt.
And if blood flows because of this, just as you would do in similar cases, then now take some cerement and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and holding them delicately with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long, short-handed, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
And they should be like pieces of thick handle so that when you grasp them, they are not bent, their extremities should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, with straight extremities, and at the ends of those there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and grasp by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those should have the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the locked jaw.
When you need to remove a tooth that is trapped due to some cause, then it is necessary for you to place a poultice on the area with boiled substances for one day or two until the site becomes softened; and afterwards use such tools or forceps with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Their extremities should be treated inside just as the limb or the forehead.
And if he does not obey you when using these forceps or tongs, then you should cut above this ridge and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And it should have a short thick part about an inch long, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
Then if by this the ridge is properly exposed, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and finer end.
And now assist with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form as follows: and with other instruments which will be described for tooth scraping; because this instrument is useful, and this is its form:
with a triangular end that is curved or short, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar and likewise resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their varied forms.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it hurts, then at that time place the dressing on it as appropriate for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and assist with gestures of this form:
And it should be removed little by little, and should be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is evacuated; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
If there is a small ulcer in the bone, then remove that of that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
When the teeth that protrude do not follow their natural course and particularly when they affect women, especially those of venerable age; therefore, it is necessary for you to consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of filing or covering it, then extract it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows; it resembles the tusk of a boar, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And your incision should be such that when you cut it, it does not take more than a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not become inflamed among the other teeth.
And if it is a protruding tooth that can be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file whose form is as follows:
And let it be of Indian iron and the edge perfectly; and let it be of small points as with a file, with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it may not become another tooth or gum. And apply strips to it at the end, and cut that with razors.
And if it is a tooth of which part is broken and you use the tongue to shape it, now you must file that inside until the roughness of that fracture is smoothed and filled so that the tongue does not wear it down nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are knocked out or loosened by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on them properly, even after you have treated them with astringent medicines and your treatment has not been effective, now in order to prevent them from falling out, fix those that need it with gold filling and not silver, because silver changes color and quickly becomes noticeable, whereas gold never changes.
And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then extend the filling between one or more broken ones, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then continue the treatment at the part where you began, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And so let your thread be such that you can pull out the filings of the teeth without evasion.
And then cut off the excess part of the thread using forceps or scissors, and attach it in each place with skill, and convert and hide them between the healthy tooth and the affected tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then make that as narrow as a Roman coin.
But if it is loosened or broken, pull that or those out during the entire time and replace them with another thread.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two affected teeth, as you see them tied:
And when it happens that you return one tooth or two near their proper places, and they grow back as we have recommended, and they remain healthy.
And only a skilled artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a piece of cattle bone is used for some reason, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is attached as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cutting of the bandage that goes around the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that goes under the tongue sometimes is present from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is that of opening the mouth of the patient, and placing his head in such a way; and raise his tongue, and then incise that band of nerves according to its breadth as far as it is loosened from its attachment.
And if there is any hardness or swelling in that area, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an illness, then you should cut through it lengthwise until you have severed the band so that the swelling may be dissolved.
And be careful that you do not make a cut in the surface of the flesh and thereby sever an artery, causing a flow of blood.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with salt water or vinegar water or plain water; and afterwards leave the tongue hanging loose; this is done so that the patient will hang their tongue out each night to prevent it from healing in an improper manner.
But if bleeding occurs, apply over the area powdered vitriol; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this situation. And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a cyst beneath the tongue.
At times, a cyst appears beneath the tongue, resembling a small swelling that prevents the tongue from its natural movement and can grow large enough to fill the mouth.
And the operation is that you open the mouth of the patient facing towards the light and examine the cyst.
And if you see it of dark brown or black color and hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it inclines towards a whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you place the incision in that area, and dissect it with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all parts; and if blood flows during the hour of your operation, then pause for three breaths, which is vitriol, until the blood congeals.
And then return to your work once you have properly treated it, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat the area with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are in the throat and other abscesses.
When I refer to the area in the throat that is glandular and assembled somewhat together, which appears outside and are called ears, when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark brown in color, with little sensation; then do not touch that part with an instrument.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that part with an instrument due to the flow of blood; instead, let that remain until it has ripened, and then either you will extract it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is delicate, then that should be dissected.
In the operation that you consider, before your operation, see if the abscess from the cautery has healed completely or if it has diminished in any way; and then have the patient lie facing the sun, with their head turned to the side, and open the mouth of the patient, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of the patient down with an instrument of noble form, which is this shape:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be fine like a knife.
When you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then take some (material) and place it under the affected area, then pull it outwards as far as you can. Take another piece of cloth for some reason and then cut it with the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Take another piece of cloth for some reason and then cut it with the instrument whose shape is as follows: and it resembles a pair of forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each is aligned with the other, sharp, made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose shape is as follows: It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have made one incision, make the other in the same manner of cutting, and then cleanse the patient's wound with fresh water.
But if there is bleeding, cleanse the wound with water infused with lemon peels or myrtle leaves and similar astringent substances until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
And in some cases we incise in the neck other abscesses or those two ears, and we incise those as is said in the incision of two melons equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in her throat, the color of which tended to be dark, and it had little sensation, and it had closed her throat, and the woman breathed very narrowly, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if it had not been for a day or two.
And the abscess had spread so much that it reached two sides and emerged through two places.
Then I decided to operate and inserted a probe into one of the openings, and pulled it out, and much matter came out from there, and then I incised that which included the other opening, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the probe in that abscess.
And then I excised a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then her throat was completely clear, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not need to incise that abscess for a long time, and an abscess formed in the place of that one, which I incised before it could spread further.
Then I had some vinegar and cauterized her throat with it; this was for the addition of treatment. And then I wandered around and did not know what God would do next regarding that situation.
Chapter xxxvii.
On incising an abscessed armpit.
When there is a discharge from the armpit, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is below thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
However, when it is cured by what we have mentioned in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and also sometimes an abscess remains inside but is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; and if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark color or black, and does not respond at the center, then you should attempt the incision cautiously, for there is fear of malignancy in such cases.
And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down with their arm raised using an instrument that fits the shape of the area, and then press it firmly. Then pull it downwards and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the double incision procedure.
And you should not incise it beyond what is appropriate within the natural limits without excess, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is distressed by the incision, you should use cautery without fear, and the method of cauterization involves only sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your lap, then press it firmly with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take the sharp water that we described in the chapter on cauterization and apply it to the area, making sure not to make it too thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this shape:
Here is the extract of the cautery in which the medicine is placed as with the cautery of copper alloy, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall onto it due to its proximity, lest it should cause harm to that part.
And then take the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period until you see it become blackened and numb from the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cork and wrap it around the end of the cautery, and dip the cork into the medicine, and insert the cautery with the cork into a tube so that the cork adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cauterization clean around the wound with a cork dipped in syrup, and modify it with what is around the wound from the medicine, and wash it with fresh water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and care for it with remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration out of caution.
In some cases, the uvula is cured with something that is less harsh than cauterization and incision, as it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be heated moderately, and in the middle of the pot place a tray upon which is placed an instrument made of wire like this: it should be made of silver or wire.
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above which the uvula is obscured.
And then proceed with it on those moist areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, for it would be too harsh on the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather wait for the maturation of the abscess.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, now take a cane and attach to the end of it a piece of cloth dipped in vinegar, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the cloth dipped in vinegar prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the wound and of other causes.
Moist substances adhering to the wound or thorn or some other cause.
Then you should remove what is apparent from those substances, on which your eye rests, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of sunlight, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the wound.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the wound, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the wound will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and soak it well in vinegar, then let the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the place where spines are lodged, they will be easily expelled. Take one eel and boil it in vinegar, then remove its intestines and extract the contents; or take a poultice and apply the contents to it and spread it on.
If you do not forget the causes which we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at its end let there be a curve which you insert into its throat with ease.
And when you act, keep his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of his throat, so that it does not injure him or the person who is holding him, or cause harm to the surgeon’s hand.
However, let the patient be well prepared, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause attached and held down, and pull his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the amount that is prepared within him so that it is not forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of a bloodsucker attached to the throat.
When treating a bloodsucker with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, now consider the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you have already drawn his tongue forward with the instrument that we recommended.
Then if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently with a small incision or with fine tweezers.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls off the throat) and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
Take a sponge full of clean water and wipe the mouth with it, then rinse the mouth with that water; and do not let any impurity enter from there, and pour out the water after an hour or so when the blood has settled.
But if it is not possible to do as we have recommended with this, then fumigate the malodor with cypress or with sweet basil using the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and he will be cured.
And there is another method of operation in fumigation for this, which is that you take an olive in which are burning coals and the olive is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and attach the end of the instrument to that hole; then proceed with the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will fall immediately.
And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and abstain the patient from drinking water, and give salty and dry foods, and let them not drink water; and it is also necessary that they follow this regimen strictly.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gum when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you might see them, but with some curvature: which is placed in the gum, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it grasps something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are various types, of many ways, as will be recalled, each in this book.
And they differ in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what they derive from the humidity.
And the second method is according to the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in fleshy parts is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but only at the proper time of maturation of the pus or when they are fully developed.
There are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and not mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints, because when an abscess is close to a joint, its nature extends until you can puncture what is around it, and lightly the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is next to a principal member, delaying its puncture could lead to damage to the main member; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it before it becomes mature; but do not puncture it raw and without proper digestion, except for those close to the buttocks, so that you do not cause premature discharge of pus inside the buttocks, leading to an elongation and forming a fistula, or causing damage before it can heal. You know that you should pierce the abscess when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when there is a reduction in pain and the cessation of fever, and shortly after, a decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should know that the puncture should be made at a place where the pus is closest to the surface of the abscess and from where it will come out easily during healing.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the skin or body if the abscesses are in parts such as the chest, elbows, tendons, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places equally where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, the best time to make the puncture is after the digestion of the second stage has been confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause much harm, and greatly harden the lips of the abscess and its depth.
But some abscesses should be punctured across the grain of the skin or body due to necessity, or according to what is required by the member.
And you should administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a larger puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which the incision should be hollowed and made when it is to be done as with bread, and it is done at a time when it can already stand, just like those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
And of those that are cut open having three angles; and of those in which it is cut open as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the armpits.
And of those in which round incision and lunar incision are administered, and similar to these.
But in the one that does not have any such as its superficial lion abscesses, you should pierce it with a superficial puncture, or just plane it.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted one part from it, then scrape the abscess internally on another day, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its progression until it heals.
And especially if the patient is a robust man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in frailty, for in such cases the vital spirit is quickly resolved through the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you will have operated successfully.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you perform the incision in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or requires a flat incision; if it is small, administer some lint or antiseptic cotton. If the abscess is large and the incisions are many, then you should place dry lint in each tract until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is cut or has been hollowed out along its circumference, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you have treated ulcers or swellings without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and subsequently proceed to treat it according to what is needed from ointments until it heals.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then prepare water and vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the area where the blood is flowing for several times.
If the bleeding continues, then you should administer treatment and care, using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and in division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is on many nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with vinegar and heated oil, and place those on the sites.
And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and this should be wiped on for three days as we have said, and then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what it needs until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Chapter XLIV.
On the section of abscesses that appear on the neck.
On the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of various types of nodes that contain membranes; and their types vary.
And they are soft, and the contents of these are moist, similar to jelly. Of those things which contain humidity like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are lithic, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should know that the extraction of those does not oppose the curvature.
And the operation in the section of those is that you should press them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entrodes, so that you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section along its length by a superficial section according to this form:
And begin in the section from line .B. to line .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, you should then excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause for recurrence, as closely observed tumors return if any cause remains.
And then immerse a piece of cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, as this will corrode everything that remains of that membrane.
And then apply the cloth to the ointment again, a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If there is opposition from your surgeon, now do what I have recounted first.
And similarly treat the mature abscess by incision and cure as we have told you; and the incision of a mature abscess is easier, since it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are cases of abscesses in the head in certain people who are not very moist; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be penetrated, and if anyone were to attempt to treat it that way, they would suffer harm.
However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case of this chapter; also, the abscesses that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears should be treated with superficial incisions.
And pause the incision of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
And then treat those as is appropriate for that type of cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Often these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula of these is within its own proper layer, just as with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
There are various types of these scrofulas, and they are spots. Of those, only some are lithic, and of those, only the ones containing moisture are subject to treatment, and among them are malignant ones which do not respond to cure.
Therefore, when you encounter one that is in good condition during the examination, whose color matches that of the gland and which is not adhered to any part, nor attached to the neck nerves or veins, and is not swollen, cut it with dry scissors superficially above the upper line of .G. between the line of .B., and scrape it completely from both sides of the gland as we have said about abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the scraping not be sharp, so as not to harm you during cutting or disturb the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders that promote blood flow and staunch the wound. Let it rest inside where the abscess subsides, and when the inflammation is mollified and begins to become purulent, proceed accordingly. When the blood has been constricted.
Therefore, return to your operation once you have completed it.
And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, so cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, cut at the hour when you do not injure that scrofula from its root. And cut so that the seam is very strong and let it be such that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then treat that.
And if you cut out that scrofula entirely, then sew together the two lips of the wound and close it up so quickly that there is no time for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is excessive superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then cut into its root and extract it, apply sutures, and do as has been said.
And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision where the place of maturation appears to you, and proceed with an incision that reaches the deepest part of the mass, as we have said.
And then proceed with the incision, apply ointment and treatments suitable for those cases, so that it accelerates what remains of the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
The ancients called this section in the epitome, and no one in our land has seen that operation performed.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men who have a squint, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as by doing this no benefit will be gained since all the veins and the major ones in the affected area are not reached.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or near the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is better to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section across two circles in quantity. The section should be made in soft tissue, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
And if the surgeon is cautious, it is better to first extend the throat skin by one inch and then cut into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then incise the soft tissue as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the membrane which is attached to that part and by the absence of voice.
And let the wound be left open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is feared for perforation, bring together two edges of the wound's skin, and close it up except where it is near the cartilage.
Here is the translation:
And Al-bucasis says that the summary of the speech which we have recounted is an exposition, namely that one sees that some of these abscesses have obstructed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come within reach of death, and the airway is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and he may be saved from death.
And for this commander allows the incision to remain open so that the poison inside may be consumed by the disease; and it is the poison of him for three days; and therefore at that time commands such an incision, and treats it internally until he is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut out part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her, and I heard the moaning as if it were the groan of one near death, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood which had come from the wound in small amounts.
Therefore, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her internally until she was healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
And now I say that in the section on the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the throat externally, and it is called a throat hernia.
This swelling called groin hernia is a large swelling according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental one happens in two ways; one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is like a swelling caused by an arterial clot, and in that case there is cause for concern. And it is not appropriate to treat it with iron unless it is small. And you should proceed with caution and investigate it as mentioned. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then you incise it like you would knots and extract it with water containing soap and bursericlam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is appropriate for treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the Section of Kinds of Knots.
There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And it is necessary for me to describe the difference between a knot and an exitus as would cause doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an exitus there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it completes putrefaction at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
This may not be a heat nor fever nor pain, and it continues like a lion's leap which is to its prey.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a pustule and it is made thus as it vacates, whether larger or smaller, and its kinds are two, either dry or greasy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are motley, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about it at the beginning concerning the disturbance which is called an intermisson, as its form will come in the chapter which is near to this one.
And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this disturbance and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve it there little by little until you know that the disturbance has already penetrated the tissue.
And finally withdraw it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the disturbance and consider what has come out in its wake.
And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you shall incise it with a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if from the wake of the disturbance you do not find moisture, then you shall know that it is dry.
And if it is dry, make an incision in the form of a cross according to this form: as I have taught you, and suspend it with threads, and incise the tissue from all sides easily, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the pus from the node.
If the vein is cut during the operation, it is not possible to extract that one, and you must seal it with stitches so that nothing may remain inside from which infection might arise.
If anything remains inside for any reason, whether little or much, the wound will return according to the vein.
And if you see that something small remains inside, then apply the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and treat the wound, and place on it what will form an abscess cauterized, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, then you should stitch both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
If the vein is either pulsating or non-pulsating and in opposition, then you should cauterize it and fill the site with three applications of vitriol, letting that rest for two days or three until the wound subsides and the bleeding ceases; and afterward return to separate what was cut from the wound.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, there are instruments of three types, some being large, some medium, and some small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Here is the translation:
These are the forms of the experts, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
It consists of three types, for among them is one great, middle, and small.
The form of the great expert is as follows:
The form of the middle expert is as follows:
The form of the small expert is as follows:
It is suitable for them to treat abscesses, excrescences, fistulas, and buboes, as well as other conditions related to the bones and various causes.
They make needles, large and thick, as well as large needles used to sew leather, which are made of citrus thorns, or of wood, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are those made of citrus thorns.
The experts make black feather probes, which they use to probe fistulas in the concavities of which there are reflections, so that they can be reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
They are of three types, for some of them are long, and others are middle-sized, and the others are short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
The form of the large expert (lead probe) is as follows:
The form of the middle-sized expert (lead probe) is as follows:
The form of the small expert (lead probe) is as follows:
The forms of the lancets are of many species, for among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of their curved ones there are hooks, and they are of three kinds.
And among those with curves there are ones having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And of those that have three curvatures, there are three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple lancet is as follows:
The form of a large lancet having two curvatures is as follows: The form of a medium lancet having two curvatures is as follows: The form of a small lancet having two curvatures is as follows:
The form of a large lancet having three curvatures is as follows:
The form of a medium lancet having three curvatures is as follows:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are incised and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and a few others.
Form of a large knife:
Form of the medium-sized knife:
Form of a small knife:
The extremities of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp; they are not designed in such a way to pause, but rather so that during the scraping of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve. And by this means, the patient may be healed quickly after the abscess has been scraped, finding some relief due to the adjustment following the incision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble a reed from which alcohol is made.
And there is a punctured extremity on the side where the spatula is hidden, and along that edge are the parts inside and outside, as you can see when you want to.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the puncture of abscesses so that the patient does not perceive them; they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of flaps from which the blood flow is ligated are of three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
They are made from citrus peel, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these types of flaps, large, medium, and small, because with them you can ligate blood flow quickly when necessary, and also at other times when there is no immediate need for medication.
However, do not use them to ligate blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the thighs and sides of the body, and on the muscles of the arms, and on the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy parts.
And at times, some are made of other small instruments resembling the shape of fish scales; with which blood is ligated when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And at times, some are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
In some cases, men's breasts become enlarged when they begin to sweat during sleep, and then the breasts resemble those of women, and we call this condition Roman apostemata, which is rare.
And for that which you are to treat in this manner, cut it into a crescent-shaped section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then shave off all the roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
If the breast inclines to the sides and is softened because of its size as it often does in women, then cut it into two parts with its excess pus, each part resembling a crescent-shaped section, each contained within the other except for their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line B to the line G. Then shave off the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's discomfort and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Near the Armpit.
These abscesses that occur near the armpit are often of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a hair-like substance.
And only some of these contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be cut in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything has been evacuated from the abscess, you then fill it with thick cloth and leave it until the next day.
Let the cut be treated and cared for with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type of the glands or scrofula, then you should incise it in the manner described in the section on scrofula as well.
If the plague has spread to the point of gangrene, then administer cauterization as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the part above it becomes inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can determine whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the upper part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound in it.
And when it is due to a vein, it appears near the surface of the body.
The incision of this abscess is risky, especially in areas such as the armpits, angles, neck, and other parts of the body; it is dangerous, so its treatment should be avoided, and particularly so if it occurs in the extremities or on the head.
But for an abscess caused by inflammation of the artery opening, incise it in its proper section lengthwise; then carefully open the section with hooks near the artery, and separate the tunics until it is exposed.
Upon that needle I place something and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, which cause I explain in the extraction of two arteries, which are in the temples.
And then place the location between two ligatures with a spatum inside so that the blood stops there until it is all dissolved and the abscess is resolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligatures fall off; and afterward, treat it with appropriate remedies so that it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is within reach concerning the abscess and its condition, and then insert the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie a double thread in such a way that you extract it from the other side, and afterward ligate the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you regarding the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread with the needle below all of the abscess beyond the insertion of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its proper place so that when what is inside it comes out, you then incise the excess of the vessel, and leave what is connected to it.
And then apply powder on which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and afterward administer the treatment with bandages and remedies so that it heals.
Chapter on abscesses which occur due to nerve strain.
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similarly.
And it happens that this occurs in the areas of the joints or the heel, or in any place where the joints are frequently troubled.
It is a severe abscess and resembles the color of the surrounding tissue. It is one of its worst conditions when it is hard and accompanied by vehemence, and at that time the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
And it is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and because of this it is less severe, and it affects all parts equally without going to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, for it would easily lead to contraction.
But when it is in the head or on the forehead, treatment should be done with spatum. But if the abscess is small, then at this time treat it with forceps and incise it carefully.
But if it is large, then suspend it with ligatures, and excise it, and afterward close the wound; and adjust the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
On the section of abscesses which occur due to pain in the belly.
Thus, for some persons, swellings occur in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms; the root of these is delicate and their head is thick. And often the lips of these are smooth, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those whose magnificence is great.
And I myself have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts which resembled mushrooms more closely, and there was no difference between those white ones with their delicate roots.
And the lips of those were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore, I incised them and found within one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other weighing about six uncias.
And the procedure in incising them is that you consider whether the malady is humid, and if the color of the tumor is white, humid, with delicate roots; then you incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, for the moisture and swelling must be expelled by drying up the blood; and if there is much bleeding, cauterize that.
And if you find the malady rare and fearful, guard against incising with an iron instrument; rather, take fresh lead, apply it to that tumor in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And immediately adjust the tightness of the lead band; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until it is detached and falls off by itself.
If there is a thick pus in the wound, at that moment when making the incision into it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially if it is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you may incise half of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then treat it internally until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to incise pus that is of a dark color, with little sensation, and hard in consistency, for that is usually cancerous.
And this will come as a reminder regarding these matters.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the belly, and through these openings, either tissue or intestines protrude as in other ruptures; or it can be caused by blood that flows from a vein or artery depending on what is present there; or by trapped air.
However, if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and may appear in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats and then returns; it is soft to the touch, and becomes more prominent after bathing and vigorous work.
Meats that are moist, when pressed with your hand, do not remain hidden, nor are they constricted, nor are they hard.
And if it is due to inflammation, then these signs appear: the abscess turns to a declining blackness.
Meat that is badly grown results in a severe, large, and hard abscess, which penetrates according to the amount.
If it is due to gas, then the touch of it is light.
And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to inflammation of an artery, or a vein, or gas; then it is advisable for you to be cautious about treating it, since there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I mentioned abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or membrane, then it is advisable for you to command the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to stand between your hands on their back; then encircle the area with a piece of linen in the circumference of the navel where you have felt with your hand; and then extend half of the abscess above about an inch; and then tie it in the circumference tightly with strong thread or string according to the proper method.
Then pierce the center of the abscess extended over the bandage and insert your finger into that area to feel for the bowel; and if you find it caught or held by the bandage, then carefully extract it and move the bowel away from inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the cloth, now take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
And if it is contrary to your art or vein, now surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place in those two strong points and interpose two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then press the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off on its own; or incise it when it is softened and can be drained, and then treat it with whatever medicine is needed until it is healed.
And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then treat it with what is needed to heal and consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
We have already discussed in the division, the types of wounds and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is important for the treatment to avoid infection so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have also explained the causes and precautions in the treatment of wounds.
And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in places where it is possible to remove them completely, just as with wounds in the breasts or armpits and similar parts of the body assigned to extract everything, especially when they are starting small.
When you are old and gray, do not seek to undertake it, for I cannot heal from that illness nor have I seen another, nor has anyone else reached that.
And the operation is performed as we have said, when you proceed and leave the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then bleed him if retention is found to be evident.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation will take place, and then hold up hooks that are needed for it; and then wrap all around with a good cloth to prevent any cause of infection inside so that no reason for it remains. And let the blood flow freely, and do not cut it hastily, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the available tools.
But if it is contrary for thick blood to coagulate in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the treatment of hydrops (edema or dropsy).
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment of it with medicines.
And the one that is treated with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of tympany or hydropsycha, for this is fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not confine your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached debility, or if it is another illness accompanied by hydrops, just as if it were in the chest or abdomen similar to those cases. Then guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
If you see the patient with abundant vigor, and in them there is no other illness but hydrops alone, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant presses the abdomen of the patient with their hand, expelling the water from below the navel, and then take a spatum spinos (a sharp instrument) in this manner:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp tip like a spatum; however, it should have some slight tapering little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowel, and thus injure it.
And then consider whether the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in your section you keep away from the navel by a distance of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
But if the origin of the hydrops is from disease of the kidney, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not rush to that place and cause harm.
Here is the translation:
I then pierce the cyst so that it reaches the space where the fluid is. I then extract that and insert an instrument which has this form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's hide, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut like the shape of a pen, as you can see.
And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that fluid immediately descends upon the instrument, so that in each moment it evacuates a certain quantity of fluid; for if you evacuate more than what can be handled in an hour, quickly the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it could lead to suffocation which is close to death.
But evacuate that fluid according to the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
And then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is caused by the fact that it is immediately retained by the ligature that holds the hole on the cyst which you are advised to pierce in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave too much fluid remaining.
If you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture on him in bath; and let him wait in the sun for a long time; and treat him with desiccative medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the intestines near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what has been mentioned before.
Chapter .lv.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the top of their urethra not perforated (or it is straitened or not in its proper place).
Therefore, when there is no perforation upon its birth, treat it with a subtle cauterization according to this method:
And place a fine lead needle in the straitened part and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not wash away this closure.
But for the one whose passage is straitened, treat him with a lead needle as we have said, for several days until it becomes wider.
But for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that which is born and the urethra is at the end of the penis, so it cannot urinate properly unless he lifts the penis to one side; and it is not suitable for generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and this is a minor illness.
Here is the translation:
And guard yourself that in your operation for hemorrhoids, such things may happen to you; and pause there at the place where you stop the blood, and cure the wound within it so that it heals.
Chapter LVI.
About balanitis, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this balanitis occurs in the penis as a soft fleshly protrusion.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant: suspend it with a thin thread and stop the bleeding until it dries up completely; then apply a poultice made of Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat the area with a cleansing ointment until it is healed.
And if the balanitis is malignant and has changed in color, then you should administer cauterization around the inflammation and its extent.
But if the balanitis occurs in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should treat the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you should treat the part that is outside, because when treating both together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and in the foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored, what is about to become corrupted, or what is already corrupt; and afterwards apply a dressing over it using honey, which has been crushed with ground fennel seeds and finely sieved.
And proceed with that treatment until she is well.
If blood flows excessively, apply cauterization as follows:
because cauterization is beneficial in two situations, namely when there is excessive bleeding and when the condition has become infected.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and completely destroyed, then you should insert a lead cannula into the prepuce so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is intact, and circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to an infection or abscess), you should use a blunt spatula to separate them until the bond dissolves and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should use a spatula gently on the head of the penis and the foreskin, because when the foreskin is thin, it can be easily pierced due to its delicacy.
And proceed to separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a fine thread, which has been moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with styptic herbs until it is healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for the continuity of other diseases; but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since it properly affects children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way to achieve recovery.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in some of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have observed is that most surgeons and midwives use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread with glue and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and found no better cleansing with scissors than with thread and glue in circumcision, because most times one avoids the foreskin being too tight above, as the foreskin of the penis has two layers, and remains a layer below, making further incision and certain pain unnecessary. And in cleansing which is done by alphabeti, and is digital, used by barbers, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed to be safe, as it easily leads to internal injury.
But in the operation using a nail, you easily err and corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it remains in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
But with the cleansing that is done with scissors and thread with glue, the goodness and experience reveals itself to me, because the scissors are suitable for proportional incision, as the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and so when you press your hand proportionally to both sharpnesses, and cut according to a measurement at once; it is made in such a way that the compression of the glue conforms to the shape containing the foreskin all around, with which you do not err completely.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down if it is one who can be somewhat understood, and that you tie the thread only on his penis, and leave that for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding. And then make him stand between you preparedly, and do not let him sit down; and hide the scissors in your hand or place them nearby, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand onto his penis and blow into the channel, and pull that inside until the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of the blades be blunt and the other sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two middle fingers alike.
The mistake in cleansing is that you remove too much of the inner lining, either completely or partially where you make the incision.
Therefore, you should apply the dressing for as long as your finger indicates before the abscess in that area bursts, and then incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it for as long as your finger indicates, wait one inch before the abscess bursts and then incise it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling persists below the abscess, you should leave it until the pus is ready to come out, then gently squeeze it, and incise it when you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the abscess, for that is where it should not be done.
And therefore, treat it with the powder that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the lining, and you follow the parts above, do not pay attention to that.
And therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter L VIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or clotted blood, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the cause of what we have said is not dissolved with water and it strongly affects the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin like a quill tube, as fine as a sparrow's feather in subtlety and length about half a palm, to which a fine tube should be attached at the end.
And the method of inserting the urine through this instrument is that you take a thread doubled and tie it to the end of the wool or cotton with good binding; and place the ends of the thread in the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, cut it off with scissors and then insert the siringua gently and slowly.
And have the patient lie on a chair, and raise his bladder with it, and lubricate the siringua with oil, olive oil, and rose water.
And then gently insert the siringua until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where it joins; and then push the siringua into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, and that causes the patient to reach the empty space. If this is not done in this order, but instead inserted into a winding passage, it will not be correct.
And gradually extract the poison with the wool little by little, for the urine dries out the wool.
And extract that and use for treatment urine, and use a cup, do not stop doing this and use a cup until the bladder is evacuated and the pain is relieved.
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or constricted pus, and you want to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but at the end of it, it is blunt, that is closed. And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, similarly on the other side.
At the beginning it is concave, in which what is to be introduced should fit, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture from it, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled far, as a clampcedra has naphtha applied to it in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull with it the water that is introduced into the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the extremity of the leather strip into the clamp as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with water that you use, for that moisture reaches the bladder soon, and the patient suffers from it.
The shape of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which should resemble a small feather, and below it a hollow tube.
Then take a bladder of wool, and place the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder inside it, and then tie it securely between two with strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the clamp.
Then apply your hand to the bladder with the moisture until it is structured properly, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available, you take a piece of parchment and make that into a circle; then pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as would be attached similarly, so that you place in it the moisture you want from humidities, oils, and waters.
Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of stone extraction.
We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stone and cure thereof by medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have said about the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And thus narrating it with that kind of exposition, clear and concise.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder primarily affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals, experiences painful urination, and shortly thereafter feels relieved; and these are the main points about it.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals. But in young adults, it is moderately treatable compared to those cases.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment more difficult; And if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes all foods that might prevent the passage of the stone due to their inquiry.
Here is the English translation:
Take that piece of skin which is most suitable for covering the wound, and let it be taken from an area where there are no important structures, so that the entire bladder-like structure will hang down towards the lower parts.
And then examine it and everything around it.
If you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately cut it open on that.
And if you do not immediately find it with your touch, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a woman, or the middle finger if the patient is a man, and insert it into their anus. And examine the stone to see where it is in relation to your finger. And gently move it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger and expel it outward towards the place from which you made the incision.
And instruct one assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to stretch the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to raise the fold of skin that is below the thighs, near the location of the incision.
And then insert a probe that has this shape: and cut in the area between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle but towards the left side; make the incision over the stone with your finger in the anus, and ensure that the incision is transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide while the internal part is narrow according to how much you need to remove the stone, as much as possible without making it larger, because your finger will easily compress the stone behind the incision, and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that there is some stone which has angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish it smoothly.
And there is one that resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is easily polished smooth.
Therefore, for the one that has angles and edges, adjust it into the fissure.
And if it is not drilled accordingly, now cover over that part, or apply force to it gently with a suitable gesture, the end of which should be like a file with which you smooth the stone without slipping; or insert an intricate curved instrument between them.
But if you cannot do that, now expand the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, staunch it by pressing with vinegar of tartar.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then gently push a little further from that point; and similarly proceed if they are in greater numbers.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to incise it with a large section, because this causes the patient one of two evils: either death or that they suffer from continuous urine distillation, because the area does not heal completely.
But administer an expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture of it with forceps so that you extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pulp of aloes and dragon's blood, and press it firmly. And place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixed, so that the abscess may yield.
And apply the poultice to the affected area on the first day, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, then apply a healing ointment made from chamomile and one made from balsam until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the wound, which is adhesed and corroded, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and because of this, urination is prohibited), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if you leave it, it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to its condition for healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you should examine both the wounds and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, as those treated by this method are less likely to require surgery; and I have seen this, and that you should take a fine iron probe, which has the shape of:
with a triangular tip, sharp, fitted to a handle.
Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Approach the iron to the thread, piercing with ease until the piercer reaches that stone. And rotate the piercer with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will make the penetration so that it allows the other side to enter; for the urine is immediately relieved.
And then press your hand on what is broken of the stone that is left above the thread, for that part is shattered, and it is discharged with the urine, and the illness is cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some cause that prohibits it, then tie a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone. And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties. And then extract it. And then untie the ligature and clean the congested blood, which is caused by the condition.
And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other tie above it, because when the wax near the edge of the stone is untied, the wound will return to its place and the illness will recur.
And for this reason, it is necessary for you to tie the wax above so that you lift the wound to the upper parts or return it carefully, and the illness will recur as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult at that time, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman is very light or weak.
The second is that you do not find a woman who is honest enough to disclose whether she has visited the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation itself.
The fourth is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a distant incision is needed, and this is dangerous.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek an honest and knowledgeable female assistant, and such women are rarely found.
But if you lack such an assistant, then seek a discreet and careful woman, or present a respected midwife who is honest about women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, present her and command her to do everything you instruct her from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to ensure that the woman is honest, so she should insert her finger into the woman's body to locate the stone.
Then if you find that one, cut it below the joint, and now order them to incise on that one.
But if it is not a virgin, now order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that one well.
Then if you find that one, now proceed to gradually remove it from the bladder's opening towards the posterior at the height of its strength until it reaches the end of the issue.
And then incise on that position in the middle of the vagina at the end of the issue from whichever part is convenient for you and push the stone into that place, and make sure the finger does not slip off the stone when cutting below it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Then you should know the types of stones based on what you understand and wish to convey.
And if you see blood flowing, apply crushed vitriol to that area for one hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut, then sprinkle powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bandages and compression, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone [or clot] and do not remove it, for the patient may die quickly otherwise. And then treat the wound.
When the intensity of the bleeding has diminished after some days and the wound is healing, then you may return to your operation once the clot has been expelled.
Chapter LXII.
About the treatment of hernias.
A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the arch of the inguinal canal, which contains the spermatic cord, and this is called a pouch.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty tissue that nature has prepared for the passage of the spermatic cord, such that it appears to be another cord; and this is the inguinal canal between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not like that immediately.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the inguinal region, through which this matter protrudes, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the inguinal area.
And this moisture can have various colors; the color of it may incline to yellowish or reddish, or brown, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and these are the most common types.
And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water lies are as follows: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then at that moment the abscess is round, sloping slightly in length like a hen's egg, and the heat appears, because the moisture contained there spreads on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like two eggs side by side, and for this reason one estimates it to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the redness of the heat and the white skin, then at that moment it is below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should examine the color of the moisture in the abscess through a puncture where its form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the marks of the puncture, judge about what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and to apply the body of the abscess to the vapor.
And let him lie supine on his bed raised somewhat high for some reason, and place under the abscess warm cloths.
And you should stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his hand from one of the two sides to the redness of the heat and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the redness of the heat from the middle location along its length near the navel.
And let the incision be made according to the rule equally distant from the line that should follow the hair of the pubis, until it reaches the white line encompassing.
And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should be suspended more and examined on the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the white line full of water at a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the white line in the parts above; and do not touch the membrane surrounding the pubis, and incise the white line in that manner as much as possible. And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially its thin layer carefully, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the procedure proceeds from that outside of its membrane during the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the white line, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the pubis membrane with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the organ corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspension, and remove the organ, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
After you have wiped away the blood, immerse wool in oil or rose oil; then place another piece of wool that you have immersed in wine and oil over the two thighs and the area around the belly; cover this with folded cloths and powder, and bind all of these together as follows:
Then take two cloths and fill them with crimped wool according to this pattern; make the ends so that they press against the skin or moistened wool, and attach them to the structure at the waistband of the trousers, one end reaching into the cleft of the buttocks, the other extending to the groin area, and two ends over each thigh, and all attachments should be securely fastened to the waistband of the trousers.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery and incise along the root of the groin, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white substance containing the fluid becomes visible. Then you take a cautery in the following form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
Then pierce that white substance with it, and ignite it until all the moisture has been expelled.
Then extend the white substance with hooks and remove it with hooks, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; incise as much as you can while ensuring that all of it is removed, and be careful that your hand does not touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than bleeding, and better than dry cutting.
If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterization, or bleeding, then choose the times when these oppose you least, and use the treatment that suits you best according to what has been said.
But if the patient is weak and does not wish to undergo a second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is serous.
Then it is necessary for the patient to sit on some raised support, and you should puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and place the incision according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide enough for all the fluid to drain out.
And then make an incision near the edge and ligate it there so that the remaining fluid can drain out. And then treat it so that the wound heals.
But if there is opposition to the escape of fluid at that time when you puncture it: and this happens only because the white fat in the wound opening opposes and prevents the outflow of fluid, then you should place in the wound a straw or instrument with which water from blisters is extracted, as described; or apply slight pressure to the wound with something small.
And know that the water returns, and it is placed for about five months or so; and when it has been set aside, then it should be pierced according to that method, because in this way the patient will have passed his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in major cases; therefore, in my view, abandoning it and being saved by that better method.
And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this is done for various reasons: either due to acute, sharp excess which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And when the abscess becomes stone-like, its color is dark, and there is no comfort from it.
And sometimes it is caused by the binding of the arteries, and by the swelling of those that are already perceived from the memory of it, or by the swelling of veins.
But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and there is no need for that part to be touched.
May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein does not disperse for any reason due to the compression of the said vein.
And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should incise the tendon of the genitii, and immediately place the fat above the sections, extract the white lymph, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory ligaments after delivering it from all parts.
Therefore, if the fat has already consolidated with that flesh, now it is necessary for you to extract the fat and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion between any part of the lymph or between what is between the vessels, now it is necessary for you to deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, now it is necessary for you to incise all of that, and extract the fat as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the testicles.
It is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to a boil on the soft tissue of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking painful.
In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a reminder of what caused it.
However, they must perform the operation as they did in the beginning.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised stool; then apply bandages to suspend the testicles below; and then take hold of the genitalia with your hands and wrap them tightly around the penis as far as you judge appropriate; and have another assistant help you, stretching them out vigorously.
Then incise with a sharp, narrow blade in a transverse section between the veins so that the vessels are exposed.
Then carefully remove it completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is done on flaps.
Then place a needle with a double thread in it, and tie it at the beginning of the location where you act, and tie it again at the end of them. Then incise them in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from fetid and corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would any other wounds where you want healing to occur, so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles do not become damaged, for it is not harmful if they do not.
But if you act on all the vessels, then the testicles must be removed or become detached from the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the vessels, and become dislodged, or attach in a way that is not beneficial for them.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the caphac extended over the front part of the sides of the belly, because the intestines enter through that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the caphac or of its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the caphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess within the area where the caphac compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a tear in the caphac, as at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it appears as an abscess differently from what would be expected near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, and its contents are beyond the caphac.
And in some cases, the membrane is pushed out with the intestine, and this type of intestinal hernia is called a circumcrural hernia.
And in some cases, it occurs with swelling, and in other cases the intestine splits open, and here it is contained, and this is very painful for the patient, and in many cases it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid surgery in such cases.
Here is the translation:
From the side cut the membrane which seals the membrane of the testicles above, and incise the membrane of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert hooks into both sides of the section as you deem necessary to open the section with them.
And if you make the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove of that part.
And then remove the fatty tissue around which the membrane of the testicles is wrapped, until the hard white capsule of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into what seals the testicle, between the hard white capsule which is behind the membrane of the part, and between the subsequent layer, and separate any adherence that is in the rear part.
And then pull back the membrane of the testicles from the external parts, and with this extend the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the part with the capsule to the section; and instruct the assistant to raise it up, and you will dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complete solution.
And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped in the hard white capsule. But if you find any cause for concern, then return it to the abdomen behind.
And then incise in the area below the groin where there is a section from which blood and pus flow, as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the plague; and apply the bandage as we have recommended (and sometimes the area is cauterized with white cypress, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, as often happens) and leave the bandage so that it does not fall off.
But if the dressing of it is delayed, hot water should be applied, and placed on it so that it stays as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, there is none who has dared to attempt its cure with iron.
And the earlier ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia involving the bowel; which is to ligate the veins near the section with ease; and then dry up in the proper place around the abscess that opens it, until the veins fall off.
Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said until they are healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the incision that is made in the glands.
In some cases, an incision is made in the glands as we have said, and the location is examined.
And they do not attribute any cause of the pouches to the genitals; and if they do attribute it, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjustment of the fissure in the scrotum is made where the pouch descends into the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, which is near the glands as we have said, and because it causes softening and swelling, and the area is examined.
And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narrative.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried using a section across the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then stretch the white scrotum that is below the testicle until it is exposed.
And then take the cautery and place it over the prominent area of the scrotum, and press it towards the front of the abdomen.
And then apply the two prominent areas over the tip of the cautery, and stitch one to the other.
From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and do not incise into the depths completely, nor extend the hook, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And in the treatment of this injury, when you incise the pus, clean that and restore the wound until it is healed; for the depth is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is best in this place, for it is nearer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
And if you wish, cut away the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and secure it with a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed and the pus subsides.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration according to our law is excommunicated, but for the reason it is read to me wherefrom I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by someone who suffers from it, the physician knows how to cure it; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration in other animals for our use through them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar to such animals.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting off, or by dividing and sectioning.
But in the one that is performed by cutting off, the method of the operation is that we should scald the animal in hot water until the testicles become soft and are loosened so that they can be removed. And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are separated and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration performed by division and sectioning, hold the animal and press the scrotum of the animal with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments and make an incision on each side such that two processes are exposed.
And then cut those parts after you have peeled each one. And do not leave on those parts any cause for infection, but make the castration subtle so that it is above the veins.
And this method of castration performed by cutting off is better, because cutting off leaves some cause from the testicles for which the animal desires to copulate.
Regarding the treatment of internal wounds, let them be healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: the first appears where there is a space between the testicles, resembling a female form with characteristics such as hair.
And in some cases, that same place through which urine passes is located between the testicles.
In women, there is one kind: the part of the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man, slightly recessed as if it were between the thighs like the scrotum and testicles of a man.
The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is that you should cut away the tight tissues so as to remove the cause of that condition, and then treat it as you would other wounds.
And in the second kind of men, where urine passes through a space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of protrusions and raised flesh due to causes related to women.
A protrusion that is slightly loose due to natural causes should be treated and managed carefully; in some cases, it becomes enlarged in women to the extent that it extends similarly to men and interferes during intercourse.
Then you should have on hand the excess of linting with your hand or with a lancet.
And do not stop at the incision, especially at the root of the hair, so that there is no flow of blood.
And immediately take care of that during the treatment of the wounds until it is healed.
Meat born is meat that grows in the hollow of the mother until it fills that space, and easily spreads to other parts like a tail (and for this reason some first called it "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would with linting, and take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Pterygium.
Pterygium is when the woman's hymen is not perforated or the opening is small. And it can be either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a disease that preceded it, and that condition is caused either by loose flesh or by thick phlegm.
And it occurs either at the root of the uterus, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prevents intercourse and conception and childbirth, and also easily disrupts menstruation.
And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent; but if it is not apparent, you should seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
If there is an obstruction and it is small, and it is near the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two lips pellets, and close by you place the fingers called indicators of both the nearest ones.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread apart, and stretch the two lips firmly so that the small obstruction is broken and the blockage is opened.
And then take some linen and soak it in oil and place that on the site, and instruct the patient to leave it as is so that the cut area does not heal too quickly.
But if the obstruction is large and thick, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and cut it open.
And you should have the medicines that stop blood flow without causing harm, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and feathers, mixed with fresh egg white.
And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
And then proceed with the other treatment for healing until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the greater part of other tissues, and then you should cut according to this method. If this is due to an abscess in the vein, do not make any opposition to it by applying iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors that occur in the anus of women.
Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the openings of small veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form thrombi.
And now I have mentioned in the division the types of those conditions and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi when they are in the vicinity of the vein and do not appear to the senses, at this time no treatment should be performed with iron on them.
However, those that are in the opening of the vein, on which one can feel a sensation, are those that can be treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a suitable position and then grasp the hemorrhoid with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with razors.
And then powder should be applied to stop the flow of blood from them using one of the powders for incisions without causing irritation, such as acacia and similar substances.
And then bind the area with a dressing for one hour, and afterward immerse it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and gallnuts and similar substances.
Take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster, which you should apply to the back.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to both sides of the navel and on the nipples without scarifying.
And take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of anise or in the juice of hyssop with vinegar, then apply it to the affected area; afterwards, treat the area with internal remedies until it is healed.
And treat it internally until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the piercing of the uterus in accidental cases involving the mother.
Various types of abscesses occur in the mother, such as carbuncles, stone-like abscesses, ulcerous abscesses, hemorrhoidal abscesses, rectal abscesses, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses. And I have already discussed these illnesses and their types and the signs of them, as well as their treatments in detail.
And what I say in this treatise about abscesses applies to those that occur in the mother when they are among the abscesses that can be treated successfully, and if you want to know how the procedure is performed with iron.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness and sensitivity in that area, then do not proceed with piercing it, but treat it with what helps internal maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
During the hours when you wish to perform circumcision on a woman, place her on a bed that has two supports; and recline her on her back and arrange her feet at the part below the belly, and spread out her thighs, and position her arms above her head, and bind some of them with bandages appropriately.
Let the midwife follow on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is stretched, the form of which will be described in the cases that will be mentioned.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the line of the opening of the woman's birth canal, and ensure that what is inserted into the birth canal does not exceed its natural opening, and guide the patient carefully. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the birth canal, then place pillows around the tissue of the birth canal's opening so that it prevents the insertion of any instrument into the birth canal.
And it is necessary to place the screw that runs along the side of the instrument, and let the practitioner hold the instrument while turning the screw so that the opening of the birth canal is stretched.
And when the wound appears and is touched by the hand and feels soft and moist, then it is necessary to dry that area with a dry cloth.
And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and apply a pad to the dried area near the opening of the birth canal.
Take a piece of clean cloth and place it on the wound after dipping it in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated twice a day with what is suitable for this until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the inflammation are washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or iris root has been boiled, and then returned to the dressing.
And if the inflammation is deep in the wounded area, it is now necessary to avoid treating it with iron, instead using what has been described in the section on this type of care.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat malformed embryos in cases where there is an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs. When you see a woman pushing with her lower parts and desiring to breathe fresh air, and if she is illuminated by what is above her during labor, and the birth comes out head first, then you know this birth is according to natural form, and it is the delivery of it over her own head, and the second child either hanging from or suspended below the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it comes out head first, the second one will follow, and both should be cleansed of any excesses with proper care.
He who lies in another part than this is unnatural and unsuitable, for when the drunkard lies on his back, his body is placed head first and feet upward, or one hand or foot above, or his head and one hand, or at his belly, and he turns lightly upon his side, and resembling the figures of him that is unsuitable.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I will show all the figures of those things, and which angle is in those by it that it is signified by this and stands upon this.
When the seed is placed upon its head by natural inclination, and it is vigorous on the woman and done in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then let that be done, or let women have it, and evaporate the essence with fenugreek juice and aromatic oils.
And then the midwife should insert her small and split finger, or make that one with her fingernail to scrape out what is inside it of moisture. And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with powder of feathers and powder of fenugreek with eggs.
And then command him, after the anointment, to be squeezed and make that one sneeze with conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
And if both of them [the parts] are torn away at the beginning, then you should reduce them to ease little by little. But if you do not obey the instrument, then make the woman lie on a cushion and lift her off it, and afterward place the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the movement.
And if the parts are not returned internally and the birth is retained, then incise them and extract the remains of the birth or tie the cord to one part and extract that part equally, for it will be torn away.
When the birth is on the thighs, then you should push them upward, and afterward turn the birth little by little, and then even it out, and then take hold of one part and extend them little by little.
But when it is removed inside the body, then you command them to sneeze, and make that person sneeze according to the condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you should return the birth little by little until you place it in its natural position again, for it will be expelled easily at that time.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take mastic and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar with good pounding, and afterward apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the lowest part of her abdomen. And if you cannot find the navel hair in clear water, enter until you reach the hypochondria.
And when the upper parts below the skin are inflamed, apply the smoke of myrtle for inhalation and place it under them. And when the smoke inhalation lasts for an hour, then place it on a piece of cloth, and afterward make them sneeze and expel it from the mouth, and remove it, and press the lower part of their belly gently with compression, because the result will be quickly expelled.
Examine the excretion laterally with one of their hands. Here is the translation:
And if it cannot be done, then place it on the cloth, and crush the items with strong pounding, and afterwards apply dressings made of mucilaginous substances.
And if childbirth has occurred, then place her on that seat, and subsequently examine the reduction of the hand [likely referring to a part of the birthing apparatus or anatomical structure], and ensure that the delivery occurs according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to push inward until it is expelled.
Also regarding the delivery, place it on the back with its sides expanded and the bandage behind its greatest width. Let the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gradually turn that little one, so that it becomes easier.
And when it is done and the proper time has come, then place it on the one we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
And then instruct her to hold herself gently little by little, and when you have done this, place her on that seat on a cloth and tell her to lean over the right side, and then instruct her to push; and make her sneeze under these conditions. The fetus is prepared and positioned on the side.
When you see the fear of the mother according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you incise the second part with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
Here is the translation:
Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born rarely, and sometimes three or four [are born], but this is strange and seldom happens; yet these causes come from nature, not from living things.
And among those, whether they are multiples, there is a second one, and they are separated by the ciphac, distinguishing them entirely through the umbilical cord of each. And sometimes they are born this way naturally quickly, and sometimes they are born this way unnaturally, as we have recounted.
And if some of them have difficulties during childbirth and reach the state we described regarding the unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, whether quickly or slowly, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared for childbirth, leading to health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is miscarried.
Sometimes they are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it has been verified for me that a woman miscarries at six months, and another at ten months, all formations, the cause of which was determined by the measurement of the wise.
And all of this must be known by the midwife as it is crucial for accurately recognizing such cases, and thus one should proceed with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it has not yet been expelled, and you must use surgery to do so, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not affected by any of those conditions for which she is feared to suffer loss.
At this point, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
And the minister should hold her by both legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil, honey, and mucilage made from linseed, fenugreek, and flax seeds.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she should gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where to hook into the fetus.
And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and if so, you should place the hooks in the hands of the fetus, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the chin, or at the clavicle, or in the proper places along the ribs, or under the armpits.
But if the descent is foot first, then in the buttocks, or in the middle of the back.
Take the needle in your right hand and place its curvature at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, then insert it with ease into one of those places we have mentioned until it reaches the diseased area.
And then place and insert another needle beside it, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And let it be avoided in all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done with teeth during their extraction.
And it is necessary in the place where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and roll there what is retained.
Then if a part of the fetus is dislodged, the needles should be moved to a place that is more suitable; and do this until all of the fetus is dislodged.
But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then wrap a cloth around it; and afterwards extract it until it is completely dislodged, and either incise it at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or contraction occurs during its extraction, or it is in the head of the tight water bag, then insert between the fingers and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And it seems that if the bone is large by nature: then at this time it must be sawed through with a chain-saw or taken out as we have said; and next remove from the bones what remains with the forceps.
And if the bone is bent and is compressed at the fork, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the bones may be effused.
But if it is not complicated, nor does it protrude abnormally, then you should saw the bone immediately as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or in it there is dropsy, then you should puncture that area through which flows the moisture that is within.
But if the bone is on the ribs, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it to the mouth of the artery is distant.
But if it is compressed against the abdomen and the bones, then you should take out that blade which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and the bones through which flows what is within them.
But if the other members remain still and the bone returns, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the artery is open, then insert your hand into the wound, and search for the bone, and pull it with the said instrument into the mouth of the artery, and then insert an inch or two inches, and pull it with those.
And if the mouth of the artery is compressed by an abscess that has occurred, then it should not be touched directly; instead, you should administer moist and fatty applications. Apply plasters; and have the patient use waters that soften and moisten.
And if the condition is on the side, then if possible, puncture it; and administer what we have said about the living patient.
And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces, and extract it.
And make sure not to leave any cause inside for the second time.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for boils that are similar to those that occurred previously.
And if there is bleeding, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other fetus was also dead. It happened to one who had for a long time a boil in their navel area; and it became swollen inside with a pus-filled focus, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there was no bone in the belly.
And then I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Thus, in treating the ulcer, extract the bones from it, the female bone existing in its marrow channels, and having seen this method over a long time, he corrected it with a little hand.
And it is not strange to do so, but rather in this lies the science and aid for what the physician craftsman uses his hand to administer in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the substance.
Form of a spiral in which the main one is used:
This is the form of a stretcher on which he equalizes the leaves, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two poles. However, this spiral should be finer than a string, and it should be made of copper or the wood of a tree.
And the width of each pole should be two fingers, and the margin of each side should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two poles there are two adjustments made of that same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the mouth of the main one so that it can be opened by them when you revolve the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form, but finer and lighter:
It should be made of copper or wood resembling the form of tweezers. However, at the extremity of the bone to which it is added, do this as many times as necessary, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
And when you want to open any of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the opening of the womb until the metrona does what you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients described:
Form of impelling in which the feces is expelled:
Form of attachment in which the large intestine is contained
And it resembles forceps, at the end of which there are teeth, as many times as necessary. And some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times as necessary, with teeth like those of a reed in which is incised and contained. Form of attachment rarely used:
Form with a hook having a spine:
Form with a hook having two spines:
Form of spatum having two ends in which the head is divided:
Form of two spatulas:
With those instruments such exercises are performed, and when the various types of them have been multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and more beneficial for people according to their quantity.
And you should not hesitate to prepare any of those instruments, wherever they may be needed, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the second [incisor].
When the second [tooth] is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the woman to pinch her nose and then sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if this causes it to come out by means of this action, that is good.
And if not, take a leaf and pierce it at the edges to place over the mouth of the mother along with medicines such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla (camomile), Arabian scammony, cinnamon bark, and saffron. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the leaf, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the mother's cavity.
And then instruct her to sneeze as we have said, and the second [tooth] will be quickly expelled.
But if this treatment fails and it does not come out, then instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond oil, and then insert it into the woman's vagina and search for the second [tooth] with it. When you find it, grasp it little by little. If it is attached to the mother’s gums, then proceed as we have recommended, and when she finds the second [tooth], extract it slowly so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the ulcer with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against overworking on that by repeated abstraction, but rather ensure what is extruded from the mouth of the mother lies in contact with the woman's body, and subsequently treat it with enguent and tetrafarmacon; for this will cause it to be absorbed within a few days and thus dissolve and be expelled.
But when it is absorbed, it rises to the head and to the stomach, and this worsens the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate treatments for that.
But some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with nitzot (a type of herb) and dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated due to retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
It should be made of wood or ivory.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep it there until the sub-fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
On the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Some children are born with their anuses not pierced, which are small and closed. Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully pierce that mentioned opening with her finger; and if not, she should use a sharp probe to pierce it, being careful not to touch the membrane.
And then apply lint soaked in wine and oil to it; and subsequently treat the area until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead (as a cauterizing agent).
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part, close to the body or near the buttocks outside of it or in the area between them, tend to be hard and thick.
And if it is one fistula or multiple.
And as that hardness subsides and there is a discharge of watery white liquid or subtle pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate further.
And these penetrating ones are known by what is felt during discharge and by windiness; and sometimes the discomfort of discharge indicates that they are indeed such.
Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the urethra of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
And in those that are known as penetrating fistulas into the rectum and non-penetrating ones, it is when you place your finger in the rectum, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that area, then insert a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything of this nor find any cause for evacuation, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at this point the treatment should be applied.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of this is that urine will come from it, and it prohibits such that the site must be treated to consolidate.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and that you will have pus continuously from it; and that medication does not help in this case, nor can it be consolidated by treatment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is hard work and futility for physicians, as such is their fate.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this which I have already promised.
And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their buttocks higher and elevate the limbs within them, the objects being inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then introduce a probe made of lead or iron if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the place where the probe passes.
And if that is the case where the patient surrounds the anus, then you should introduce your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already been discovered penetrating, or what you feel between your finger and that tube or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, for there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment in which hope is placed is that you use a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues have become constricted like a feather quill.
And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all those constricted tissues heal, and then treat that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further, tell which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or ciphac [type of cloth], and sometimes the fistula is on what dries the surface of the intestine. Now dry the intestine from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying along with the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
And then cleanse those fleshy parts that are affected by fistulas, which resemble an owl feather quill tube, without damaging any part of them for any reason.
But if blood flows between you and your operation when you are treating those flesh parts, now the method that is best and for pus an acute instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of those flesh parts being conjoined, and the other is the cessation of blood by drying out the moisture.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter or honey until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with a hard flesh graft that generates and strengthens.
And medicines that have the property of being styptic and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the tissue around the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, now insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of cloth or flesh, and it is suitable for penetration, now there is no operation to be performed here but rather proceed with confidence and hope.
The cause of this is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the contraction necessary for you to introduce certain medications and proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if it does not endanger the surrounding tissue, but perform it according to the patient's condition without causing them distress; and then treat that area with what we have mentioned so that healing may occur more easily; or lengthen that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus, as we have said, or use a sharp instrument, and then cleanse those ulcerated tissues within the drying process where perforation is possible through pressure; and then strive to restore the entire wound by drying it out, and if the upper opening of the pus does not consolidate, and if an abscess remains in the buttocks region, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it runs along the buttocks near the surface of the body around the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, take a sharp-tipped probe, which resembles a needle prepared according to this form:
and introduce it into the affected area wrapped in five leaves or around them; and then insert the probe with the leaf into the fistula until you achieve the necessary contraction.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the interior, then you extract the leaf from that path as though you were introducing your finger into the anus; and you pull out the tip of the leaf and secure both ends firmly, and tighten each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when you later incise the leaf in the flesh, tighten it well so that those tissues between the two ends of the leaf heal.
Thus the treatment of the ulcer should be such that it becomes consolidated and healed.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do so gently, for you should not do this to cause harm to the patient; and thereafter proceed with treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with a sharp spine used to incise the fistula: one part of it is sharply curved and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like charcoal pieces, or they are like grape clusters. And they can be small and large, and blood flows from them continuously and is one type, and they appear inside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less moisture, from which clear water or a little blood mixed with it flows continuously, and their color is like the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible. Then you carefully use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your fingernail, and then cut those that need it along their roots.
If the hooks do not hold in them because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cot or a flaxen bandage, and extract them with the fingers mentioned, and then cut them and sprinkle certain powders close to the incision, as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cauterizing. And afterwards, treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision small enough for it to discharge easily when the pus is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are external, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your fingernail or hook, and cut them, and afterwards treat them with the remedies we have mentioned until they are healed.
And for those who need suturing, proceed as follows: take silk thread and pass it through a needle, then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make the needle penetrate to the other side of the incision, wrap both ends of the silk around the area below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with strong pressure, and then tie off the silk and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one open and not suturing it, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
And then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate to it; place that on the affected area and instruct the patient to rest. If you find it in there where it has entered; and when it is enclosed, treat those which are found or with another treatment until it is healed.
And when they become old and do not benefit from that medicine, now you should scrape those off with the edge of a spatula or with your fingernail until they are made wet and pus is discharged from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Now you should scrape off those with more vigorous pus removal than the first time until some bleeding occurs and they are sufficiently scraped; and then treat them until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is a key ingredient, and it is nothing but red spots similar in color to the body and resembling clove buds, and they are found all over the body but mostly below the waist and around them, and from these you should alleviate the pain.
Then you should incise what is within the area of the key, and hold it with tweezers or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the following as described in its chapter.
But a verruca is a small, rough, fistulated, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they frequently occur in most children.
Of the treatment of the place which is stretched and cut there, that which restrains it with a thread or with hair that encloses. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
A worm called a furuncle is a small raised or fistulated swelling on the surface of the body that itches intensely, and when scratched it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and spreads around the body.
The treatment for it is that you take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the worm (furuncle) such that it contains the circle of the needle around its parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle such that you cut what is in the circuit of the worm, and place it in the itching of the flesh, and so eradicate the worm from its root.
And if you want, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Let the end above of the needle be drawn to sharpness, blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the finger it appears blunted and its rotation is controlled.
And if you want to cauterize the worm (furuncle) according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Some instruments are made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and some instruments are made small or large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should have small ones; and for those whose rectums are narrow or painful, their instruments should be small.
The form of the large and few crucibles:
The top of the copper tube above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the end of the tube below, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering slightly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays and somewhat thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and the length of the bag should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong wax from fresh wax, which should be of this amount or so; and tie the bag tightly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the instrument between two distinct points with a strong knot, and then seal each thread: But the quality of sealing it is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise her buttocks with something beneath them like a cushion or pillow; then smear the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; then gently introduce it into the anus; then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it vigorously until everything that is in the womb has been evacuated from the bowel; then remove the instrument and let the patient lower her buttocks to the ground.
And if the medicine forces her to evacuate, let it do so as much as possible; and if she sleeps with it for a whole night, it is better for recovery.
But if you treat her for abdominal disorders and evacuation of the bowels, then repeatedly use the cautery until she is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle and soft womb cloth, like those used for babies.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the plague using medicine according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes for which such wounds are made by plagues are like throwing stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that occur in the parts of the body such as the plague which spreads over the head, neck, feet, abdomen, groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
And for that reason I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to being hit by a stone or something similar, and if only the skin has been broken and there is a large wound and you fear that an abscess may form, then immediately apply cupping and do phlebotomy on the cephalic vein without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the patient from overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
But if some minor cause prohibits it, then reduce the amount of food and do not allow meat or wine.
And pause treatment on the wound if an abscess forms, and apply it only to oil that has been lightly heated or to wine that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause treatment on the wound if it is fresh and the blood has not clotted, and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply sparingly.
And if the air has already changed that, pause then until some signs appear indicating it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to the separation of tissues and similar conditions, and if the edges of the wound cannot be brought together with forceps, then adjust those using a suture as I will explain regarding the suturing of such wounds.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and beneath it, and there is no need for much support but only a small suspender, then incise that and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the dressing, and instruct the patient to eat food that is nutritious: meat and foods similar to it, until recovery.
And if you find putrefaction in the dressing and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotten and remove it, and immediately treat it.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessity compels you and what we have said does not suffice, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; sprinkle this powder over them, as it will consolidate those before the air changes them.
And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of henbane one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sift them, then fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the dressing, and let it coagulate with the blood.
From above the wound apply poultices and leave them on it, and do not loosen them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not heal it until it is cured.
And sometimes this single cautery is done when it is not within your reach to get the blood and sweat of a dragon.
And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a position and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intention to place this powder, but at that time treat these as we have said, placing on them some cooling substances or placing on them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterwards treat these with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with a forceps.
And I say the treatment of fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
Of wounds of the neck.
But if the wound happens in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no cooling treatment but rather it should be avoided and treated with something that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that adhere to nerves and contract them. Do not linger over any cause of worry, for the substance of the nerves is spread out and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if he is being treated with leeches, as is often done with warm water, and sometimes immersed in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then washed with warm water while the other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bind the edges of it, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is corruption at its lowest part, then puncture it in the most depressed place.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or cauterize it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should bring the edges of the wound together with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and afterward strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; subsequently treat it with substances that are astringent and stimulating until it is healed.
But if the wound has already become inflamed in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the inflammation subsides.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found later in its chapter.
If there is a thrust wound from a spear or sword, and you feel the depth of it, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it too hard so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depths and return to the heart, causing harm; rather, use a dressing that attracts fluids, and change this twice a day.
And if a dressing is not available to you, then place over the wound opening a piece of cloth so that it absorbs any moisture; and make the injured person lie on the wound so that what is trapped within flows out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of breath has affected the injured person, and you see other good signs from it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed.
But if healing of it is unnecessary and much time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a knife or sword cut, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as would be done before suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been an attempt to clean the wound and pieces of material are still inside, now you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate. 但如果它们没有分离，你现在应该将它们留在原处，直到伤口愈合，因为那时取出会更容易。
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment during healing is as we have described.
For wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to handle by other methods, and it is important that reducing them becomes more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their proper place, as they tend to stiffen and swell, making manipulation difficult.
And therefore, the best condition is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, whereas it is difficult in both of the previously mentioned cases.
And you should know that there are four methods of suturing the abdomen, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds on the body.
Of two other specific sutures communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
Here is the translation:
Thus I say that when the swelling is small and some cause has occurred in the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways this can happen: either due to the smallness of the hernia as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is the case, then it is necessary that you warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cypress and spica, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation subsides.
And sometimes it does this in cases where there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which hyssop and mallows have been soaked, for this soothes the instrument with little cause.
But if the intestine is irritated near this treatment, then divide the hernia slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there is no need to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is blunt, and the tip is fine, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly rounded.
And thus when the inflammation is increased and pus has formed outside the bowel, it is now necessary that its reduction be according to the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible in this way, for better is it.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs further apart than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and feet further apart than the sides.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then you should focus your attention and consideration entirely on this so that the part where the inflammation is may be further apart from the other side.
And so you should administer this for both large inflammations and moderate ones.
And for small inflammations, prepare what is necessary, and then have the one most skilled among your assistants perform it, who should hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it at some distance from each other.
And this is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or a piece equivalent to one in length according to the quantity of the width of the inflammation; and then lay it from the end of the ring finger, and pull the needle taut so that you do not place pins at both ends of the thread, but between both ends of the suture that is inside the wound, until you make this penetrate into that part; and when you have joined both ends of the thread and both ends of the suture, it makes four knots.
About the length of a finger, make two circuits around the needle, and several twists on both sides, then bring together the two edges and the wound by appropriate joining; then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and tie that with as much care as you did for the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be medium between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, so it is best that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the wound directly, so that the flesh is not penetrated too quickly and the wound does not separate before it has consolidated.
And do not extend the stitches too far so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not protrude and cause discomfort to the patient; and place cotton pads over the stitches, which will cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you can use one needle or two or around them for the stitching.
But the second type of suture is common: it involves managing four points in one go for the stitching—both ends of the wound and two points on either side—using a needle that is appropriately balanced in subtlety and thickness.
When you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, retract the needle from that part where you began, so that the suture retreats to the most superior part of the wound, so that the seam is like a cloth seam along which the pieces of cloth are tightly joined.
And pause between each suture by the amount of the thickness of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to be for humans.
And in such a suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man's abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it was stretched from the bowels around two palms from the bowel of the middle part and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; then I reduced it after the bowel had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I treated him and he recovered; and soon after that he spoke in a weak voice, and returned to his usual condition.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; but by a miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, as it was in a place where no medical treatment was available, I placed the wound over hot coals twice a day and washed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Text.
And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place make small incisions according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the end of the suture with which you have inserted the needle; and cause the needle to penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
And then when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same end of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the suture which is in this place, and cause the needle to penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
And cause the penetration to be made in such a way that when you make that penetration into the suture at the end of the wound, it is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and take it to the other side at the end where the suture is, and extract the needle from the bone into which it penetrates, and then return it to that bone and attach the end of the suture which is on the other side to this end of the wound; and remove it from the bone which is on this side.
And do this one time and then another, and do it one time after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture one time from the end of the bone, and leave it for another time until you have completed it.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at one end of the suture close to you, and make it penetrate inside the body at that point, leaving both ends of the thread free; then turn the needle and have it exit from the inside to the outside through both ends of the suture.
Then turn each of them around and make each penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of another suture that is on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common quick suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously spoken.
This is the speech of Gualia
And if someone were to say that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, it is because you insert a thread into each needle and begin by threading one as needed, and make it penetrate through the opposite side according to the method used for suturing bodies equally.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
Which cause is why when you manage to treat the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and sew it properly, then apply powder over it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that are present before you to make it form a hard crust and dry the threads; and afterwards treat it as you would any other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short time, because it begins to form pus, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may affect the main limbs, then cover it with linen soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place this over the area between the joints, applying it to them.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the body cavities, and this often happens, then use styptic black thyme powder, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the cavity and an incision needs to be made into the depth of it.
And know that putrefaction in the larger cavities heals more slowly than that in the smaller cavities.
And it is difficult to heal when the cavity called “gugun” does not easily recover from wounds that occur within; this is due to the great number of veins present in it, its large size, the fineness of its tissue, and its proximity to nerve tissue.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain this fresh, reduce it according to your skill in the same way as you would reduce cavities.
But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply something firm over the area that is discolored, to promote the flow of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
Here is the translation:
Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible to repair it in some people, because I saw one who had been injured in his belly by a spear thrust, and the injury was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge and gas.
Then I treated the wound even though I was not confident in its healing, but I carefully managed that part which would heal and where the tissue was solidified.
And when I saw the place already consolidated, I warned about the harm that could arise from this bad event; and no one suffered any harm from this accident by changing their food and drink habits accordingly, and soon they were bathing and exercising as advised.
And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take large-headed ants; then bring the two edges of the wound together and place one of those ants with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; thus when the ant bites onto them and clings, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do no harm to the patient.
It is possible that the bowel be tied with a fine thread made from the bowels of an animal because it is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread of bowel, let it be bare, and join the end to it, enveloped, and insert that thread through needles and sew it to that part of the bowel, and reduce it to the disruption.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine bowels, for then there is only inflammation, and not healing of it entirely.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it matures and becomes old, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any limb, is universally called a fistula, and we refer to it as that abscess.
And a fistula truly is a felted node, hard, white, at which there is no pain and to which there is adherence as there is adherence of bird's nest; and for this reason it is called that rough swelling, that is, sore.
And it is in some people a moist swelling, which discharges continuously; and the moisture is excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is pus, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is appropriate that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery with my methods.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among them are those that extend to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that affect the vicinity of major limbs and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to heal, and do not easily receive a cure, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach to the places mentioned above and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of steel, and if the fistula goes according to straightness, explore it with that.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to be easily guided and curved around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having movements of horror, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Then anoint the openings through its openings, for the moisture with which you anoint it will go to the other openings and spread throughout them.
And then inquire very carefully according to the method by which you can know if here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with all its openings and lies over everything within your power, within your inquiry, within which you inquire about the malady, and the cause of the pain lies under your compression on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
And when you have stood upon all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you consider now whether it is a fistula apparent near or in a salt place, distant from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or tissue and similar parts, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it becomes necessary to incise it as far inward as possible, and then remove all corrupted flesh; afterwards apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have opened with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with applications that produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless there is any prohibition against treating a major vessel, nerve, or primary limb as we have stated.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then you should scrape that until all the corruption is removed; and afterwards treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it heals.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to form as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and at that point you uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it with your strongest remedy, and afterwards restore it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and at that point there is nothing left for you to do except to lay open that area.
And if the corrupted bone is small, you can remove it; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those tissues or flesh as necessary, and release the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones immediately, then apply what can alleviate the condition over the wound, and leave it as it is until such a time when there is flesh and tissue around those bones, and protect the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation remains open.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in hot water with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, because when these tissues will have become loose, and the bones are separated from them, and those adherences are loosened.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that away with a rasp only until the corruption and blackness are removed, and then repair the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and thoroughly incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
Here is what is recommended to you regarding what happens when you encounter a patient in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man around xxx years old, who suffers pain in his abdomen, and of the parts inside there is an injury concerning the matter inside the body which has reached the abdomen, and this matter is of an abscess becoming very large, and it does not have an external cause.
And then time was extended in that case due to the error of the physicians until the abscess became pus-filled, and they intervened when the matter had become purulent, and his treatment was delayed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the foulness and moisture of the body were discharged.
And then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had knowledge in the art until I was called.
And I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already his body was completely exhausted and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
And then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they reached from all parts of the swelling.
And then I decided to incise over one of the openings there so that I could expose a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already turned to dust and decayed. And part of the swelling had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I saw what was hidden from me and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had already reduced and exposed.
And then I paused the healing of the wound with medicinal substances for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I re-examined and discovered on the bone secondly over the initial discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I exposed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I proceeded to perform the cure for it and its restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered another way and did not stop at incising the bone little by little particularly and proceeded with its restoration, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm of it, and that extract along with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became sound.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffered at all hours due to excess evacuation of syncope malaise.
And thus he became completely healed, and nothing remained in place of the bone but living flesh; and his condition improved within his body, and strength returned to him; and he resumed his usual disposition and did not do contrary to it in walking or harm from any cause.
But if it is a prominent bone in place of the already injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it; pause with this thicker thread after the first one; then wrap the thread around the flesh near the bone, and stretch its extremity so that you pull the flesh towards the sides, thus uncovering the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the scissors do not injure the flesh.
Place a pad or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw over the place of corruption little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where the corruption is not apparent to the senses, then you must saw from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one piece is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you expose the flesh from all parts entirely; then place a pad underneath, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part continues.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, little by little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not in proportion but beyond measure.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then expose that area and clean it according to each possible disposition, and adjust as needed for each case, without coming into contact with veins or nerves.
And know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for every kind of operation.
And know that this operation means to provide you with the specifics of the instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long experience of the methods of this art, and witness to ways of illnesses, then you will yourself possess what is appropriate for all instruments concerning every illness.
And I advise you at the end of this chapter to list the number of instruments which you will use as simples, among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of knife: Let the head of this knife be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points should be in the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not sufficient unless those heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with the most prominent arch and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood should be well made. Shape of the liver:
Shape of the razor, which has a curvature:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Shape of another smaller cutter:
Shape of another cutter; this one resembling a reed, and its tip is like pincers, and it is displayed in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a reed that is suitable according to the ratio of that which is to be drilled into the bones:
And its tip is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it seems to suit all the purposes we have mentioned for razors, cutters, and saws.
For cutting edges and the sawing of bones.
The extremities may need to be amputated either for intrinsic reasons or extrinsic causes, or if you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent reason; then it is necessary that you cut off that limb at the point where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or greater malice which would be a worse outcome for the limb.
And the sign of that which happens to him is that the member becomes black until it is burned by fire, or you may apply the blackness within so that the corruption might enter into that part where it dries up and takes hold of the whole body; and thus take care in this operation.
And similarly, it is the cause of corruption from the percussion of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion, sea creature, or viper and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should incise at the joint of the wrist and not give space for the corruption to enter into the elbow.
And if it spreads, then you should incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause in this cure requires the proper amount of skill.
And similarly, do the same for the foot; when corruption spreads to the toe, then you should incise it between two of the joints.
And if it affects the instep of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it penetrates to the sole, then you should incise the arch at the joint of the heel.
And if the corruption has already reached beyond the bone, then at this point there is nothing to do but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting or tying up the limb is that you wrap a ligature in the part below where you wish to cut, and tie another ligature over the site; extend one ligature toward the lower parts, and extend another ligature above; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures as far apart as a palm's breadth so that all the flesh is uncovered; then it may be cut or tied up.
And it is necessary to cover the area with cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and treatment for abscesses.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the site, or apply some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then wrap the injured limb with bandages at the appropriate place, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I advise you what happens to a man in his own home, this kind of accident which I and you have advised against, the one that causes blackness in his own body as if it were burned by fire.
And that corruption begins primarily in his own finger and then tends to spread throughout the body.
And then that man prepares for himself the possibility that the treatment will proceed to the point where the intensity of his pain and burning forces him to amputate the limb at the joint, and thus he is healed.
Soon corruption occurs in that part of the hand indicated.
Then it comes to me, and so I perforate to expel that excess with what I apply to the hand according to my treatment, near the purification of the body from it; and if the excess is not expelled, it begins to go to the other hand before going into the hand.
And if the patient asks me to cut off the hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and also because I fear that the cutting off of the hand might lead to death, since the power of the disease was very strong.
And after he leaves me, he returns to his own land, and it is reported to me that the man prepared and cut off his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have added this narration only so that it may be assistance regarding how to deal with this disease, and to serve as an example for which it is described and according to which it should be treated.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends so that pus collects inside, and then it is broken open and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption, nor does it affect the bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends so that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
And in the treatment of this, incise that wound completely as it is revolved, and especially when it is subtle and made like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the wound will adhere and that such corruption has not yet succeeded by its later consequence, and there is a swelling in the wound, then treat it with an enema.
And it is that you consider the smell, and if it is great, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting equally of oil, vinegar, and raisin, which are mixed in a vessel and cooked over fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the wound, and plug the opening of the wound, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
And then take that medicine with care; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes an enema is given with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of wheat, put them over water; and then strain it and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the wound is now clean.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer an enema with honey and water mixed with finely strained raisins; and give an enema of vinegar and honey mixed, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and vinegar helps the wound to adhere, especially when the vinegar contains a surplus of astringency and dryness.
And when you find that some areas are swollen and you confirm that the sinus has already burst, then irrigate that area with water that promotes the growth of flesh.
And it is that you should take a decoction of white figs and dissolve it with rose oil and vine stiptic; or what you irrigate that area with certain medicines and other decoctions which have the properties that I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not accept the cannula for irrigation, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small tool, and pause in there a cloth wrapped in Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should sew together the edges of that area with stitches and leave it in a quantity sufficient for the irrigation to take place.
And if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area in the lower place where the pus can flow down, because when the pus is restrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will grow there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the lower bone area as you wish, then prepare the member so that the pus flows freely according to your ability and ensure that there is no obstruction hindering the flow of the pus.
Place above the opening of the sinus, which you should probe at all times so that what is inside the arm may drain. And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is thin or thick, or is undigested or digested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is discharged over the opening of the sinus adheres or tends to adhere, then on the first day you should loosen it or do so every third day, and when you loosen the crust, then change the dressing and renew the application.
But if the sinus is in an area where there is subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is appropriate, because some people experience a delay in the generation of flesh in their wounds, and others experience the opposite.
And if the sinus remains loose for several days and the arm is undigested, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to the drying effect of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be as dry as a definitive dressing when applied, because there is an excess of moisture to be removed.
And the most important thing in curing is to take a definitive dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it over the wound as an antiseptic in its substance, and use it appropriately.
In that action, when there is no bandage, find a piece of linen, take honey and mix it so that it thickens; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them up, sprinkle the powder over the honey which is on the fire, then stir until mixed well, spread this on cloth and stretch it over the wound; and put the linen with the thickened honey which you have cooked over the place of the injury, and sprinkle it on a cloth and apply that.
And sometimes administer with the medicine a long piece of linen and roots of lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simple ingredients or adjust them, grind them up and sieve them, then sprinkle the powder over the honey which has been recommended; and use that.
And if the wound is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its root, and it affects the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and the cutting of an added finger joint, and sectioning.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of a toe or finger of the hand, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is more difficult; it may be an abscess caused by cautery, or it may be corrupted. It generates pus inside which corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire area, sometimes spreading to the bone causing a foul odor, and making the extremity of the finger or toe rotten, with its color turning blackish.
Therefore, when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all the superfluous part that is rotten from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound nearby, for cauterizing is helpful in such cases.
If the bone is exposed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already compressed the flesh inward, and they begin to pierce and cause pain in that area, then you should place a thin probe from below the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and urge it up and incise that flesh with ease, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive burning medicines until it is completely removed; and afterwards treat that with applications until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should incise the bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of the joints according to where its removal is necessary, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
But if there is an injury or irritation to the nail and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and afterwards dry the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse cut from above down, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh below the nail, for you would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would become a cause for the excessive growth of new flesh over the wound; and then treat that place with something that relieves pain.
This may be adjusted, which is natural in most people, being soft and fleshy everywhere, or soft and hollow in the bones, or soft and weak in the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth of it is in some nodes of the said joints. But that which is born in the nodes of the finger does no harm, whereas that which is soft and born in the joints may cause damage.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is shallow, and it is such that you should incise them to the base with a blunt knife.
But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, guard against its excision.
But in that which is born between the nodes of the finger, you should incise at the beginning the flesh around it with a round incision to the bone, and then close it with one of the appropriate sutures, and afterward care for what lies within until it heals.
But for consolidation that occurs between the bones due to their rubbing against each other or because of the birth condition of the person who is born this way, or due to inflammation or burning by fire, then you should section that consolidation until the bones return to their natural form.
And then place between their membranes in oiled linen so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of them on the palm, then you should section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Of incisions for veins, such are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and veins wrapped thick with melancholic excesses that flow to the extremities of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment for them is by two methods: one is that they be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and completely extracted.
The sectioning is done in this way: first, immerse the leg in hot water for a moment so that the thick blood becomes resolved, which is sediment in the leg, and then stretch the patient's limb to the most prominent part of the swelling below the knee with a bandage, and then tie off the vein at one place, or two, or three with wide ligatures, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the knee upward into the thigh until the quantity is released that you wish and that suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
And then bandage it, and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and inform the patient about this.
But the elevation of them is done in this way: first shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it, and then place him in a bath or immerse the leg in hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or have him exercise vigorously with exercise if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
And in a gash made along the side of the vein by cutting either lengthwise or behind it you should use the scalpel, or at its base you should use the cautery.
And when you open it with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should notice its appearance declining to blackness.
And thus when you expose it and from the wound you see that white one which is the membrane.
And then you place the ligature below where it is elevated and turned from the wound, and suspend it with hooks for one hour.
And then make another incision near that incision at three points, and then scrape the wound above the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it at the rear incision using the cautery, and then extract that and elevate it until it comes out through the second incision, and then extract that from the incision above it.
And do this until you extract it from the incision that is highest or farthest from all the incisions, until everything comes out; and then incise it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and extract it, or insert below the ligature and move your hand in all directions until it is dislodged. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and the harm will have come about because of this injury.
And when all that is done, place over the site of the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil and plain oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosities to which there is an envelope on the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the tortuosity and at the places where the envelope is, and then lift it up by hooks until you elevate the whole.
And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; use your prudence in this.
The shape of the incision for cutting the vessel:
It is not sharpened like hooks nor has a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility like a lion's, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein because of its fineness; however, it should be in excess of thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is found in the legs in warm countries such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body apart from the legs.
And the formation of it is by putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body between the skin and the flesh.
Here is the translation:
Then when it appears at the opening, you must wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one dram, and entering two drams, fix that and leave the lead suspended from the string.
And as many times as you go out to any place for some reason, wrap that in lead and fix it. And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that too far in until it has come out, for if you cut that too short it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and corruption in the place and a bad ulceration.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body and there remains no cause for concern in the body.
And from this vein it emerges in some people to a length of five palms and I have been told that one reached twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the rod into the tract and perforate that along the length of the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days; and subsequently cure that as you would an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
And thus cure that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
Of the incision above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because worms are often found in the cattle, and one of these worms is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt by the sensation passing from limb to limb until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and larvae and ascarids occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then suddenly it lightens within it and enters and destroys the brain, and this is why many fears occur.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is done according to the movement and appearance of it to the sensation, and then you should press what is above it and what is below it firmly with bandages and constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract that.
And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire over the area where it resides, and the main cause of fear is its corruption, by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see it approaching the head near the brain, then press above the eyebrow with firm constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and the patient should use purification of his body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
On incision for the disease nafir.
This illness is called nafir in our homeland, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and it often changes from one limb to another.
And I will now describe that illness as I shall recount it to you. I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After it had been ruptured for about an hour, I observed that this inflammation spread as quickly as wax would melt and rise up, but more rapidly than could be expected, like living silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it spread to the other parts of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was moving throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by the transformation and the speed at which it moved from one limb to another. And I had seen something similar before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen the pain transform from one limb to another as I did then. But I have not seen anything like this in my other patients as I did with the woman.
And I thought that this was due to the fact that the woman was of advanced age, with multiple ailments and exposed veins, and in such conditions, one might experience a transformation of sensations.
It is necessary that there does not appear according to this retroversion in those who are delicate and whose flesh is thin and the veins prominent.
And when you want to perform the treatment on it, and the patient feels that pain, at that moment do not proceed as we have said, but instead press strongly on it and evacuate that trapped air until it is released, and then cauterize the area.
But if you do not perform it with your hands, then treat that by inducing vomiting and expelling the air, and also use preparations to remove foul pills and senna pills and similar remedies.
Of the extraction of splinters.
Splinters vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small points, some are concave, and others blunt; some are solid, while others have three angles; there are also those with tongues or star-like shapes.
And the signs of concussion are when it strikes in the sagitta, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the sinciput which is above the head, because there occur soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigidity in the eyes, and inflammation and rigidity of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and it easily severs speech and destroys the voice, and exits from the place of the injury moisture white like dust, and there appears on the face an aquosity of the flesh.
And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard place, not in a soft one; and very often the movement of the arrow is like the movement of a pulse, and there flows from the wound black blood, and chills those extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and thus you know that death will come soon.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are that foam of blood comes from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the complexion changes, and he exhales a great sigh, and seeks to draw in cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the diaphragm which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and one cannot move any of the body's muscles.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, then very often food that is undigested appears at the wound.
And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it is fixed within it, make some incision in the wound, or the membrane, or the vessel which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure without extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow is embedded in the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and the process occurs due to some cause affecting the parts outside, and pain becomes severe over the injury, then you know that it is fatal.
And the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the helper muscles, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the ribs and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you as I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your own treatment.
The reason for this is that in a person who was hit by an arrow at the lacrimal bone near the root of the nose, I removed it from the other side, left the gray matter of the ear alone, and he healed without any damage to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray matter of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was deeply embedded and could not be completely removed; only a small part of it remained attached to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, made of iron like a lion's claw, which did not have feathers.
And the Jew recovered, and there was no adverse effect on his eye.
About extracting one arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it had feathers on it; then I incised between two grooves, and it was submerged in his flesh there; then I carefully removed that, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his abdomen, and I thought he would die from it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition for the worse, I incised around the arrow and engaged with it, and he recovered, and no further harm came to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between two parts of his body, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of the injury.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, and there was no change in her condition for the worse, and the woman did not suffer any harm from any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed over it, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases are like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who was struck in the middle part of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
Then I touched the wound of the arrow with a narrow probe; then I examined it carefully, and did not feel anything there; but she felt a prick below her right ear, and then I hoped that that pricking was at the tip of the arrow.
And he plastered the place with an adhesive and digestive plaster, persuading me to put the place where the abscess appeared by him on the arrow wound, so that it might dry over it.
And no significant accident occurred at the site where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days without any incident; and as the wound healed, after some days' time, one day he felt the arrow within his abdomen and reported this to me.
And then I applied acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and with a probe I probed that area, and found the tip of the arrow delicately adhering to the shaft.
And soon I adjusted the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me four months for this to happen.
And when the wound had healed sufficiently, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did not do so immediately but rather continued to carefully consider and devise methods of extraction, until one day I began to use specially made forceps to extract it in a manner described at the end of this chapter; and then I restored the wound.
And some surgeons judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, and there was no need for further treatment.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows in order that you may understand this rule and its meaning regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not comprehensible without narration nor can those who read this book understand them.
And the wise craftsmen compare little by little; and what is present with what is absent; and when new operations and new instruments are discovered, they should trace back to the causes of these novelties in the art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or an arrow proceeding in fleshly tissue, is drawn and extracted.
And if you do not observe the hour at which you catch it, sometimes it is better to leave it for several days until the flesh around it has healed and lost its attraction to it and its extraction.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not observe the proper method, then leave it for several days and gently move it according to its attraction each day, and it will eventually be extracted.
And if you do not observe the proper method for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is out of reach, then you should search for it carefully, and if you can feel it, then move it with some instruments that are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then you should enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is necessary to remove the arrow along with those that are attached to it, then you should excise the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as possible; and devise a way to do so, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh over fractures of the bones and twisting them until you can proceed.
And when you perform the extraction of the splinter in whatever place it may be, then you use both your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and gently with gentleness that the splinter is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and for its extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less inflamed, and then repeat what is now easier to perform. But if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about the treatment in its respective chapter.
And guard your skill in incising veins or nerves, or cords, and administer means in every possible way to avoid the extraction of the splinter; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And therefore, make the splinter retract so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the splinter in it, for this is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But splinters that are ejected by the opposite side, or which you have already processed some part towards the outer parts, or cause inflammation at the extremity of the splinter due to the feeling from the upper part near the bone and raise it; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and then pull it out, for it is made easy by this method.
If it is retained in the bone, then at that hour turn it according to its opposite direction until the arrow penetrates the bone, and expand it as you insert it, and thus extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days and then attempt to extract it when the flesh has softened.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out with force.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to apply force, then insert something, if it is blunt, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the curvature of it in the head of the arrow and then push it out with force.
But if the arrow is convex, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow will be easier to remove because of this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is present, as much as it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what seems appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close so that you touch it through the skin, and it is possible for you to operate on it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and afterward treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of the forceps be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like a clamp so that they do not let go when grasping the arrow.
Of those are made various kinds of hooks, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the sinew, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
like an arrowhead so that the instrument may be guided easily into the concave part of the arrow and is pushed in that manner.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy as follows: xxx, in the head sixteen, two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins visible on each temple; and two veins that are at the corners of the eyes, called aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic — ; and there are also two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms number five. Of these, one is a cephalic vein, which they call the wild latus; and people refer to it as "the head vein," and it is also called a median vein, composed of a branch from the basilica and another branch from the cephalic; and people name this "the vein of the whole body." The basilica vein lies on the domestic arm and is named "citillar"; common people call it "the belly vein." Another is the funis of the arm, which lies above the elbow, in which phlebotomy is performed, and it appears prominently over the wrist. And there is also the salvatella vein, which is located between the thumb and the little finger, appearing on both sides.
And on the back and in the groin there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the rib cage; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the groin of the wild animal; and in the groin there are other similar veins.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, migraines, fevers, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occipital region at the place where both veins are with a large piece of cloth for good friction; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the two veins appear near the ears in two places on the back of the head; and feel those veins with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where you should proceed.
Then take the lancet, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon towards the upper parts and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers, adjusted or around that amount; and let as much blood out as you wish.
And then apply pressure with powders and keep it compressed until it is healed.
In this begins the chapter on the cautery and its applications.
But the two arteries near the temples are used for phlebotomy in cases of migraines, ancient and severe diseases, and frequent ophthalmia, as well as acute accumulations of superfluities flowing to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those arteries I will now recommend to you: instruct the patient to hold his breath so that the two veins become apparent by a clear manifestation and feel the pulse below your fingers; then at this moment attempt it.
And then raise the edge of the knife above the vein towards your indicated finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below, raising the vein up; and make the cut in it as you did with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and afterwards place it on the cut and poultices, and bind it strongly above with a bandage, leaving it until it is healed.
And now follows the description of them, and the incision of those veins at the beginning of the book.
And thus the phlebotomy of the frontal vein is also used for the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and for migraines, stiffness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I will recommend to you: the patient should hold his breath with a cloth so that the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Pause the puncture at the point where it reaches the vein above and strike it either on one side or another for that purpose, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then afterward release the patient from the puncture and bind that area until it is healed.
And in some cases, a femoral incision is used, but it is not necessary for the femoral incision to be sharp like other incisions; rather, it should be flat. Make that incision transversely because the bone is close and strong, and you would easily break it with a sharp incision.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for conditions such as itchiness of the eyes due to irritation and oiliness in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the incision is that the patient should hold their neck with a bandage, and then make those incisions while you stand above the patient's head.
And the incision should be made transverse to the length in a few places, slightly apart from each other, because in that area there is little flesh; and if the incision is sharp, its tip would easily break the bone.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause when it reaches those points, and bind those areas for one night, and then release them.
However, the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
Of the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle slender long and put it in the middle place of the nose tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Move your hand with the small phlebotomy needle little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and afterwards leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
The harm of excessive phlebotomy leads to constriction of the veins and the beginning of leprosy, and to many other diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
The quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that the patient strains each side with his neck; and let the practitioner stand over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit upright on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a slender needle little by little; and afterwards extract blood according to the season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that purpose; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and stretch both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave him in bed because the illness is cured.
And the harm of phlebotomy from large veins applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you face the patient before you, and strengthen the neck of him with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of him and regard two veins of which one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those very veins small black ones; and then incise each one with an incision incising.
If doubt is before you, and you do not know which one it is of those, then you must perform the incision on the larger of those, and from the most apparent of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
But of the two veins that are below, the tongue's movement is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery in preference to those in the throat, to diseases of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun, and raise the tongue of him, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each one inclines to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to go too deep when phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend are usually found in all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either place on the phlebotomy site a small round plug like a bilberry or olive in subtlety; or use a knife for phlebotomy, and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
Use the knives as mentioned before, and you should open the concave full veins coming from thick vessels, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
And this venesection is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it should be used for the venesection of fine veins that contain thin, citrated blood.
But the benefit of venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases below the jaw and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
And the venesection practitioner should be very careful when performing venesection on that vein and have great fear of it, for there is an artery nearby. If he errs in puncturing the vein, he may cut into the artery and cause a hemorrhage. Therefore, it is necessary not to perform venesection with a piercing instrument but rather with a cutting one like a knife.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or search for a branch of it. Or perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is visible; and proceed with venesection using a knife as we have said.
If you want to perform venesection on the forearm, then place your hand in front of the bend of the arm so that you touch the area between where you know the pulse is, and just above the tendon; then hold the arm steady and section the vein at a concave part for venesection as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of its location.
And when you press, with firm pressure on the area that you marked above the tendon, if there is swelling in that place, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow during venesection as thin and bright like a child's urine, then you know it is arterial blood; at that moment, stop and rest your hand there for some time; then remove your hand, and if the bleeding has stopped after a few moments, then press the arm and leave it.
And warn the patient about the danger of this, and advise them not to fear it excessively but also not to engage in heavy work for some days until they are healed.
And if the blood does not stop and you are without medical help, then if the artery appears to you, cut it, as the extremity is contracted and the blood has stopped; or take some cloth, fold it, and take one half of it and press it on the vein at the point of constriction with your hand and with poultices on the other side.
And if the blood has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what has been previously described for stopping the flow of blood.
The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
For the dark vein, phlebotomy is a beneficial method to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; this is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious in performing phlebotomy on this vein, because below it lies a nerve; and then if one presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, it will cause stupor in the patient, making recovery difficult, and rarely does he recover completely. And this nerve is often felt; but if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, now you must stop the phlebotomy at the place where you are performing it near the elbow, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And it is proper that if you want to perform phlebotomy, you do so at the olive vein or the myrtus vein puncture site; for this is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
However, sometimes a tumor appears in some people, when it is not detected by the first examination, but we do not notice that tumor.
The first is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with the hope of benefit and caution against the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, which are: cephalic, femoral, and basilic. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
However, phlebotomy that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it should be that an infant should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it should be that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with a warm enema if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not carry superfluous substances during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels and do not affect the principal limbs.
Do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are suffering from seasickness or drunkenness, nor during the onset of an illness or after drinking heavily when what they need is to retain what is in them, nor for illnesses caused by water retention. Also avoid phlebotomy near colic pain and vomiting, as well as conditions affecting the bowels, and do not perform it frequently due to excessive sexual activity, work, exercise, fasting, or staying awake, or any other cause that weakens either their physical strength or vitality.
And take into account the subtlety of the condition before deciding whether the blood is thick, and regarding food and drinks, as well as medicines, if it is possible to do so.
And afterwards, take a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
And avoid performing phlebotomy at the end of the day, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And ensure that the patient avoids any harmful animal accidents on that day, such as bites or stings, as well as all physical exertions and unnecessary labor, sexual activity, and similar activities.
And at the time of sitting down, have present the causes that are used in the custom of men for aromatics and odors, as well as balms and similar substances according to the quantity and possibility available.
And the person performing the phlebotomy should sit on a higher seat than that of the patient who is to be bled.
And afterwards, extend the patient's arm, and have it washed by the phlebotomist two or three times with their hands; then wrap the arm with a bandage twice.
And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not equal or the ligature is too tight, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, and then you prohibit the consistency of the blood as well.
And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that he who is to be a phlebotomist wash his hands thoroughly before so that the veins are inflated and become clearly visible.
And concerning the phlebotomist, he anoints his lancet with a little old oil properly. Then he places his thumb on that vein at the spot where he intends to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the percussion is set because of the veins which feel like cords fleeing from the phlebotomy; and those are full of air bubbles. When he presses the lancet onto it, if it does not yield, then that one is narrow and the phlebotomist is revealed as unskilled; and the lancet does not enter the vein, and if it enters, then that one is constricted.
And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be careful and diligent in all these matters.
And then apply the lancet, but if the vein is hidden in one spot, then proceed with caution; and if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or over an area of congestion, if that location is not abscessed.
And if the location is abscessed, or if the condition worsens, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for it will soon draw an abscess out, nor should you enter a bath.
Regarding arterial incision, if it is needed.
And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will be released, then repeat the arterial incision in that place straight away and adjust the incision slightly larger, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for the area often becomes inflamed after a small incision.
But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not incise there again, for it will serve you no purpose; instead, apply some part of the oil poultice to it, for it aids in dispersing the blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, apply an oil poultice to all arterial incisions where the blood flows are prohibited by the body, and use either theriac or sage when applied over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is dispersed when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is formed in the area of the arterial incision, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or who had only a small incision on the vein, then you should cut it open, and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, to the area for one hour, as it is dissolved.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has flowed from that vein until it is complete or from another vein.
And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply some preparation of aloes and frankincense dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or camphor or something similar to it.
And from these swellings abscesses and elevations arise, requiring phlebotomy at the base.
And therefore apply your hand on that spot, and if you find softness there, then apply pressure on that spot. At this point, the elevation is bad and harmful; and be careful not to place anything as mentioned before, for blood will flow easily from an artery.
And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the spot becomes hardened, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their vigor and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is alleviated.
And for one who is robust and has the need for bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the procedure should be done slowly.
And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary that the bloodletting be done in small amounts, and that the procedure be quick.
And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive blood flow and injury to nerves, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
To which it often happens that fainting follows the phlebotomy, and you should treat that beforehand with a little bread infused in pomegranate juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the place of the blood in three or four applications.
And if it is cold in constitution, then before the phlebotomy take bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic syrup with a good scent.
And if fainting occurs after the phlebotomy and is caused by the effusion of bad blood, then you should have them drink watered-down syrup with a subtle good scent; use aromatics like rose petals, and let them sit quietly with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for one who wishes to alleviate their condition and dissolve their blood a second time, it is appropriate for which the phlebotomy is for bad evacuation, and the effect of this is that it gradually evacuates the blood in small amounts, as is according to the quantity of its power over continuous days.
But for one who wishes to alleviate their condition and reduce their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then this should be done about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
But for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it inclines, it should be alleviated on the second day or the third.
May that body in which the blood is heated and inflamed and causes fever be bled at once, and let a large quantity of blood be drawn so as to prevent fainting, but ensure you maintain all conditions appropriate for phlebotomy; and place your hand on the patient's pulse while he loses blood from his body, so that he does not die instead of fainting, since this happens often when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, for this is harmful.
Handle the release so that a second phlebotomy can be performed; or it may be due to the inflammation of the phlebotomy causing coagulation in the vein's orifice; or pause on that spot with honeyed cerate, or with sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood is fully out.
And if the vein is inflamed, now release that one and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that spot or on another vein in the other arm.
And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or basilica veins when they are not available or hidden, as it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse his hand in warm water until it becomes red and the vein appears prominently.
About this stricture in the middle of that membrane, approach the phlebotomy transversely at the small crosswise part; neither laterally nor longitudinally.
Make the incision wide and perform your phlebotomy on that which you phlebotomize above the joint of the hand at a small distance.
And if the flow of blood is restricted, now move the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the days of summer, now you are exempt from moving the hand in hot water, and similarly pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves nearby.
And the phlebotomy of the right forearm vein is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you hold the hand tightly by the membrane or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy transversely; and if you incise it not completely, do not proceed further.
And be careful not to leave your hand on the phlebotomy site, for there are nerves among the aforementioned areas stripped of flesh.
And now move the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not move it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, restricting its flow.
And when you have extracted the blood in the required amount, pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not heal too quickly; and similarly, this should be done for all kinds of wounds.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left hand is that it helps with diseases related to the spleen.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy on this side as you have done on the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the legs and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
And the quality of the phlebotomy from this vein is that the patient immerses his foot in hot water and performs friction until the veins become visible; then place a bandage around the ankle; the location of the vein is on the back of the heel, and it branches out into the front part of the foot with many branches.
And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the wound behind the heel, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the front part of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the front part of the foot, and place your incision across, as if you were cutting it transversely.
And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
If bleeding is prohibited, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another phlebotomy shortly after, since the location is suitable; and do not fear causing harm, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same for the vein on the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the heel at the junction of the sole.
And the time for phlebotomy is best when it is due, particularly in cases where bloodletting is necessary to treat excess blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly binds the arm from above the elbow to the fingertips with a thin strip of cloth about four fingers wide, so that it appears only in this manner.
And when it appears, then perform the phlebotomy on that vein as much as is possible for you and according to its course; or incise that vein by incision or cut it by cutting, since the location is suitable.
And it is often somewhat hidden in many people; and if you find that one does not appear clearly to the touch, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, which appears between the toe corresponding to the ring finger and the little finger.
And be cautious of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
Then disengage the constriction and place over the site of the phlebotomy a plaster and strengthen the site, for gradually it will heal.
Of wind instruments and of the qualities of using those.
Wind instruments are usually made of horns, or of ivory, or of wood.
And phlebotomy is done in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is phlebotomy without incision.
And this phlebotomy that is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with heat or without heat.
And for the wind instruments that are administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen locations on the body. Of these, one is placed at the occipital region, which is the back part of the head; another is located in the middle of both sides of the neck; wind instruments are also placed under the chin below the jaw near the mouth; wind instruments of the two cheeks; wind instruments of the alar wings, which are at the end of the nostrils; wind instruments of the two temples; and wind instruments of the two wrists and the two ankles.
And phlebotomy without incision extracts blood only from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this method, one does not capture the vital essence as is done with regular phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for phlebotomy to be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
But if necessity compels phlebotomy due to illness or for maintenance, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at some times during it.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that flatulence be performed after two or three more hours have passed since noon.
And the benefit of flatulence from the neck is that when it counteracts gravity in the head and to what has sunk into the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this flatulence is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not advisable to use it on one who is completely fatigued, or in one who has a cold, for it can cause great harm to them.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use it on the elderly, and those whose heads are frequently ill.
But for one who continues to experience forgetfulness due to it; and for this reason, you should command the practitioner to pause their hand a little while after applying the cupping vessel to various parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Here is the translation:
And when it is slightly compressed the windpipe, for if it is placed below, it produces weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the upward windiness causes headaches and accidents in the head, and ophthalmia, and paralysis, and prenasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of bloodletting from the basilica.
And you should command the windworker not to press his hand for scarification so that he does not incise the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And windiness below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is in place of bloodletting from the aliheric which is between the two lips.
But the windiness that is performed on the two temples causes cephalalgia, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the windiness of both parts inside the temples causes efficacy equivalent to bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are larger in the flesh, and from the smaller veins within the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the windworker not to proceed too far in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh and below lies the nerves and arteries.
And it is a windiness with which one winds over the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
You should order the surgeon to make a large incision, and it should be of even depth, for the place requires strong drying; and let thin superficial cuts be made with the lancet.
Small incisions in the groin should be made very carefully, for they draw blood from the whole body, and relieve old pains of the heart and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothor and ademil; and they serve instead of phlebotomy at sophena’s two sites, and alahorcoben, and at two nails.
However, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some men.
And for the incisions at alahorcoben, the judgment about their appropriateness is similar to the judgment regarding incisions in two groins.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you place the incision at its beginning and then gradually continue it according to a timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but pause them briefly, and remove them gently, so that the humors come to the site by equal occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already turning red and swelling, and until the vigor of the blood appears.
Now you should make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and appropriately consider the condition of the body.
For the man who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And he commands the assistant to enlarge the incision slightly and to empty the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, now you should scarify twice, for on the first occasion the way of absorption for the blood and the moisture is opened. But on the second occasion, to the acquired inspection of extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is muddy, now the third scarification should be performed so that it achieves the desired effect.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify more extensively.
And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
And if the skin of the person where the incision is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the areas for cupping with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or olive oil from violets, or chamomile oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomilla oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and viscous, then the oil should be marigold oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, or similar.
If the wound is from broad pores of tender flesh, it must be prohibited from oil, and should have applied to it the places of wounds near ventilation washed with fresh water or warm water infused with solatrum, or water of couchgrass, or water of borage, and similar things.
And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with vinegar water, or water of myrtle and sumach and similar things.
And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or water of savory, which is marjoram, or of dill decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it must be guarded from bathing; after which it should be administered immediately following the bath for an hour or two, and it is good for it to rest near the wound.
What is needed to be done to regulate the patient after wound treatment or bloodletting before applying dressings to the wound.
At the beginning, consider this: if the wound or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is inflammation and heat over the blood, then it must be treated with cooling causes such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar water, lettuce, sage, julep, and similar things.
And give them foods such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
And for the one whose complexion is warm, it must be that they drink rose syrup, or syrup of hot sage seeds with sumac, and sweet-smelling water midway between sunrise and noon; and it should be recommended to them to use little drinking and eating, and give them foods of poultry and rabbit and small birds and pigeons.
Let it be known on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy that drinking should be more than eating.
It should be given to drink at certain hours to some men theriac alpharac or medicine of musk, which is nutmeg, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and it is not necessary for them to take that hot mixture.
However, let the bleedings that require incision be performed cautiously over the groin area, and on the thigh and ankle, and around the navel, in the places where the ribs are, and at the pit of the armpit, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
And it is not intended for those areas except to draw blood from a member, just as we place a cup over the breast in a disease of blood flowing from the nose; and we use that method to dissolve coagulated blood in the member, just as we place it on the abdomen and the navel; because that thins the member and heats it and alleviates pain by resolving the coagulation.
And it should be applied to the nostrils when they are blocked or diseased, because by the power of attraction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates disease from its location.
And similarly, it does the same when applied to the groin and thigh due to bloodletting in those areas where it is confined.
And these bleedings should be administered only after suction has taken place; and some should be applied with heat.
And some should be applied full of warm water in diseases affecting the thigh.
With this you are to fill the blister and make it larger, either use warm water alone or water in which herbs appropriate for this purpose have been boiled.
Method of administering a blister with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of fluid should be half a palm; and it should be placed in the middle part, at the location which is around it, halfway there; the tube should be small according to the amount that fits into it, like a needle.
It should be made of soft leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion's skin, flax, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
And there should be a horizontal stick of wood or iron in the middle, on which a candle is placed for light.
And this blister should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller one is used according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
And the blisters for children and those who are weak should be smaller than the blisters for young and strong people.
And the quality of placing this blister over fire on a limb is to extend the flesh towards the fire properly in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the horizontal stick at the right location for the blister so that the heat is applied below but does not burn the patient's body.
And it should be placed properly on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the tube that we mentioned, so that when we have the blisters and do not want to keep the finger there and allow the vapor to escape through that tube, the blister will dissolve quickly.
Regarding fire injuries in the manner of medicine, and repeat that if you should need it.
Make a ventouse that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is not applied except when filled with water, and place it on the limb only briefly.
And this is the form of it: And the larger this ventouse is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter xcviij.
Lancets are not administered to all members but only to those members where the placement of ventouses is not possible due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found, namely water leeches, should be from clear and clean stagnant waters.
And then leave them in stagnant water day and night until they are hungry, so that there remains no cause in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and ventouse application; and then rub the diseased limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if it is possible to suction the area with a ventouse, it is better for relief.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and subsequently with clean water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood is prolonged along the course near the attachment of the veins, and if it oozes out, then you should press a cloth upon it that has been dipped in cold water, and place that on top until the oozing stops.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder and sprinkle over it vitriol trisected, or alum and similar substances that cause constipation, until the bleeding stops; or place over the area masticated fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the spot, at which point the bleeding will stop.
And if it is necessary to apply the procedure of bloodletting again, do so when it is possible to change those veins.
And if the veins are prohibited from suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the spots until bleeding occurs; and afterwards place them there, for those who feel any blood will soon adhere.
And when you want them to clot, sprinkle over them a little aloes powder, or salt, or ash, and they will clot immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is deemed necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Or, my son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of this for any length of time; nor have I adopted what follows except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
And thus I directed my efforts toward experimenting and studying throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which I have experimented; for I have abridged it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of clarification; and formed therein various forms of the instruments used, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
An overview and collection from the treatment of fractures of bones, including those whose preliminary steps are necessary before we begin to recall the details of each type of fracture and their various treatments. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is necessary at the beginning for the practitioner to stand on the truth of those; so that you and others who know or will learn this noble art may understand.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment you should consider at the beginning whether to perform bloodletting or to treat them otherwise, along with whatever else is appropriate, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it affects an infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or during times of extreme heat or cold.
And accordingly, be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; and avoid heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe recovery from inflammation, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
Then return the patient to their usual regimen when they are accustomed to it.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then necessary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made from wheat boiled with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones fractured in humans during the first fever and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone from all parts without any cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they conjoin and unite, until they reach their full strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause hindering them from performing their works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to withhold from the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
And you will find a description of every type of fracture, expanded in its own separate chapter.
Note the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diverse within themselves; for one kind of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are according to the length of the bone: so the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and open and closed fractures proceed as when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture due to a blow and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, as there will be a separate description of them in their respective places.
Note the signs of a bone fracture. And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press on it.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the place or sound, and when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there may be twisting or a small fissure; therefore, you should not press on it with your hand and compress it entirely. Instead, pause and apply the medicines of which there will be a reminder soon at the moment when it is appropriate to do so; and note that it might be tight due to subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is arched and not split into two or another part with it without being affected by swelling, as it remains whole from its beginning, then you should begin from your time to correct the swelling that affects the abscess.
And if an abscess affects it, then leave that for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage that according to each method you can by lightness and ease.
And know that the restoration of it and adjustment of it is easier than that of the bone in which swelling occurs.
And then strengthen that according to what will come to mind regarding it.
But if swelling occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb down bound according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it forces you to return those addictions with ease and according to each way you can back to their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient due to your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any different cause, correct that and bind it according to the extent of your skill.
And from an incorrect extension and compression, so do false doctors with their foolish manipulations cause an abscess to occur by their operation, or they cause a contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen through their foolish manipulations.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of fine soft cloth.
But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with linen and hard material, because the wrapping of linen connects the large limb and strengthens it uniformly in constriction, ensuring that no dirt enters.
And after beginning, after your equalization evacuation, pause appropriately for this, on the site of that fracture with three wraps or four depending on the limb; and tighten it gently with the bandage.
And apply it to the part where the main pus comes from the place of the fracture, and tighten it so much that you do not loosen the compression with which you have tightened the place of the fracture. And apply an extension to the wrapping of the fracture site slightly, and loosen the compression little by little until you have removed a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap the fractured site again with it, and then apply to the lower pus part of the wrapping; and your procedure should be in the compression of the wrapping and the loosening of it as we have said about the first upper wrapping.
And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is modeled, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for this reason.
And then place over the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made right away if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place over what causes the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the bandages.
And let the plasters be about half a cubit wide and well made wisely; or let them be of fir wood; or of palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster should match the size of the limb; then wrap over the plasters with another bandage according to your initial compression; and then bind it above with fine linen as we have said about compression, and this should be your compression according to the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less should be the compression.
And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes made from twisted fibers for their threads, this is a great error, when one sees the stitches uneven.
And likewise, fine threads are not suitable, for you will not achieve with stitches what you desire; and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the bones near the stitches in those places, then pause and use bandages made of lion's wool or crimson wool until it does not cause injury to them.
Sometimes a fracture is caused by a blow, and there occurs a disruption in the collarbone, and I found this in my memory as described in the second chapter specifically.
And know that all broken limbs are not set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on splints immediately but after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of pus.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients used to treat, which were applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of making a plaster for the rapid healing of fractures, suitable for various conditions and particularly for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that sticks to the walls of the mill during grinding.
And confine it as it is, but sieve it through white cloth, and stop the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, lead oxide, acacia, hellebore, and migrauch, which is the rind of wild millet, of each drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each drachm v; aychil drachm xx; all are trisected and sieved and mixed with water or with white cloth if the composition is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health on many men.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migrauch and the bark of white mulberry each drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each drachm v; of acacia drachm vi; of Armenian bole drachm xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding tool, and they should be sieved, and they should be compounded with water or white cloth if the mixture is heated, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the location.
Note that this plaster is not effective for restoration, for abscesses, and does not properly alleviate pain.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh mulberry leaves and wild poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of preparing a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant of abscess: take rue leaves, chamomile flowers, violets, and flour of spelt, each one part; mix all together and boil in wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, now mix that with coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method of making a stronger plaster for resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rue leaves and linseed seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, each one part equally; mix all together and boil in sage water or in sweet water or in wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and according to its repose as indicated by its color.
However, Hippocrates does not write in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration except for wax made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else; he recommends that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
However, Galen is seen to have placed them on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes in which there is slight drying with heat as well as substances like myrrh and onion, similar to those causes that we have recounted.
Method of preparing a plaster to apply for injury and pain: take egg whites, chickpeas, human hair cut or bird feathers, rue, and salt, each in equal parts; mix all together and sieve them and boil, then make into a plaster.
The quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain on and should then be removed is such that you consider whether there is no pain or swelling or if the bone is not displaced from its place; therefore, do not remove it for several days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should be cautious or remove that bandage at once, and remove the plaster as well.
And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in warm water, then use that to wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterwards let the limb rest for an hour; then bandage it with soft wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and keep it wrapped overnight until you are sure there is no abscess forming, and until the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has been reduced.
And afterwards, repeatedly apply a gentle bandage and small plaster without making it as tight as your first binding, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess, the hardness, the pain, and the swelling have all subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandage, then repeat this as you did at the beginning, similarly.
And if no cause occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but wait three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all of this is left for twenty days as you see fit when removing the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh around it coagulates.
At this point adjust the ligature more than in your first stricture entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition cannot reach it; and therefore apply to it moist sponges as often as possible; and do this for three days; and slightly loosen the ligature, and by this operation direct nourishment to the limb, and it will be quickly healed.
But what those foolish restorers of the fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as necessary and is restored according to its curvature, is an error in their operation and great fear, and if they were judges, this would be enlarged upon by the Ancients in their books and criticized accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do so.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a hard object, and the impact dislodges all the bone inward toward the brain, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood; therefore, this type is called an indentation. Or the object may cut some part of the bone and cut through the flesh but does not penetrate to the backside of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures can be either great or slight, and there is also a fracture called comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is an impact with something weak or falling onto a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the danger of these two fractures is great or little.
And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small threads, and for this it is named this particular kind of fracture capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it occurs in the concave place just as it happens with bones when they suffer an impact and break upon entering the soft parts.
And this happens more often in the bones of human bodies, just as it does with children's skulls.
And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are applied, which are pieces just like small stars separated. And I will return to the recapitulation of all this in its place.
And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the state of the flesh that is corrupted over them.
And the capillary kind is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it shows as a line on the bone because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that they signify by clear indication extreme fear, such as vomiting like bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, and similar symptoms with their severity, doubt whether the patient will be healed.
And if for uncommon accidents you hope for a cure, then you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is four if it has come to you the illness at the beginning as it is an illness and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the condition of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what is around the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and adhered, then it is necessary that you incise the fragmented and adhered part as I shall recount to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the sick person, and expose the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, or there is bleeding or an abscess requiring cautery, then you must proceed with what is necessary, and it is that you apply the area with cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure of no further bleeding; then begin the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of narrow shape, and this is the form of it: And then apply another incisor to it, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
Then apply the lancet to cut out the pus that remains.
And it is necessary that you have various lancets, some of which are used for cutting out pus deeper than others; and some are sharper at their tips than the rest, and they are made of iron or leather.
And use them with ease in tapping on the lancets so that you do not injure the head and skin of the patient.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the lancets, which are called shallow forceps.
And they are called this because these do not reach the depth of the bone beneath them. For the forceps have a rounded tip or margin above that which is near the head, similar to a small border or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient that you have many of these forceps, each of which should suit the sharpness of different bones. Ensure that at hand for every part of the brain, the tip of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the size and sharpness of this bone.
This is the method for three types of forceps: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the forceps on the bone and rotate them with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the forceps to another location, doing this throughout the extent equal to its thickness or thereabouts.
Here is the translation:
And see that you keep such carefulness that the incisor does not touch any part of the thigh.
And thus when you have circled the bone to perforate it, and it is separated from the thigh if it is continuous with it, and you will extract that, see that you rasp and equalize that in the roughness of it with something that is in the bone, but however see that it is more thin and finer than other incisors.
And if any part of the small and delicate bones remains, now take that with ease with what is suitable to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have said.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac and many great authors praise; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the tip of this slow and cheerful incisor, which has this form:
And it is that the lens-shaped part remains intact and does not cut any area, while the sharp part divides into two sides along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be fitted to the thigh with the sharp face of it against the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small hammer until you cut all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure about the soft tissue that no accident happens in any way, and even if the surgeon were the most inexperienced of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
If there is any reason to cut into the tissue beneath the skin in certain bone locations, insert the pointed part of the knife-like instrument and deliver it where it is easy to do so, for it should be done without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue beneath the skin, and what is abraded or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in roughness and small protrusions, then you should scrape that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them appropriately at any location during your operation on the broken bone and according to its shape.
And you should administer at your ratio with which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the broader of those razors, and gradually use one finer than the other, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
But in each of the other small and delicate fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of them.
And it is because they are not afraid about all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written regarding major fractures.
And if the tissue beneath the skin is intact when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and dip it in warm oil, and place that on the wound opening; and then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and dip it in wine and warm oil, and place that on the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to injure the tissue around the wound. Then apply a broad bandage over it, but not too tightly, just enough to cover the wound.
If you are certain that this condition requires treatment in one day or two before you are sure of an abscess being cauterized; and then untie that and immediately administer medicines which counter excessive dryness, such as lint boiled in water and flour of wheat, and powder of endive and arishta, and similar to those.
And it is that you should make of these medicines powder which is finely ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let it not become infected or inflamed; nor allow it to increase in virulence. For when it is placed over the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that part and weakens it, and you will bring upon the patient that malignant malice.
And it affects the brain, as when the bone is penetrated and especially when the treatment of it is compressed, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider these signs if you see in the patient the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
And if the blackness does not come from the medicine placed above it but is due to the nature of that medicine, then take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and soak a piece of cloth in this mixture, and place it over the wound; and subsequently treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or sometimes one of those lesser areas, because there you have two bones, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only contusion and swelling and bruising occurs there.
If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your finger into the side of the nose, and equalize that fracture with your index finger inside and your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize it at the end of a smooth rod which is small in diameter.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And when you restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should rest from cauterizing the abscess.
And then insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or place two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the bandage be thick enough to fill the hollow of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in butter, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; instead, let the cloth be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered flour; then leave it on until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, place a poultice on the nose instead of cauterization, as it is wrapped in cloth from a lion; and if the fracture of the nose is too severe and the patient is prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do cauterizations.
And if another poultice is applied after cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or with wax infused in vinegar and rose oil, or with cerate.
But if no poultice is applied after cauterization, now you should apply plasters to that with sesame flour and powdered coriander seeds mixed with egg white; and then place it over the lion's paw, and do not put anything on the nose.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments as is appropriate; and then close the fissure, and treat it with what promotes healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for that.
And if there is swelling inside the nose, now you should treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling around it, now check if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, place your left thumb in the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, use your right thumb; then push the bone fragments back into their proper position with ease using your other hand from the outer part; proceed gently but effectively.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth or disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply cerate to the fractured jaw, and then place it on doubled cloth, and place over it a large piece of linen properly made, or a pad of wax equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your bandaging method and as you find convenient, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
And if you find that the figure is already altered in any way, then you should change and loosen it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered of it and plaster it with powder of linseed, egg white, or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the cerate from it, and place over the plaster thin wool.
And then, as it is now attached and adjusted the plaster over it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for usually this fracture becomes strong in three weeks.
And if another abscess occurs that needs to be cauterized, then administer what we have said about similar cases in the section on reducing inflammation, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is a splinter, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced. At this point, use your skill to remove those fragments with what is appropriate for you in their removal with the instruments available.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel as much as your need requires.
And when you have removed those fragments, and if they cannot be completely extracted, then close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this condition to promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 5
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
There are various ways the collarbone can be fractured in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without any splinters being involved, and this is easier for its restoration; or it may involve splinters, making its restoration difficult; or the fracture may be accompanied by a splinter.
And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture is accompanied by a splinter, is that you have two assistants present: one to support and guide the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck toward that area.
In adjusting the fracture align the bones so that it takes on the form most appropriate to what is necessary, and do not leave any prominence or depression.
And if you need more extension, now it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a ball made of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the ball with your hand so that you align the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the shoulder extremity outwards towards the side, so that it reaches the proper position, now it is necessary for the injured person to lie supine on their neck, and place something under the muscle of one side, about midway in size.
And the assistant presses the muscle of it towards the rear until the bone of the shoulder is elevated to its proper position, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the bones as described.
But if you feel hard knots of the shoulder and pain, now it is necessary to incise over those areas and extract those knots with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have placed under the shoulder the tool used by the surgeon; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a bowl whose interior is concave; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Make the length of the instrument as long as is possible for the operation; let it have two ends just as you please, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you should now approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form an abscess soon, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
And if an abscess forms soon, then apply a dressing with vinegar and rose oil, and place it over that.
And thus, do not let the splint rest on the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so when the bandage has loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
And place the patient's pillow on their neck, and place underneath it a small roll to raise the head during sleep; therefore, in this way, the support of the chest will be raised from that side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated according to the muscle; or tie the arm to the neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless you find an abscess in the area within twelve days.
And then change the plaster if you see the face of it like that, and adjust it in the constriction and restore it until it is set and the collarbone fracture is healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in less time for some people.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula is broken in the middle and not fractured at the edges but only the margins.
And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part of it — and this is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way you can manage.
And place over it powdered alum of hauv and lion's fat; and next place cotton wool doubled; and then place upon the lint cloth, fine powder according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
And if the lint cloth is concave in some parts of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then press the lint cloth according to equality.
And then wrap it above with linen strips with appropriate compression and fix the lint cloth in place so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandaging each day; and whenever it needs to be softened, change it and wrap it again, and adjust the lint cloth if it has moved from its position.
And place the dressing on its side as appropriate.
And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when the number is complete, then you undo the bandage, and you know for certain that this is of the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone piece and place the bandage below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone for the pus formation or cauterization if this occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the extremities move, which causes cicatrisation and comminution.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken is that it inclines to the internal parts and there occurs great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and heavy bleeding; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a bolster is placed between their shoulders; and gently press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs by more than two ribs, and carefully do the operation and equalization in every possible way and suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as needed.
And then place on it a plaster and cotton, and lay over fine sticks of willow or hazel or similar in lightness, after which you wrap that in cloth; and then gently bind that over the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and proceed with bandaging according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that moderately; and then consider the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten that again.
And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been bound by corrosion or pus or an abscess that has occurred in the area, then you should cut and untie it and remove the plaster and correct what has happened according to this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster if you have done it to the face; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they join; and at their extremities in front, such contusion does not happen to them because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those who examine it with the said methods.
And the restoration should be such that it aligns the fracture with the said methods in the possible manner, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe and piercing pain occurs, like the pain that happens to one who has pleurisy, and because the bone punctures the membrane; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood occur; and this is difficult to treat.
And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that produce inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
Let us proceed with that which will not be a cause of generating an abscess by burning, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now aid in that.
And some of them say that it is paused above the wound and close to where it is drawn with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound may draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powders between the folds until it is full, so that the bandage is applied as if wrapping it according to its roundness; and near it, treat the injury with the treatment for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the cause of the injury is violent and cannot be endured, and the bone pierces through the membrane with a point, we fear for the injury; now it should be that we cut over the place, uncover the broken edge, and then apply an instrument to secure the stability thereof, the memory of which precedes, and that they saw the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should incise it and apply powder in roasted oil on the place, and treat the injury with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And he should lie on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the second vertebra and the neck.
In some cases, there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it takes time for them to heal, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider whether their skin is already softened, stunned, deadened, unable to move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not recovering, and in such conditions it is fatal.
And if you press on them and they feel constriction from the pressure and pain when pricked with a needle, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if the vertebrae of the neck show signs similar to this and you want to know if they will recover or not, then at that moment consider their breathing.
If you see that they are already weakened and the same thing happens to them as described for the skin, and shortly after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and in some cases they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point there is no need to work on their treatment.
But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and farther removed from danger.
And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the swelling on the affected vertebra using raw oil or boiled linseed; place this poultice on it several times a day until the swelling subsides.
During the hours of rest, apply one of the comforting and healing plasters, and stretch over that bandage; and command the patient to use rest and calmness and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is bruised or has separated for any reason, then you should set it in place and hold that bone; and immediately bring together the two edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with some flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
But if the tip of the bone is fractured at the end, and it is the joint, then you should insert your finger into the backside, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree adjustment; and then apply a plaster and splint to it, if you need those, and then secure it.
And if you feel bruised and fractured bones there, then act upon that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad (likely referring to the treatment of wide wounds or injuries).
The bones of the broad areas are often fractured, and when they are fractured, then their fracture is nothing but a communication at the extremities of those bones and they are split along their length and deviated to the sides; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the limb is paralyzed when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it aligns with the figure of the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as seems appropriate to you by equalizing it so that it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the bone that already inclines downward, then have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture. And when you have set it properly, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no risk of the fracture being moved or the splint becoming loose.
And set the concavity by filling it so that it takes on an even shape, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what is appropriate to sedate the abscess as has been previously described; and then return to restoring it, and bind it as is necessary.
And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct bone.
The adjunct is what lies between the spine and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which involves taking a piece of wood of medium thickness in this shape:
Let the ends of two bandages be held, and let it be suspended from a high place.
Follow the malalignment on a stool; and then lay the broken arm out over the wood until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the wood matches the curvature of the arm.
And then suspend something heavy from it, so that the patient extends it downward with their hands; and then the physician should place the fracture along with its parts above in such a way that the fracture returns to its proper position.
And another method is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the hand of the neck with bandages; and then instruct two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture along with its parts, and the other to hold below the patient; and each should extend it in their respective direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then pull on the fracture with bandages and on that with another set of bandages, and each of the two assistants should extend in their respective directions.
And therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the midpoint and the other part below the fracture near the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
Similarly, do this with ease and effort, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied well, pull on that if an abscess does not occur, using caution.
If an abscess is to be cauterized, if there is no stricture within seven days, and you pause upon the wool bandage soaked in vinegar for six times and rose oil so that the abscess may rest, then tighten it.
And the method of tightening that is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then wrap it with a wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that auxiliary, and place its hand on the side muscle.
And wrap the cloth and tighten around the auxiliary for the arm to be in a place of stability, if there is no cause from the broken bone that prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus three fingers from both ends.
And then tighten around the splints with the bandage as I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And the farther apart the ends of the fracture are, the looser the bandaging should be.
And thus, when you position the splints and bandaging as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the bandaging and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
And therefore consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and place pillows under their head so that it is raised higher than the stomach.
And place a pad filled with wool evenly on the injured area, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too loose; thus correct this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at the beginning until healing starts; and then gradually increase the quantity of food.
For the usual practice is that the bandage and splint remain tight for forty days; and then they should be loosened, a bath given, and medicines applied with those that correct this.
And if the fracture is rough and uneven, then do not loosen the bandage or remove the splints for one day or even up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one is small and lies under the thumb, while the other is larger and lies beneath the smaller bone, closer to the lower part.
If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and if they are broken in such a way.
And when the smaller bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the bone is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, it is appropriate for the physician, due to its easy restoration, to allow a short period of extension with ease until it is set.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then a more vigorous extension should be allowed.
And if both bones are broken at once, then it is necessary to allow for the most vigorous extension.
And it is necessary to use the figure of the hand for its restoration and extension stretched out on a board, with the wrist at the top end, higher than all the other fingers, and the thumb lower than the others, and the patient lying on a sloping bed.
And there should be a board in front of him at an appropriate height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And the attendant should extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or with a splint, and another attendant should extend it from above similarly.
And the surgeon should then place the bone in such a way that it regenerates in the best possible shape.
And if the bone is fractured, you should then reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if a separate fragment appears that you cannot join and it is not within your hope to restore it, then act on it as we have described above.
But if the fracture is accompanied by an infection, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to that, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerote made of rose oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and apply it over the area where the abscess is present in a fine layer; then remove the cerote and place on an emplaster prepared from powdered myrrh mixed with clear honey, and afterwards apply plasters; let the plaster placed over that fracture be more distant and firmer.
And know that the number of plasters for the arm varies depending on the major disposition, whether the fracture is in one fossa or in two adjacent fossae.
And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is most suitable to place pressure on the parts above or below the fracture, apply the bandage slightly looser as previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are wrapped should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the bandage for some days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as promptly as possible deal with the condition affecting the member, and then immerse the member in hot water until that condition subsides.
And leave the member undisturbed until it rests, and then resume the bandaging.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches that area, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And then have the patient's arm suspended by their own skill in making agitated movements, and make them lie down to sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in about 30 days or 32 days, or sometimes it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill involved.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the other fingers.
Know that the thumb and the joints of the other fingers quickly heal from fractures, and they do not suffer any significant complications.
When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at that moment it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and to place the arm on top of that extended.
And then the surgeon should extend the broken bones and the physician should align them so that they heal properly.
Now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess forms in which case cauterize; then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that with cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make it appear as a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured hand; then bind it tightly with cloth.
And let the splint be placed against the skin with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the splint adheres to the palm; and bind it as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below on the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; and then bind it, as if rotating the hand at the wrist with bandages.
And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align it and bind it to the affected finger; or bind all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on that finger, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of the abscess both heated and opposed — according to the nature of the operation — with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narration.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone is often fractured and is made apparent by sensation according to how it has shifted both forward and upward.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and face.
And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their appropriate places according to their quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be placed at an angle towards the part of the armpit, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the armpit, then the bandage should be placed towards the armpit, and the extension should go to the parts below.
And then the physician equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper union; now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the heated abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The treatment of the bandage should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then wrap the joint so that it reaches to the thigh and the root of the spine.
And insert the bandage between the bone and the joint near the end towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the bandage reach to the upper part of both sides, and then wrap around the joint and the bone what is left of the bandage.
And then place over the bone at the location of the fracture splints, and place one strip over the bone of the joint.
And then fill the spaces between the joint and the bone with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is compacted.
And then begin the firm bandaging from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your bandaging should be lighter, looser, and softer.
And then extend both ends of the bandage towards the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and secure both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandaging is not moved from its place.
And then lay the bandage over that so it is such that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur to the limb; and if any of those causes should arise, then cut through the bandaging at that point and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
If there is in the bone a splinter of bone that must be removed, then you should cut it out as much as possible; and if not, cover it over and massage it, and treat with whatever preceded the memory until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by other things that are attached to it, as we have said about the helpers and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb that has been treated in this manner, lameness does not occur; but if it is restored alone, or if the other side is not similarly applied, then it is necessary for the person to limp permanently.
And you should know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knuckle bone.
Know that the fracture of the knuckle bone often occurs at the joints, but it also happens in other places.
However, if there is a fracture, it is often merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is either a single injury or several injuries, and all of this depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts or mentioned should be cut out, and then joined and conjoined as much as possible by means of adjustment, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and place over it a round plate if needed; and strengthen above according to the constriction as appropriate.
And therefore consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, so that they may be applied in such a way that is suitable to every accident and appropriate to each case until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fractured thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the femur; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And accidents of certain types of fracture occur to both bones in the thigh as do those to the two bones in the arm, and thus restoration is performed on it similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
And if two bones are broken, the thigh is affected in all parts.
And if the more slender bone is broken, the thigh is affected in the forward parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes which are not within your control.
And then administer extension, reduction, and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
However, be careful if the thigh fracture is jagged with many fragments, that the extension be gentle and proceed with your skill.
And in the thigh there is some cause for operation similar to that of the arm, which is when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure; at this time, you will take pieces of wood from a tree that grows below the causes that are stable on stones, and make them similarly from branches of palm trees; choose those with little curvature, and not those with fingers, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and tie them at both ends.
Wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one at the concave side of one part and the other at the convex side of the other part, with the seam directed towards the base of the foot.
Bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle, for with this structure the arch is prevented from tilting to either the right or left side, and it remains in proper position.
And a wooden brace has already been applied according to the length of the arch; and place it in such a way that it preserves its range of motion.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a condition requiring such treatment.
And each day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous observations, and keep it guarded from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act according to what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and of those mentioned.
A complete fracture does not usually occur at the ankle; but fractures can happen to some of the bones in the foot. Fractures are less common for those bones, and they often suffer only contusions depending on their disposition.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones are elevated above their normal position, then the patient should place their foot on prepared ground as follows.
Then place something on top of that which is raised from those bones, and press down on them, and press, and bind them so that they return to their places.
Then apply a plaster and place padding above it, and below the chest of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
Then strengthen that limb with proper support, after you have wrapped it in cloths and with other means as you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound, either broken or dislocated, and the treatment in such cases is as you know.
But if some say they are dislocated, then restore them, and bind them as I recommend to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place under the dislocated finger a stick according to the length of the finger, and add a little more; then below the patient place the table as I have recommended to you, and support it with proper binding.
But if what is dislocated involves two or three or more bones, then you place under each finger a stick of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and support the table at the lower part of the body, so that it stands on one of the flat surfaces of the table to keep the chest raised for proper retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and treat each case with what is appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the fracture of the skull of a woman and of the bone of the penis and of the virile member of a man.
When the skull of a woman is fractured, at that moment make that incision in a crescent shape, and then slightly incline it towards the part of the back.
And then the midwife should fill the skull with cotton, and it should be placed in the skull as if it were a membrane; and then the woman should be bandaged, and elevate her back little by little, for all of this is done so that before the part of the skull that was fractured heals, the bone returns to its place.
And then place poultices on her back, and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she has urinated, reduce and return it according to the method by which you prepared it at the beginning, and then return to the original poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is then restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stitch onto it a reed tube; then insert the entire bladder into the skull, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the skull, for this will help the fracture to return.
And then fill it with cotton and keep it that way for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, at that moment administer to its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
In what is right, it is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few become aware of it, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions through straightness in the restoration and constriction of it, and thus understands well.
When the penis is to be bandaged, take a piece of leather and place the penis in it; then wrap it with cloth coverings, and let it be wrapped for three days or around that time, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
It is appropriate for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you proceed to incise and open it immediately if the conditions for incision are evident to you as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you should proceed to arrest it by dusting over it finely powdered sugar, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess develops, then you should postpone the restoration for nine days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you may cause further harm.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and equalize it with your hands as easily and with minimal extension as possible.
If the extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it is too large, then at those times you reduce that to your own size with this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round, and let there be little grease on it so that it is not doubled over; during the operation, apply pressure on that.
And let it have a sharp tip at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part of it be thicker, and from the middle to the end be narrower.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntz atelarem," which means a small palette.
In order that the extremity of it may be steady, raise it up to the prominent part of the bone.
And press it in one motion so that the bone returns to its place, and let it be aligned with some support.
And thus strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not take the tool well for some reason, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has control over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert it with one of the probes that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
Approach cautiously him who limps from roughness and small scratches in the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and during the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will greatly help the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and if it is summer, apply it properly without pausing to cover the wound with wax or any other oily substance, so that decay and corruption do not occur.
And proceed to dress the wound at the appropriate time of your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may excise any proud flesh with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be careful not to touch the wound at the fracture site, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, causing death or incurable illness or severe harm to their patients. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not necessary to apply dressings; instead, make an enveloping bandage with hard cloths rather than dressings and apply it to that area.
And when after one day or two the wound begins to generate granulation, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and proceed to dress it with medications, as per our custom for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacum and similar remedies.
And you should untie the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs from it to the lower parts with ease.
If several days have passed and the wound has not consolidated nor has the flesh been separated from it, then you should know that this is due to the small veins, for which you must probe the wound with a probe. And of those veins that are separated and removed or extracted, those from which they cannot be separated and which cause pain when the member is moved, you should proceed to incise them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if the wound becomes infected with gangrene or erysipelas, which are severe forms of corruption and putrefaction, then you should proceed to one of those treatments as described in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
And concerning the matter on which my discourse rests and you should present your approach: when the bone is broken, it protrudes from the limb as the bones do in the wrist and elbow and similar to those of large limbs, and you should not attempt to pull it out, nor its extraction after four days, for that might lead to death; instead, leave it inside where it can drain pus, for it will likely fall back into place within about twenty or thirty days; and then attend to the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
Sometimes these nodes occur in the traces of healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and they deform the shape of the limb; thus you should prevent the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider whether the node is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloes, myrrh, cumin, saffron, and acorus; take any of these or all of them. Confirm with one of these styptics, egg white, or vinegar, and apply this over the node on lint, then bind it tightly with proper compression.
And let the bandage remain tight so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and reapply another one until the node is softened; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, because lead has the property of reducing anything swollen in limbs.
But if the node has already turned to bone and is hard, and the necessity requires that it be removed immediately, then cut into it at its most prominent part, remove the superfluous and prominent portion, or reduce it with some instruments until it is softened; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they have been set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but not according to its usual nature.
When a bone fracture has been set and the limb is subsequently moved gently, this is done for various reasons: one of which is excessive soaking of the bandages and ligature not according to what is needed; or due to too much compression preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of unnecessary poultices; or due to premature movement; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
The treatment is to give the patient food, and make his heart tender so that blood may be multiplied within him; administer baths; and apply poultices and lint to him.
And apply plasters to the limb so that the plaster may draw nourishment to it, or continue rubbing with cold water, until nutrition flows and returns it to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are set crookedly and it is prohibited to operate on them further.
When it happens to a limb that has already been restored near its healing from crookedness and prominence of the broken bone and nodosity, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb is considered flawed, but since the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
But there are false physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible one leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if limping and nodosity are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with cold water in which you soak softening herbs such as chamomile and radish leaves, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be made with a softening agent as well prepared; or take mucilage of radish seeds and mix it with flour of linseed or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and grind them with dove's milk, and similarly with the medicines mentioned for strengthening consolidation.
And in some cases it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most fluid parts, and motion of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times.
If the inflammation has already advanced and become hard and converted into stone, thus necessitating treatment with iron, then it is necessary for the pus above to be drained and the continuation of the bone to be dissolved, and for that which is superfluous from the nodes of that matter on the bone to be excised with subtle instruments, and ease should be administered in this while being careful and studious.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, thereby prohibiting movement, distorting the figure of the limb, and causing severe pain and great injury.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to attempt reduction as soon as possible and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, inflammation will set in and make the reduction of the dislocation more difficult.
And for this reason, one should not wait or delay during the inflammatory stage, as doing so often leads to spasms and intense pain.
But when this happens, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the inflamed area, and then allow time for the inflammation to subside; afterwards, the limb should be bathed with hot water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
And treat the entire limb with whatever remedies will come to mind for its proper care.
Here are the bones set in order as previously described for fractures; now I enter into the part concerning wounds more prevalent.
Chapter XXIIIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So when both jaws are dislocated and if they do not reduce easily; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are reduced from their positions with slight manipulation, and become slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and thoroughly separated, such that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and the patient cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped around the jaw.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, it must be that reduction should be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the assistant hold the patient's head, and the physician insert his thumb on one side into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside equally; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and move them from each side; and the physician equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously, it must be that warm water and oil fumigation is administered, until gentle reduction can be performed on both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so when returning to the bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed and not softened, then pause over those powders of cloth with wax, and let it be made of wax and rubbed oil; and afterwards let it be applied with ease to the soft parts.
And let the patient sleep on their side, and their head be placed between the two ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; having their food should be cut up finely, until when the pains have subsided and the jaws are relaxed, then allow them to eat what they want.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and other actions, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at some point and not returned to their places is difficult, then fevers and frequent sweats occur, and the belly of the patient swells easily, and there is vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and many times the one to whom this happens dies within x days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest towards the interior by its continuation to the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is perceived by sensation.
And for the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return to its proper state.
And then apply the poultice and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which is connected to the spine and continues from it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you have prepared.
And then apply the poultice, powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and moved out at the lower parts below the joint, and more easily in those whose flesh is thin; but in those with thick flesh, it is harder to move out.
If it happens that any person is struck or falls and the muscle of the place becomes abscessed due to inflammation, and is rendered displaced as if it were dislocated.
Then proceed to treat it as if you were treating it with the methods appropriate for its condition, and now proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts beyond the tendon; thus you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for you find obvious differences among them; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle, and below the tendon there is the touch of the head of the muscle as if by a man, and the injured person cannot return their hand to its socket, nor can they move that part.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, then you immediately find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the arm above the shoulder; then place your hands below the tendon, and with strength return the joint to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the arm, and extends it out straight; then let it rest as it returns easily.
But if it does not return as we have said, and after the initial days since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary to bathe the patient in warm water and administer a lotion that softens and relaxes as if for rheumatism, using substances such as mustard seeds, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and apply it.
Let the patient lie supine on their back and place under them a soft cushion of wool that is neither too loose nor too tight. Then the surgeon places his hand under the patient’s chin, elevates the neck muscle upward, and holds the patient's arm so it is not injured behind, while another assistant hold the patient's head so it is not hurt from behind, for that part immediately returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: have another man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side where the injury is. Insert his muscle under the chin of the patient and elevate the chin upwards so that the patient hangs in the air, while another assistant holds the patient's arm from behind the patient’s stomach. But if the patient is heavier, it is necessary to find another way to suspend them, so that they do not strain themselves, for the dislocation will immediately return.
And it is reduced in this other way: Drive a long pole into the ground with its top rounded like a mortar head, neither too thick nor too thin. Place it under the patient; then lay strong cloths over the top of the pole. The patient should stand along the length of the pole, and extend one arm behind to the side opposite them. With strength, extend the body on the other side, as the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if the reduction of the patient is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two cubits in length, four fingers in width, and whose thickness should be such that it fits under the chin according to this form:
And on the round head place linen cloths so that the flesh does not injure the patient.
And let a pad be placed under the buttocks of the patient, and let the arm or the hand be extended over the body between the parts below, and let the body be wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And let the arm be placed on a step of a ladder according to its length, and let the hand be extended toward the parts below, and let the other side be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon follow.
And when the instrument is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, then place beneath the buttocks a pad of woolen cloth of equal thickness; and then place on an adhesive plaster prepared with powdered mallow roots and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then tightly bind below the buttocks with proper constriction; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and it should be left alone, and do not move the patient's hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to give the patient food in small amounts until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier for their recovery.
And then the food should be given more freely after seven or five days, and one movement should be exercised; and when it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery in three places, as was stated earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not been secured, and the plaster and strapping are reduced several times, and it cannot be fixed so that he can raise his arm above the part, then you know that the nerves which run to the end of the muscle have either been cut or stretched or weakened, and know that the joint will never be restored to its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the foot and the hip or the posterior parts, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
And let the other strapping be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness and slowness in movement occur near the healing of the limb, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation is not concealed from you when it appears as if it has fallen away below the view or touch according to some figure it may have been displaced. And when you adjust the dislocated neck with the hand, this is clearly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach its usual muscle.
And you should treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it occurs before it becomes an abscess or ulcer, for if it reaches that state, reduction will be difficult, and full recovery is unlikely. This is especially true when the dislocation is to the rear, as this type of dislocation is worse than all others, more painful, and often leads to death.
And the restoration of it is such that when it can be reduced, the hand should be extended across two boards, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be on either side of the joint below it, and he should press the joint with his fingers together or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns in such a way that the hand is bent towards itself, until it strikes the elbow with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then vigorous extension and strong motion should be administered.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and there should be those firmly holding both sides so that it does not move due to the extension.
And the arm should be rotated around completely, as it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that these are those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then press the joint with vigorous pressure until it returns.
And after the reduction, it is necessary for him to rest on a plaster that has styptic and cohesive properties with an egg albumen base, and be bandaged tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and he should be left alone for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you loosen the bandage of the arm and let it be.
And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; after which you may remove it.
If it happens that there is great pain during the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it becomes calm; or place upon the joint something cold, which reduces movement; and afterwards bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And afterwards take that off and place it in water; when it is cool, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and afterwards apply something cold to it again, which reduces movement, once, and the second time, and the third time, with a bathing instrument until it is finished.
And if you wish, place on it pieces of boiled and softened cowhide and stitch them; and do this several times, for these are moist and help to restore its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it has occurred, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of such dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm, and the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered whether the palm is fixed to the belly of the hand. If this is the case, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the fingers, then the position of the hand should be placed directly on the table so that the doctor's hand can act immediately upon the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a bandage over the abscess and leave it like that; and do not repeat this procedure, because otherwise, it will neither be endured nor can you prevent the pus from spreading over the days.
However, the joint moves according to its curvature; and if you notice nothing in the patient that would cause this, except that the hand is soft and cannot be strengthened by any means; then know that the nerves are compressed or torn, and there is no remedy but to cauterize it properly for the case and strengthen it as far as possible without causing further injury.
When it has been returned properly, then place the bandage that we have recommended on it, and leave it and strengthen it for five days; and afterward, remove it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
However, if the movement of the limb is restricted and you encounter any severity in it, then apply it with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Said Joints.
In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
And when a finger is dislocated at one of the joints toward the palm or toward the base, hold the finger steady and apply pressure to return the dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend that part and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap that part according to the narration, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
And do the same for this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and wrap it in that part and perform the first operation like this until it is healed.
And do the same for this when it is dislocated at the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae move out of their places, then there is no cure in that case, for death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; and often some parts of them become weak or two limbs or two arms or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes the displacement goes to four directions.
Thus it is turned toward the rear parts and is named gelbozitation.
The cure for it is that you consider whether the gelbozitation occurs due to puerperium, because at that time there is no cure and no healing from it.
But in the case where it comes from trauma or impact or something similar to those, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, much of which returns to being overly detailed; but I have abbreviated that part, sparing from excess due to my closeness to understanding and my exposition, with which I have made this explanation and formation from a different instrument than that with which I would show this and demonstrate that.
And those are not cured except for the one that occurs precisely as I mention.
And it is that the patient lies on their back near a wall, and is placed below a well-padded cushion so that the legs are not strained.
And nearby a straight post should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end near the head of the cushion, and another post around the feet at the other end of the cushion.
And the minister should hold one post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders with a firm linen bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the post that is behind the head, and secure it there; then tighten the other bandage over the hips near the armpits, and behind the thighs; then adjust all the bandages and secure them to the other post that is behind the feet.
And the minister shall extend the ligature at the part of the stump, and let not the two stumps and their respective ligatures be removed from the places in which they are fixed, but rather let them not be secured as we have said.
And the physician shall place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or let him place upon that one table, and then adjust upon the table his own weight until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit. And then place half of the table on the spine, and the physician place his weight on the other end, and gently pull until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open again the one that is revolved with the hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of two stumps, the length of which is one arm, and behind the patient's neck at the end of two similar stumps; and let the distance between each stump be a palm, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be one round rod in which is the wheel, and it should revolve in the two sockets of the two stumps.
And at the end of it is a socket in which the rod is formed, the length of which is one palm where it revolves; and on the other two stumps there is something similar to that.
Unbind the bandages that you have tightly applied to the patient’s feet at the time when you were preparing to cut off his head, and the bandages that you have bound tightly around his thighs at the time when you were supposed to cut off his legs.
You should have each turn held by a minister with his hand, and the surgeon should twist the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned to its place and the area has been adjusted, now you should apply an excrescent plaster on a piece of cloth, and then add cotton; and afterward place over the plaster strips of wood with a width of three fingers or thereabouts, and a length that covers the affected area around the spine.
And then wrap it with the bandage as we have described, and use a light diet for the patient until he is healed.
And if there is any stiffness in the area at the end of the healing process, you should administer medicines that soften and lubricate over an extended period according to our recommendation; and a sheet of lead has already been applied to that area.
And at times stiffness occurs in the lower part of the spine due to dislocation; and that bone is such that it may become dangerous if you attempt to treat it with this medicine, as it could easily lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the joint of the broad part and the joint of the muscle is subject only to dislocation, and does not suffer what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the broad part is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the healthy side along with the affected side, it becomes longer and the heel more prominent than in a healthy state, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the shin, and this place where bending occurs is prone to abscess from cauterization, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs outwardly is that the symptoms are contrary to those of the aforementioned condition.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs forward is that when the leg is raised according to its full extent, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot move forward; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is difficult, and they should walk on the heel.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs backward is that they cannot extend the heel, nor can they bend forward as much as when swallowing, and the leg is shorter than the other, and swallowing is difficult, and the head of the bone is in that location.
The final reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been there for a long time, you administer reduction to it and rest according to its disposition; now it is not in that cure entirely; and then it does not have to be made with excessive force.
In the case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocations, now you should look to that which will return the joint to its proper place, extending it both inward and outward, and move it from side to side, for it returns easily without needing further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, now you should prepare a strong assistant and extend the limb from below, or with its fingers, or with a bandage that lies above the joint; and another assistant extends the hand of that person above so as to place their fingers below the joints; and then tighten a lion's skin bandage over the crook of the arm, and have another assistant hold tightly at the end of the bandage.
And this extension of the limb or the part inward to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the part behind to the part of the back.
And this extension of all these at once should be done while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all kinds what I will say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of the shoulder, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is to the inner side, the patient should be laid on his back; and then place the bandages along the ridge of the shoulder in that part which lies between the head of the humerus and the clavicle; and then extend the bandage from the angle as far as possible towards the sternum.
And then another strong assistant should take hold of the patient’s arms and forcefully press down on the thick part of the dislocated humerus while extending it outward with great force, for thereby it returns to its place.
And this particular case is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other cases.
But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the exercise with this particular method of treatment at all, then bind both sides of the patient tightly together with a strong, light bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each of them be four fingers, and let the affected side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended at the top of a post and held by his hands; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the humerus, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth presses the arm with great force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of the shoulder, when the dislocation is to the outer side, the patient should lie on his back as we have recommended for treating stiffness; and let the bandage be tightly wrapped around the affected side and over his feet.
Place the poles beside him, one at his feet and the other at his head; and place beside them rods adjusted to the middle of his back, laid upon which wet cloths should be wrapped around him, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among things belonging to him, so that the extension to the parts below is not pulled away.
And each minister extends to his part, and the surgeon with his hands applies the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the bench be extended quickly, and according to this method of narration on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's lower abdomen, and with that compression uses the other hand to extend towards the rear parts.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, and he should be raised off the ground; but it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary in the same way if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about positioning him on two boards; and it is on his face with his limbs extended, as we have said, otherwise there will be no cure.
And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location where the joint is.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient’s limb in two directions, and when you see those lines and the patient moves the affected limb and expands it for its own comfort, then you know that the member as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause with bandaging and wrap both bindings such that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and wrapping, and compare one limb to the other.
Now, if you see those lines clearly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and treat that area, and bandage it according to your initial structure, and allow it to rest for three days.
And then loosen that area, and allow the patient to delay in walking on it for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and downward towards the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of elbow dislocation is that when you instruct the patient to apply their limb to the joint, then you know that the elbow is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all methods of which you must perform surgery on the patient rightly, namely that you extend his leg if possible; adhere your hand to his face and place your foot between his thighs; then proceed to adhere the tip of his penis with your palms, and hold those between your said hands firmly upon the tip of his penis so that it returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery for him is that his leg adheres to the body without laborious effort.
And then apply a plaster to that and make his leg adhere to the body, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for some days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it by you is unnecessary, now administer extensive treatment with the bandages as previously described in the cure of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either toward the interior parts or toward the exterior parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen proceeding toward the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease using bandages so that it returns to its proper place.
In the treatment of the humerus when it is dislocated as a second step, make sure you lay the patient straight, and let there be a strong and capable minister behind him at his mid location.
And place yourself with your right hand on the most superior part of the foot, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and then place your left hand underneath twice, and then extend the left hand; and press the foot's sole with your right hand against the thigh while working.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then press the sole of the foot against the thigh for the third time, and you will be at the heel.
Therefore, if it returns in one attempt or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes straightened, it is good; and if not, then proceed with the operation again, as it has returned.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a sturdy board fixed to the ground under them, and let it fit between the bones, and you should wrap the patient in a cloth so that they do not move.
And then the minister holding the patient should hold their bones, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with a bandage placed on the neck of the foot; and then each minister should stretch against the extension of their side, and the board should be extended between the patient's bones retaining it, so that the body does not be pulled towards the parts below during the extension.
The surgeon holds the displaced bone with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy bone in place below, for the displacement returns easily.
And when the displacement returns and the reduction is declared to be healthy, apply a plaster and wrap it tightly with strong bandages, and bind the limb to the chest.
And be careful to avoid the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
And let that be for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, wrap it again.
And on the third day or fourth, remove that bandage, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the displacement will not dissolve and become corrupted, and then it will be beyond cure.
And if an abscess needs to be cauterized, then you should proceed according to the instructions in our narrative on that subject, in another section about treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Said Ankle Bones.
Ensure that the person who is dislocated is treated with some extension without labor; and what is not difficult is often easy.
But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot, then you should have the patient lie down with their affected foot on a firm surface or table, and position it as if they were standing.
Stand aside and let the patient lie on what is below the joints, and then press with your foot against it firmly until it returns to its place, so that you see it flattened and does not appear in a prominent location.
Then place the sole of the foot on a table that will support the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days; then unbind it and let it rest by walking on it for ten days, until it is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
About the types of dislocation that are caused by injury, fracture, or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of the patient, sometimes death may result.
And because of this, one should not presume to undertake the treatment themselves, but rather it should be done by someone who is wise in the art, experienced over time, compassionate and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning, use medicines that only reduce swelling, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless there is hope of recovery from the illness and where some promise appears. And then strive to perform the reduction for the patient as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes swollen and severe.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treat the injury with what is appropriate from among the dry remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones that are separated, then you perforate their membrane, and do what we have said about the simple diseases concerning what precedes in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that which pertains to the instruments in the ways of fear as it has been foretold in my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more salutary for your true body, which will be revealed in His time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them. Amen.
