O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the medical sciences. By its completion, by what it contains, and by its exposition and clarification, in my view I have explained to those who love me this treatise, which is part of what I do with my hands, namely surgery.
For surgical practice has been completely abandoned in our region and in our time, except that the science of it is rare, and its remnants remain; and there are no descriptions of it other than small ones in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much of what they contain, leading to errors and hesitation, because they obscure the intentions of surgery and weaken its power and art.
And it seems to me that I should revive this treatise according to the order of exposition, explanation, and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work as it is through the addition of explanations, and their preparation, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman is not found in our time in this field of surgery is that medical science is extensive, and it requires the practitioner to be well-versed in anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunctions and separations; and to have knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, along with their numbers and distribution; and of pulsating veins and static veins, and the locations for dissecting them.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in the work there is little, especially in the art of the hand.
This may we have said already at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not aware of what we have said about anatomy cannot be exempt from falling into error through which men are rendered dead, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves into it without that knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad physician who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, so that much blood flowed out causing the woman to die immediately.
And I saw another physician who thought he would remove a stone from a man who was ill in his state, and the stone was large, and when he came to him he extracted that stone along with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day that man died.
And I had already realized that it was impossible to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving payment from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his skull; due to the physician's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with bandages and strong binding, but did not leave room for drainage.
And shortly after he loosened it according to his desires, and then he dressed it again, and afterwards he left it like that for several days and commanded us to remove the bandage; and thus it remained until the skull and the bone became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
Thus he calls to him, and prepares to loosen the ligature, and having obtained calm he begins to relieve his pains.
But when corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until danger threatened the patient.
And I saw another surgeon who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated near the thighs, until the malignancy spread throughout the body of his lord.
The reason for this is that cancerous tumors are free of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect the whole body, but rather can be in a limb which suffers from being fully affected.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
And I have already expressed this in every part of this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and avoid that, so that your hands do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not betray you: for it is better for your glory, and more in this world and at last for your sanctity.
Wine should be used in some surgical procedures: Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors would not be named.
And thus I have dedicated this book in three parts.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered on the head inside-out, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on cutting and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar items, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head inside-out, and in the forms of the instruments.
I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its effects, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movement of cautery and its effects is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on it. But for me, a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
Therefore, I say that cauteries apply universally to all complete structures, whether they have material or not, with the exception of two structures, which are tailless structures.
In the tail and dry structure that has material, it dries out; for some people say that cauterization is helpful for this, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is not beneficial to treat a tail and dry condition with something that is hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite are mistaken, that cauterization is beneficial for every tail and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But I do not intend to go into detail about that for one who has already been instructed and trained in the chapter on cauterization through previous exercise, and who knows the diversity of human structure and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, as well as the causes of them and their accidents, and the time span of these.
But in other structures, there is no need for concern, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the use of cauterization in such cases.
And you know, my children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other parts adjacent to it except slightly.
Here is the English translation:
Take the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of its substance, it does nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in the study of the art about the truth of the causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were read in my book at this place I hide secret with the fire, and the quality of its operation on the bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, in philosophical demonstrative speech, would be acuity in your heads.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted through cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, strong and urgent, which cannot tolerate delay due to fear of those things that may cause malice, which is worse than a small harm entering through an inconvenient time.
And this does not occur in your minds, or, children, it is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors that for the illness which is cured by cautery, it is not always opportune, and they pause at that moment.
And the reason is not as such because they think about it, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which is the cause of pains.
But nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine in its efficacy and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of the illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he acquires through food and similar causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle one with little excess and moisture, such as tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, although this applies to minor instances.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and this is said by barbers, not by those who understand it, for I believe that there is no cure gained through medicine or any other cause before cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines are ineffective, and at the end of the cause, cauterization is administered, and it proves effective in such cases. And here from what was said before that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common and excesses of foolish physicians.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have found it proven and corrected that this applies only to certain bodies and not others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire using gold, it is not clear to you, for it depends on the quantity you want due to the hardness of gold, and it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts by the heat, and placing some sheets in the fire allows the craftsman to shape it according to that.
And thus with water is made the cautery of iron; you should remove the pus lightly and properly according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the more serious cases, so that I alleviate the seeker who asks for what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the cold and moisture that cause headaches and two other conditions resulting from these causes: one is caused by soda and many cases of traumatic flux, called herpes, affecting the head and parts of the ears with fluid discharge, and many cases of sleepiness, toothache, and gullet pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to evacuate with a laxative medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to what you require based on the strength of the patient and their age and usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him sitting between the sheets on a padded bench and have him rest his head on his hands.
And then place the razor in your palm near the spot above the nose between the eyebrows. But when the temperature of your left hand reaches it, mark that spot with ink, and then apply the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
And after pausing on that spot marked with a tent, in the manner which descends, with which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
And then move your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any amount of bone already uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in one's palm, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and let it be for three days.
And then pause on the embedded knot at the border and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the spot with a quadrature ointment until it is healed.
And it is said that when the wound has become completely covered with new flesh, the sooner the bandage is removed, the better and more helpful it is.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then rasp what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses firmly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpeccati (cauterizing slightly): And they believe that from that spot emanate the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has begun to heal properly.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery used on everyone in the same way out of fear; and leave that one, as I believe, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is easily injured by a solution of continuity just like we have testified with other members, and especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and from that one use it for the sake of health.
Chapter Second.
Of cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, and you use plasters, poultices, caps, ointments, compresses, cataplasms, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that I mentioned but to no avail for any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold and you find significant inflammation, then at that time cauterize with another type of cautery after that one. And then cauterize it above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut open the area of pain and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," — which is the location where the temporal vein is situated. And do this with your hand in this way, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will experience great pain from it different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate than the one used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput; and this is its form.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Recent Wounds.
When severe pain is located in the forehead or persistent pain within the head occurs, it should be treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other treatments should be administered as I have described for various illnesses. And if this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either using a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
But if you use a burning medicine for the cautery, then take a piece of dough made from alum, dry it thoroughly, and remove both ends of it. And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly below the hairline so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with bandages for continuous compression for three hours; then loosen them and remove the alum, and leave the wound covered for two or three days. After that, place a poultice soaked in butter on it until the area becomes warm.
And then care for it with remedies until it is healed.
And if you wish, use those medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
And this is how you perform cautery with iron using this cautery tool, which has the following form:
It is called a key clamp because the head of it resembles the shape of a nail head, which has some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the location of the pain and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and move the iron slightly back and forth quickly.
And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered, so that there is no bleeding.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and afterward apply honey around it, and subsequently treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radius according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of an ancient incision.
When you treat an incision with what we have said about the previous treatment and the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient for what we have mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the site of the pain in a line whose length is half the width of your finger or slightly more; then lift your hand quickly and press it strongly so that it cuts into the artery but does not reach the bone.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the muscle is not adhered and the nerves which animate it are not damaged, so that spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is fear in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation at that point at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recollection of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, this is a better and more effective cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part if the pain is in that part. Hold the cautery on the rim of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if you apply the cautery at these points throughout the ear, and wherever it is needed, and then treat the areas until they heal.
Chapter 6.
On the cautery of the throat.
The throat that is cured by cautery and not through medication is caused solely by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the type that results from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of throat condition with herbs and purgatives and other remedies, but your treatment does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the illness in three places: the first at the rim of the ear, the second slightly below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the affected area, for relief does not come from the part that is diseased but from the surrounding healthy tissue.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize the affected area with the cautery at the right extremity of the ear slightly above the horn of the head, and at the temple in another place, the length of which should be according to the length of a thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the condition is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the surgeon, whose form is laid out above. But more subtle is that which you see in a small amount; and it is necessary to use the knife instead of excessive coarseness in a small amount.
And properly care for the place with water as it was previously treated until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery for chronic apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with water as we have said and your medication does not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the temples of the head; and at a cauterium and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and at a cauterium in the nape of the neck. And the method of the cautery is done as was said above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better that way; and now it should be treated with water as you have prescribed.
Chapter VIII.
On the cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
It is necessary to give the patient large doses of decoctions and cleansing pills at the beginning.
And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the nape of the neck using the one described in the chapter on plasters.
And pause at certain points, for that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if it heals well; but otherwise, at that time perform the three cauterizations on the rear part of his head, which descend from the most superior part of the head to the part nearest the neck. And pause between each cauterization for the thickness of your finger, and then proceed with the next cauterization.
But if you prefer and the condition allows it, then perform the cauterization in the middle location; and if you want a stronger effect, then cauterize above both horns.
Then proceed to ensure it heals; and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and subsequently cauterize it in the middle part of the head, above all the horns, and on the rear part of the head, and with three cauterizations along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the condition of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it, especially when the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauterizations along the vertebrae of the back, and finally perform one cauterization near the navel area, raising the skin slightly. For one side there is treatment that heals, and for this other there is olive oil cauterization.
Chapter 10.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, one should modify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the treatment and apply the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer sweets and masticatory substances that modify the brain, before which for several days, improve the quality of the food.
And then shave the patient's head, and subsequently cauterize one area at the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the occiput, and on each side of the head as well. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize as I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body on the neck vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And it should be olive oil cauterization as was previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use gentle cauterization according to this method.
Chapter 11.
On the cautery for melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is excess declining to melancholia, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies the brain as has been mentioned previously in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then place a well-made poultice over the circle, and then apply that to the middle of the head.
And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more suitable to use one made from sheep's wool. And warm that on the fire with moderate heat, as it should be endured when applied. And then place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this for the patient once a week according to their regimen until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that with small points as needed, but use your hand with a cautery so arranged: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
And then apply that lotion infused in wool or in linen cloths.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water descending in the belly.
When you have determined the beginning of the water in the wound by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then give the sick person to drink that which cleanses the head from all humidity.
And make him sweat in baths for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water formation in two wounds, or from one side if it is the beginning of water formation in one wound.
And with the cautery cut open all the veins and arteries that lead to it; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see the patient bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the treatment to prevent bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the neck behind two bones with two cauteries produced in that manner.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cauterization of Old Abscesses.
When the abscesses of the wounds have become old and persistently remain due to veins and arteries that are evident in the visible part of the head, and it is confirmed that this is cold phlegmatic excess, then cauterize that area with the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulation in wounds, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries behind the two temples, and with two cauteries behind two bones at the neck. And if you need an addition, then cauterize that at the entire base of the nail on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter xiiii.
On Cauterization for Nasal Congestion.
When you treat that person with what we have mentioned in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person cow's bile to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize them with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil. And then cauterize that person with a small rose-shaped cautery above the two eyebrows, just over the hair, slightly.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is the form of the small rose-shaped cautery.
Chapter .xv.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you do so, cauterize that area above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them be elongated towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
Do not press too hard with your tool when cauterizing, but rather to the extent that one third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
About cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs have turned inward and are touching the eye.
When the hairs of the eye have turned inward and are touching the eye, you should cauterize in two ways: either by direct application or as part of a burning medicine.
If you cauterize with fire, instruct the patient to trim their hairs as do those who are clean-shaven, making them longer and even; and if they irritate the area of growth, then wrap the eyes in a bandage so that nothing enters until the hairs grow back.
Once they have grown back and are even, then instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and gently apply a small bandage or patch over the eyelids where the cauterization was done, marking it in the shape of a leaf, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs.
And gently place a piece of cotton in the eye or apply a mucilage of feathers on the eye.
And thus the cauterization should be performed according to this method.
And then cauterize over the marked figure little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the area shaped like a myrtle leaf is completely burned through.
A sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hair on it raised above the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and wash it for three days, and afterwards place a bandage on it until the scar is healed. And then take care of that with herbs until it is healed.
But if the hair returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery again on that area as you did initially.
But if the hair remains in the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
But the cautery and burning medicine should be such that you instruct the patient to pluck the hairs until they are long enough and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take known soap and one ounce of live lard, or something similar, and mix these ingredients well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed in; then spread this mixture over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on both eyes; and cover the eye with a cloth dipped in cold water, and have the patient's head covered as well.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it gently so that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for this burning is like that of fire.
And thus, when the biting has stopped, leave the medicine and wash the wound with water; then, once the biting has ceased, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and now look to see if the eyelid is raised as it was washed. If so, loosen the constriction with fire or incision, for that is well; but if not, return to the application of the medicine in the place where you have not applied it until it is absorbed into your operation and the eye is constricted.
And then pause on the cut at the border until the mark of the treatment is eradicated, and then treat that with defined care or another method until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened due to some cause of the hair root in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this, your contraction is made.
And the way to practice this art will not be hidden from one who studies in this field.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with water as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head either on his hands or on your lap, and let another minister hold his head still in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
And then place cotton in the cavity or on the wound surface.
And then ignite the cautery, which has this form:
which is cone-shaped, like the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
But the one that is cone-shaped is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, on it, and do this gently so that your hand does not shake or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edges of the wound and burn it.
And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place cotton around it with a drying agent applied until it is healed.
If after ten days it has not healed, then now apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: insert into the location of the fistula and make that opening, then apply to that fissure finely powdered material of which the form is like this: And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and with your finger carefully press so that there should not be much moisture lest the melted lead reach the flesh around it; and it must be applied over the wound wrapped in egg white or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, it is now necessary to treat it through the nose and reduce the fistula to follow the course of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of fissures of the teeth.
Fissures often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, now use small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
And the sharpness of it should be according to the delicacy of the area.
Then apply that hot cautery carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
For the treatment of that which is inside the horn, let it be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks open, and over time it becomes old, and pus flows and a fistula is formed; when you treat that and it does not improve, now it is necessary to cauterize according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place the hot iron in the track of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the heated iron reaches the base of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and afterwards treat it as we have said for its healing until it is healed.
And if the fistula is excised and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterizing the teeth and on softening the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but without success, then place the head of the malath in your mouth, and afterwards ignite the cauterium whose form will be described shortly, placing the quill over the tooth and quickly inserting the cauterium into it with your hand slightly so that the malath feels the heat of the fire at the gum line of the tooth.
Then take your hand, and then repeat the cauteries as many times as you wish.
Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep doing this for one hour, after which stop it, for the rotten tooth is arrested and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or if it is numb or green, and you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then the cautery in such a case is done in two ways: either by means of a cow's horn, or by fire.
Cautery with a horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in oil, then take some cotton and wrap it at the tip of the horn. Then immerse it in the boiled horn until it is soaked, and place it quickly on the painful tooth while still warm.
Then repeat this several times until the effect of the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn oil and place it on the painful tooth, then put hot iron on top of that until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire is that you attend to the cautery of iron or steel, and it should be in the middle so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
From the fire make the cautery of which I will describe the form, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is rubbed in; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated either on that day or the next.
And it happens that by pressure of that cautery the patient fills his mouth with good saliva and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them gently, then make the cautery in the form described below. It should have two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery with one end, and place the ignited part on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and afterward leave it for three days, and then place it over the cut in saliva until what the fire has burned is alleviated.
And then care for it with applications and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cauterizing a sore throat and constricting the voice.
When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when it is associated with cold temperament, one should first evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area using the root of the galium in the affected location.
And be careful not to apply the cautery to the galium itself, but only burn a little of its skin.
And cauterize that area using another cautery near the junction of the neck with the last vertebra. And the cautery used should be in the shape of a nail following the previous method.
And then treat that area with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterizing lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold and humid conditions, and the patient does not have fever or consumption but rather an old illness, then cauterize that area using two cauteries on the clavicles above the depressions; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like a nail according to the previous method.
And if you prefer, you can perform the cauterization with a puncta cautery, whose form is described beforehand in the section on treating ear pain.
Let them put in points into the cavities accordingly; and then treat that part with the methods which are described before so that it may be healed.
And there should be three steps in the cautery which is used on that part: for one session, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of small tumors which are at the tip of the finger.
When the tip of the finger is dislocated due to humid and lubricating causes and does not return to its normal position after the dislocation because it is accustomed to being in that state, and then becomes dislocated again during a slight movement as we have testified, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the injured part either on its back or on its side; and then lift the arm, which is at the inner part of the phalanx, above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
And then use a cautery with two tips; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the arm until it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out after four cauteries.
And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus there are eight cauteries.
And then pause after the cautery and apply it with salt for some time, and then ensure that the injured part remains at rest, and do not move the limb much for a while until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and this is done, then cauterize above the muscle with a cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dissipated and the harm is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is bleeding in the stomach, fray and scatter moisture inside so that it mixes with its composition and multiplies rapidly within. And if you continue the methods of treatment without confirmation, then it must be that the harm is upon his back ribs, and he should extend his limbs and belongings, and immediately cauterize that area with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and two cauteries below each side of the central cauterization, so that the figure formed by the cauteries is triangular; and space them such that they are not too close together to avoid infection.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
And the figure of the cauterization should be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
And the stomach should be cauterized with points for one who is afraid of this cautery: mark points on the stomach in the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and afterward treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cautery of an inflamed testicle.
When pain arises in the testicle due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence that has been expelled from its usual condition by excessive evacuation, and if it is not cured with the remedies we have mentioned without causing discomfort, then the patient should lie on his back, and place three cauteries in this manner and quantity over the testicle below the hypochondria, as a person would when lying down.
And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right arm from the shoulder.
And do not press too hard on the cauteries.
And if the amount of water that adheres is half the length of the forearm, and it should not be more; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then have him sit, with his things extended, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cautery when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to press too hard during the cautery, and let it adhere along the entire forearm so that the whole body is adhered and reaches into the sinews, as the forearm here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Caustics.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will complain of heaviness and pain with sharpness.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain is intense and often exhausts the efforts of the physicians to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then approach to feel the location of the abscess; and subsequently apply the cautery that resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it causes scabbing.
And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not advisable to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged and who has become acquainted with many diseases; but even then, one should attempt this experiment only a few times before relying on this procedure, for caution is best.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Hydrocele.
The ancients recommended cauterizing the roots of the arteries for hydrocele to be performed in this manner: take a dry root of an iris plant that is long and thin, about as thick as the finger.
Then you submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and just behind two small cauteries, slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and two cauteries on what inclines between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly inclined towards the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle location of the feet; and one above the stomach, and three at the rear parts; and one in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries from each side of the feet behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not cover it with your hand at the cautery, but let it be evident on the surface of the skin.
And certain ancient doctors have said that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and burn it there, placing it at the place between the ribs so as to reach the abscess with it and cause it to be purged of pus, as we have said regarding the kidney abscess.
But in this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for if it happens that someone dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place of the fistula where healing is not possible.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the breast.
When you treat the disease of the breast as we have said about treatment in division and do not confine your treatment, then there are three ways to apply cautery, all of which are appropriate. One way is to make three or four linear cauterizations along the length of the breast according to the figure of the cauteries used for the kidney, the figure of which has been described previously.
And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery be the same as we have said for the cauteries of the fundament.
And do not hold your breath during the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery with both hands, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder blade, which is on the side where the patient's left arm lies.
And let the elevation with which you raise the shoulder blade be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both hands, ignite the cautery, and within that insertion penetrate the shoulder blade on the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are completed.
And if you wish, cauterize with one cautery using three fingers.
And then allow the cautery to heal so that the patient does not move the arm for too many days, as it is more appropriate than other previous causes in the healing process.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Cauterization of Hydropics.
Cauterization is not performed on hydropics except in certain specific cases.
When you treat the hydropic in the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, now it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the kidney, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a caustic on the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And apply these cauteries with something that will cause bleeding for a long time.
And do not evacuate the badness of treatment near the cautery with what is necessary so that it adheres to the place for both intentions, and it should be prepared quickly with healing assistance.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clove-shaped according to its previous form, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On Cauterization of the Belly and Other Things.
When the belly is swollen with apostems and filled with clear water, it is necessary to cauterize the belly above the bone that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand and do not return it completely, as the clear water will be expelled.
Here is the cautery according to this form: And then place two cauteries over both areas, and at each end of each area let a knife-like cautery be made. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and over each area two cauteries.
And leave the wound uncovered for some time because some fluid may seep out of it.
And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On Cauterization of Abdominal Areas.
When the abdominal area is affected by irritation and moisture, which weaken the functions, namely the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is treated according to the methods of treatment mentioned earlier without contradiction. Sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery that exhibits harmful properties; at such times, cauterize the area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, along with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or use one large cautery over the navel, or two.
And if there are excessive moistures and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize over the navel and intestines. Gently apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect method of treatment from which you will not deviate in error.
Chapter XXXIV.
On cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the water we have mentioned in the division and do not respond to that treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries below the spine towards the two small ones which are triangular, and place two of these above the navel.
And if you find that their stomach is not being properly lubricated and the food they eat is not being digested, and their face appears inflamed or with an abscess, then cauterize it above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery; leave this treatment for some time until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On cauterizing an abscess near the throat.
When you incise an abscess, then use a cautery that resembles a ray. Insert the heated cautery into the incised abscess, and ensure that it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the abscesses are too severe, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and subsequently treat them with appropriate internal medications until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the navel, it is more beneficial afterwards.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature behind in the parts down there.
When nature does not obey the treatment that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, heal with a cautery.
Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what is more worthy to do is to try with a subtle probe, and immediately you will know the quantity of the depth of it by the previously mentioned probe.
Then heat the cautery so that it is like red-hot iron. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned away completely in one instance or two or three, according to the amount needed.
And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the intestine, then be cautious in all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the area so that it heals.
And if the area is sealed, and the substances are expelled from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the matters are not of the bones, then you know that it is penetrating either into the flesh near the corrupted bone, or one of those causes from which there will be mention in its place.
Chapter xxxvii.
On Cauterization of the Bones.
When there is pain in the bones due to rubbing or from large windiness, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the bones with a cautery for each bone, as will be mentioned later.
And you should wait a little while before cauterizing again, so that there will be three lined cauterizations, and thus they will be more beneficial for healing.
Chapter xxxviii.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to rubbing and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat glands; and cauterize with one cautery in the lowest part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be as described in detail.
Chapter xxxix.
On cauterization of the eye.
When there is blood and moisture in the eye, and because of this it is prohibited to apply anything to it, and its menses are corrupted by it, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, therefore the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries near the affected area, or two cauteries, one of which should be a cross-shaped cauterization.
Chapter 40.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the joint.
When moist mucous membranes are effused in the vicinity of the joint, and this is caused by the displacement of its location, and the sign of it is that the affected part extends beyond the other when they are compared. And the location of the dislocation is where it hurts.
Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries, after you have marked them around the circumference of the part as it is revolved, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And let this cauterization follow the form used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, one of which should be large and olive-shaped.
And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the entire affected area; and then take care to heal what has been treated.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the region of the hip, and its cause is due to friction and humidity, treat it with the water we have mentioned and avoid conferring [with others]. At this time, you should purge the patient of thick humors using stinking pills or artificial pills or similar remedies; then proceed to cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either by using combustible medicines or by using fire.
It should be done in two known methods: one of which is that you cauterize that area over the region of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and ensure they have good depth. And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or large in size.
But in some cases, the cauterizations should be on top of the middle part over the head of the hip, so there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize using the circular method that precedes the form used in the treatment of hip dislocation, ensuring the circle is continuous and burning the entirety of the chain.
And this is the method of cauterization when pain is localized to the hip and does not extend into the body.
But if the pain extends into the body, then you should cauterize with two cauteries on the body at the location where the patient feels the pain; and use one cauterization over the navel, four fingers slightly above the abdominal area.
And if you use a knife for cautery, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the sharpness of the bone.
And if the disease spreads such that the pain extends to the area near the mentioned parts of the foot, then you should cauterize at the point where the disease has spread, using three points or four or more as needed.
And if the disease spreads such that the pain is below the thumb near the joint, then you should cauterize at that point with a knife-cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not proceed with the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by doing so cause harm to the patient or contraction of the disease.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the joint and proceeded with the cauterization, and the bedsores spread inside until the swelling reached the foot, and the sores penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. And as a result of a severe abdominal injury, and from that came death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of both cauteries, for which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
And within that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a thumb's width; and those circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those bars should be one or two thumbs, and make along these edges an appropriately prepared iron border; and this is the form of it:
Near the fire kindle it within so that sparks fly, and nearby place upon the part of water, the patient lying on his back. And thus cauterize that part with three circular cauteries at once.
And then let it lie for three days; then apply a bandage to that part and let the wound remain covered for too many days; and then treat that part with medicines until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my sons, we have seldom used this kind of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who oversee it.
But for the best cauteries to him who endures them, and find the place on him where they are applied.
But the best cauteries with medicines adhere when you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the width of the door should be of iron, and the length of the edges should be the size of two walnuts or something like that.
And if the space between each is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be covered above and below, and let them contain within themselves according to this form:
And then place upon the part of the water the patient lying on his back, and press your hand upon the part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quantity of that should be small at first, and increase gradually, and let the patient endure the burning and sticking of it — for he will feel this burning as if from fire — until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand and take the instruments and wipe away the hard water from all the water with soft water.
Then let him be on a diet for three days and place him on that border until the blackness of the inflammation subsides, and let him remain like this for some days, during which the ulcer will heal. This is beneficial in treatment.
Then care for him with remedies until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or armpit, apply the poultice as you would for water, similarly to how it is done with water.
And this is the method of hard water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for one part of it not extinguished, mix them and place them in a new jar, the bottom part of which should be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the preparation.
And place at the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and live fire soft water in which it rises by one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, and let the jar descend from the sharp water to the lower part of the inverted jar.
And then collect all that water and pour it over another live fire and fresh alkali, because at that time it will have great sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other limbs, as a means of using fire.
Here are the medicines with which cautery is applied widely, such as honey and vinegar mixed with salt and soap, so that they may be compounded.
And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure by which he was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies it as being good enough for that, and says there is no need for any other treatment, because he was healed once in this manner as recommended, for such an intricate case easily responded to this method.
And it should be applied from a bag of herbs, and if green herbs are not available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be wrapped in a little cloth and placed on the leg where the pain is, or on the hip, or on the buttock, and then bound.
And it should remain in place for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers comfortable for the treatment.
And then place him in a bath, and when his body is warm, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines except immediately after the evacuation of the body.
But Galen says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and at the joints.
And then take a dry goat's horn and heat it over fire until it becomes charred; and then place it on the wool and let it remain there until it is cooled. After this, pour water continuously so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cautery for Two-Knee Pain
Sometimes pain in both knees is caused by excessive reasons such as overuse or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
And cautery is not used for any other condition except this one, which is done through the application of irritating matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance, use small pills and similar substances to apply them on both knees where the pain is, three lines below according to the latitude of the area. Place at least five cauteries in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
And the cautery should be done using pointed cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a central nail-shaped cautery in this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cautery for the Beginning of Scrofula.
Sometimes this disease affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their neck, with elevation and movement there.
And behind the last thoracic vertebra and the ones that already begin to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that part with a circular cautery of this form: that it should take the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close together.
And immediately treat the area within it to ensure it heals as we have said.
But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by the friction of humors that are distributed to each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout properly.
And therefore, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and the pains are not relieved, then apply the cautery to relieve them.
And when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with these words, you perform the cautery.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
And if it is necessary that a puncture be made on the face of the foot, then perform cautery for the puncture. And if the pains rise into the joints or other junctures, and this happens repeatedly, then cauterize each joint with three cauteries or four from all sides with this olive cauterization.
And if you must use these cauteries and find them necessary, then cauterize it but do not press too hard with your hand before the cauterization, only around the specificity of the area.
And if the pains rise into the joint and the second area, then administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the muscles, and it is called sugar, then puncture around the edges as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the edges over each node and on the base of the hand.
And if the pains rise near to the joints in the bones or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistants.
And if you do not evacuate the malady through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you find a rupture in the groin and tell the patient to loosen the belts before the operation, and this is how it begins close by, then you must order the sick person to leave his food on that day and use laxatives so that the opening will happen in his belly.
And let the patient come to you on his back, and order him to hold his breath until it is ejected or the operation instrument appears.
And then return to tell him those words and sign where the rupture is on the bone of the pubis, marking the extremity of which seems like half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has this shape:
until it becomes hot and sparks. And then reduce the bowel or instrument to its normal position, and then press your hand on the place so that the bowel does not slip.
And you have already placed pillows between the patient’s limbs and let him lie on one pillow, while another is under his thighs and another under his feet, so that he lies on his back.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you feel the bone of the pubis in the middle; and repeat this another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
And observe carefully the smell of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or another great harm come to the patient.
And know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch it with your teeth, do not make your operation.
And let the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And take care of the place where the cautery was applied for three days, until the burn scar is healed.
And take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the wound healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of time required for their treatment, so that the intestines do not protrude due to the effort of healing.
And when it is appropriate to get up after forty days, administer care properly, and keep that person bedridden for another forty days.
And limit their work and the consumption of food and drink, and speaking loudly, for when they follow this complete regimen of healing, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to the size of it; remove as much as is taken from the cord, as one-third of it. And afterward treat that as we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
And some earlier practitioners have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
This is a paused line that you follow for the latitude in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a cautery nail, but the first cautery is farther and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cautery treatment for dislocations.
When pain in any member due to falling or striking persists for a long time and does not improve with medicine, it is then necessary to treat it with a pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery for every member should be according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the dislocation and the pain in it.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member near where they are located, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you wish to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commencing and can be cured with what we have discussed in the division and do not delay. If you fear that the corruption will encompass the entire body of the patient and all its composition, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle part of the head, and another above it near the forehead; two on both horns; and one behind, either on the nape or neck.
And last of all your cautery a little inside so as to press into the bone a small depression, and thereby displace the scabs, so that the exhalation of thick vapors may be alleviated; and cauterize over the mucus as is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifested, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and cauterize one on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the back vertebrae, one large one near the buttocks, one on the buttock itself, two on each thigh, one on each shin, two on each joint, and one on each finger joint, two on each instep, and two on each muscle, and two on the soles of the feet; cauterize in all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their feet.
And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so as not to burn them.
And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because the body is already numb.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as required by the nature of the tools.
For the treatment of cautery, use flour of oats mixed with honey. And for the other cure, let it be made healthy.
Chapter XLVIII.
On cauterization for fainting.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the heat of the cautery enter slightly into the depth of the skin. And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
And sometimes fainting is cauterized in certain places that are near the ribs and to the chest and to the vertebrae of the back, and along the course of the nerves which move that limb, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
But do not proceed beyond this unless one is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the body that move them.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that become infected.
When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery slightly, according to the quantity and specificity of the depth of the skin, until the whiteness and color of it are alleviated, and its color changes.
For the treatment, mix flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add pigeon blood or swallow blood, taking an equal part of each and thoroughly mixing them together. Then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture to the affected area until it is healed.
Chapter 10
On the cautery treatment for cancer.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as it appears.
The wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the deepest cautery in the middle area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have observed this happening several times.
It is safer to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 11
On the cautery treatment for tumors.
When a tumor is delayed in maturation due to excess moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, being old and weak, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around it with many small punctures. After this, leave it be, as it will hasten towards maturation.
But if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then choose the appropriate cautery for this purpose. Place that cautery in the center of the tumor until it penetrates the tissue.
And if you apply cautery in that place where there is pus, so that the arm may be relieved; and then treat that part which needs to be healed.
Chapter LII.
On the Cauterization with Corrosive Substances.
A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, when you see that corrosive in a place where it can be treated with fire, then you ignite cauterizations with small and large branding irons as is appropriate in the place where the corrosive is.
And then cauterize it thoroughly so that you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then dress it for three days, and pause on the cauterized areas three times a day with oil mixed so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption is removed.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method in place of cautery. But cautery with fire is more quickly effective.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore use that when you find it appropriate for the condition.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery of nails and other similar parts.
Often in the parts below the foot there is a malady called "claw," which is caused by thick and hard flesh that deforms the foot; and this condition can be treated by cautery in two ways, namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
The fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery tool, which should be concave in shape and similar to a half-circle, made of iron according to the size that fits around the entire affected area, and it should have fine edges.
And then place the heated cautery on the affected nail, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days until it begins to scab over. And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mullein and salt to it, and leave the plaster on for one night, for this will eradicate it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and often occurs on the surface of the body, particularly on the palms and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of earthenware or iron or half-circle in shape, and place it over the affected nail; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube and hold it with your hand, rotating it thoroughly so that the edge of the tube touches the root of the nail; as the hot water penetrates to the base of the nail, wait for the malady to be slightly burned by the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, for the nail along with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus place one part close to the other until you cover all of them as they naturally should be in the body.
And bring close the care of those abscesses when the roots of the nails are removed with the remedies that cause flesh to grow.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for tremors.
When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then that you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cauterization; and at the feet of him, and above his stomach, a cauterization in the shape of an olive.
And the tremor of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the sickly condition caused by irritation.
Chapter LIV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When in the body there appear accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, it is necessary at the beginning when they appear, to cauterize over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended over fire; or with the long edge of erestologia; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if not done so, the excess that causes them is disrupted, and they heal from those.
However, it must be done close to evacuation rather than phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that occurred before, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy that.
When such an incident occurs, immediately place your thumb on the opening of the artery, and press over it until the bleeding stops and no more blood escapes.
And then place the olive-coated cauteries, both small and large, in the fire for a number of times until they are ignited.
And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and apply it quickly after you have stopped the bleeding with your thumb, so that the blood flow is sealed and restricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your thumb and apply the cautery, then take another cautery immediately from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and do not cause any other harm.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the blood at that moment, especially if the artery is large, unless one does one of four things: either use cauterization as we have described, or perform an extraction because when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or bind it with a strong ligature or apply medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and strengthen them with a pillow and proper constriction.
And let him who administers proper restraint with the bandage and constriction with cloths or by positioning burning substances and similar items not hurry but act slowly.
And if anyone attempts this and the physician is not present nor are medicines available, then open with care using the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood stops from flowing from the main part of the wound, and over the artery let the finger not be moved; and above the artery sprinkle it with cold water to make the blood congeal and thicken; and then proceed with cauterization or necessary medicine.
On incisions and punctures and ventouses and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all maladies in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head among the parts.
In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may praise God for it, because of what he will ask for.
And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is by means of fear what was in the first chapter about cautery.
And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of what is harmful to life depends on the puncture of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of an exit or purification of the ulcer or extraction of a splinter or cutting of a stone and similar procedures. And with all of those things, accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case of their severity, death.
And I warn you that this should not fall upon you for which there is blame, because some cases depend on your methods of treating people with many kinds of illnesses. And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and this illness brings fear which means death.
And among them is one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," while his illness is deadly.
And therefore, you must not consent to one who comes to you with this attitude; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not presume any reason about it unless based on certain knowledge that confirms what is before you, and which through experience proves worthy.
For the treatment of all your patients, make predictions and indications about which one's health can be restored, for in that is your help towards acquiring fame and reputation, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your sound understanding and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that what you seek and of which you have need may be clear to you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not understood.
But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that there was no remedy for them.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was so enlarged that he could not move because of the size of his head, and the moisture increased to such an extent that it caused death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the membranes and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the brain.
For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the abscess but is only slight, it is necessary that you cut through the middle of the head into a fissure in its length, and let this fissure run for two fingers' breadth where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spatum:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two such fissures made in this manner:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head swollen on all sides and the fluid is pressed out when you press it with your hand at the surface but not deep inside and it does not return immediately. It is necessary that you cut through the middle of the head into three such fissures in this manner:
and then extract all the moisture; and then close the fissures with strips and bandages; and then apply ointment made of oil and wine on top from the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and treat the wound with tinctures and powders, and dress the head evenly; and eat only dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you must consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it is greater at the occiput, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the swelling of the fluid, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and beware of excessive bleeding and let the illness not persist due to that flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
Chapter second.
When I treat certain wounds or ulcers in the hands or feet, and if it is old, and medication does not help in its cure, then the last resort is to begin with these two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to cut those arteries that the patient exposes by shaving their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is; and the locations of each near the places below the ears, and in some people they are hidden.
And then place your thumb on the artery, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, cutting deeply enough to reach the bone, and do this according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, which comes out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then place your thumb there, and cut into the bone.
And the amount of blood to be let is about one uncie (ounce), and it should flow freely but not too much, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the patient's strength and the fullness of the artery.
Now consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of swelling on the bone, then cleanse it with water so that an abscess does not form from cauterizing.
Now strengthen the wound with lint and cloths of linen, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When it happens that some acute illness or sharp fever occurs due to excessive moisture and heat in the veins of the temples, or if it is a chronic condition similar to these, and treatment with medicinal methods does not provide relief, then we resort to the method of extracting arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as has been shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair that is in the temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it remains hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of friction.
And if it is hidden from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly. And now you take the spatula, which has this form: And then you carefully cut the skin with that tool with ease until you reach the artery; and then proceed to extract it in a manner that allows you to remove it from the muscle and reveal the arteries beneath layer by layer.
If the artery is fine, now wrap it at the joint, and then cut off a part according to the amount by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not thus cut, the blood would not rise completely.
And then remove one ounce of blood within three days.
And if the artery is large, now make sure to tie it in two places with very strong thread or cords and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound, or else there will be a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; do this at that hour or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery near the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery after the extremities have been cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
And it is better to perform this work if the patient has a fever or is of a heated complexion; for cautery helps eliminate residual moisture, and thus it is better in such cases.
And after the extraction of the arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with dried meat, and place it on a prepared powder, and then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if at another time during your work there is a flow of blood from the artery, now you must stop that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the place with dried meat, and press firmly until the blood is stopped. And if any of those causes is not present for you, then wait until the time has passed during which the blood must coagulate, and apply to the place with water of great coldness until the sharpness subsides, and bind it as seems fitting.
And what is quicker in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with thread, and then place some ignited material until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two places, so that it stretches what is between its extremities, since they are not consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both knives be examples. However, if you make it with less sharpness than two knives, it is better, for if it is as sharp as two knives, it approaches each roughness and does not cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is kept in them and the flesh is quickly severed.
And this work is better than all works and quicker.
And let the space between the two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and it is the condition of those veins which lie above the head outside, and you do not find any cause for the treatment of medicine in that, and often the face of the patient turns red and feels as if there were a crawling sensation on the forehead, and the eyes from this become weakened, producing so much moisture that even the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to treat these conditions in such an operation, and did not name that treatment for delay.
And you command the barber to shave the hair on which are in the forehead area, and immediately incise three furrows equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a bit from the movement of the lids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And guard against the beginning of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to press against the areas where you dry the blood.
And then insert the probe with two sharp points, which has this form for the incision as follows: which is from the first incision to the second incision. Excise along that entire ridge which is between two incisions on the bone, and then perform this incision midway between the first and second incision. And then spread this probe and insert into the first incision another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the sharp side on the flesh adjacent to the ridge, and the blunt side within the bone, and proceed with it until you reach the middle incision, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
May the incision be continued until the fluid appears at the root of the wound, and then place that fluid in the deeper part of the incision.
And when pus flows in equal quantity with the blood, express the places from which the clotted blood has been gathered.
And then apply pieces of fresh leather to each incision, and place powder mixed with vinegar, oil, and sour grape juice on them, and use plasters so that an abscess does not form by cauterization.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a generous infusion of hot water or decoction, and then treat it with basilicon ointment and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of tumors by catharsis and for descending humors from the internal parts of the head.
When there is a sudden and continuous need for catharsis in some cases, and the humors of the patient are depleted and small, and when paying attention to them shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and at the temples there is acute pain and severe emaciation, then you should know from these symptoms that the matters and catharsis do not come except from veins originating in the internal parts.
And the best treatment for these cases is this: Command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at its midpoint, a little over one finger's width (starting from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and let the incision be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the temples which are hard due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hair or pieces of linen. And then sprinkle above the wound with powder mixed in oil so that it does not cause an abscess from cauterization.
And when you loosen this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to clean the bone starting from where the new flesh begins, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen that will make the flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth and mix them, and from these materials prepare a plaster which should be applied to these areas where the new flesh is growing.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Every cause that affects the ears is one of four types: it may be a mineral stone or a substance similar to stone, such as iron or lead; it may be from plants, such as thorns or beans; it may be fluid-like, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or it may come from an animal.
And so when a stone or any similar cause that does not adhere to the ear or mucous membrane enters the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip in some oil of violets or sesame into it, and afterwards administer its extraction with certain conditions, and make them sneeze by inducing a sneezing fit, and plug the nose before the onset of sneezing. And then place around the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards to the sides, as movement for several days is advisable with these causes.
And if it is not removed, then proceed with the extraction using the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which is subtle and of this form:
And if it is forcibly removed with the instrument, that is good; but if not, then proceed with the extraction using an even more subtle variation of the instrument after a few modifications.
And therefore, if it is not forcibly removed with that, then make a cannula of reed and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, and secure around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing else enters except the cannula. And then extract with the small tool using strong traction, as described in the manner we have recounted.
But if it is not forcibly removed in this manner, then take a small piece of linen or a feather that birds are caught with, attach it to the end of a thread, and then wrap it carefully around the object. And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
And therefore, if it is not forcibly removed by all the means we have recounted, then you must consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you begin by cauterizing the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner appropriate for it, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and create a small incision at the edge of the ear in the place most pressed. And if the crack is of a crescent shape and reaches to the stone, and the stone found, remove that with appropriate instruments; and then promptly close the crack at that time with speed, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the gristle that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this instruction, at that time take a fine probe according to this form: and administer the removal of that gristle which is lodged in the ear.
And do not proceed with this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause at various times, and then extract it in small pieces or with delicate movements, or as we have said, for the extraction is facilitated.
But in the water that has entered the ear, it is good for the patient to use sneezing with cold at the beginning, and fill his own ear with some old cotton, and keep it over the ear where the water is, and if this expels it, well; but if not, then take small dry stones and lemons according to the length of a finger, and heat those in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of them into the canal of his ear and jump on that side with a stone hitting the stone inside the ear. Then do not stop this with stones until all the water is expelled.
Then do not stop this with stones until all the water is expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end over fire until most of it is burned.
For this operation, insert another tube and pour water into it so many times that all the water comes out, and stretch that part with the tube as was said above about the stone extractor.
In the extraction of foreign bodies entering that ear, if it is a small object, proceed and treat it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object which causes pain to the patient, then manage the extraction by hand and incisions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that fall into the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with the water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not provide relief, then it is necessary for you to expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore, if there appears any cause for the worms, then extract it by hand or with fine incisions; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow below and wide above, which has this shape: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the quantity that will suffice for the patient's condition; then suck with a strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
But if you do not adhere to this method, then plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, and you will find these described in the treatise on distillations.
And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape: If you use a cup of silver or tin, make it tight, in which there is a small hole, and cover it above.
And thus it should be as they push in what is in the curvature of the cannula here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the syringe and wrap its tip neatly with cloth, and then pour oil into the curvature of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the syringe covered with cloth above and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the curvature of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is to be infused into the ear should be slightly warmed over fire. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too strong, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear blockages.
Sometimes infants are born with their mothers' wombs unruptured, and this also happens in some adults, where there is a blockage in the ear canal due to an infection or flesh growing there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen, is among the most difficult conditions to treat.
And in that which you seek the vein, have the patient place his ear to the sun and observe it. And if you see swelling there, open it with a fine probe, which has the shape of this:
If the tip of it where there is a small width, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the probe has two sides so as not to hurt the ear.
And if the swelling is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in its canal, then use fine forceps and cut away the vein easily until all the flesh is excised.
And if the swelling is in front of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it over fire for a moment, and then put it into the ear canal.
And if you have felt a swelling with what the patient perceives as ease, due to hearing difficulties, apply pressure to it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the trauma that you have wrapped in Egyptian lint; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some ointment and apply it inside the ear, sprinkle some finely powdered medicine over it, and use it; and if you see the ear already becoming inflamed, then you should remove that ointment and replace it with another one wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, immediately dip a sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out and apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment described in the chapter on constriction to stop the flow of blood, which is described in the section on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Inflammation that affects the eyelids sometimes occurs with moisture, and at other times it is dry.
Therefore, you should have those herbs that are suitable for this condition, and finely crush them to powder, then apply it to the affected areas as needed.
However, if pain and bleeding occur, you should cauterize the area with a fine cautery.
And the best cauterization is when it stops the recurring inscriptions and spots from returning whenever their causes remain; and when cauterized with fire, those causes are burned away and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for severe inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Often, certain causes appear on the eyelids that are similar to severe inflammation in their intensity and hardness, and thus they are called severe.
And it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the procedure is that you should now consider whether the inflammation has spread across the entire eyelid from where it first appeared; and if so, the cause of it is light.
Then place a bandage over the fracture along its length, and carefully extend it all around so that it holds securely, and then suspend the limb with it and cover it up.
And if the wound is large, then sew it up with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is small, then no harm will come from it as the warmth of the body will heal it and it will become covered with new flesh.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid, then gently press on its surface, thereby allowing the eyelid to heal and suspend the swelling with a bandage, so that you do not need to treat it for any initial cause, and apply pressure from all sides, and if the eyelid extends due to inflammation, there is no need to treat it for any specific cause.
And then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray and originates in the layers of the eyelid above, and it occurs more frequently in children, worsening their wounds and causing them catarrh when they are sick; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate for them.
And so you will see them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and thus the eyelids of their eyes are moistened, which has covered inflammation, and the blackness of the pupil is apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness within them.
And there is a method of operation in the case where the patient places his head in your lap, and immediately place a cloth between him and you and make a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach on all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers so that hardness aggregates at the center of the circle, and then apply moisture with a spatula incidentally along the fissure by latitude, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
But in the incision be careful that you cut completely through to the hardness, for in major dissections the hardness will proceed out by a fissure according to the shape of white fat.
Then extract that which you have wrapped in cloths between your fingers at the parts outward and roll it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to press on the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and damage it.
But if no fat appears at the beginning of the fissure, but you press on the fissure gently until fat begins to come out; and then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and dry those with powders.
And thus a poultice of salt is placed over it to stop what remains of that moisture.
And attend to it so that it may be healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that place, then treat it with soft plasters so that it may be healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the wound.
When fine hairs grow among the natural eyelashes and these become old, they cause discomfort to the eye and can lead to various ailments such as frequent tears and swelling of the eyelids, which may result in damage to the eye, a condition known as examining or treating the eye. This is done in four ways: either by cauterizing with fire; or using sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or performing examination through incision and suturing; or using canulas, as I will describe.
And so it is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where pus has formed below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the center above, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and draw out the pus towards the edges with the eyelid, and turn it back to its place.
Then proceed to the inner part of the eyelid below the fine hairs by incising along the course of the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct; and then extract the pus and place small particles of cotton or cloth beneath the eyelid, and subsequently cover the eyelid with a pad, and it should resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it should be made according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, since this varies in people, because there are those for whom you must cut a large amount from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is relaxed.
And then place the spatum on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs just as it is the thickness of a king's hair.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the neck, and then excoriate that entire area, and then apply the incision to both lips with gum or fine wool fleece, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what you consider superfluous of the plasters over two eyebrows with some sticky causes if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
And then remove the stitches from the plasters after three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you want, remove the dressing without stitches, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of lint; but stitching is better. And thus this is what the ancients recommended.
However, in it there should be concern about the injury, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in dressing, which is to mark on the eyelid a shape like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
If it is not possible to do this, hold the hooks, and if that is unfeasible, take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert one suture near the larger lacrimal bone, and another suture near the smaller lacrimal bone, and adjust between the aforementioned sutures so that they are equal, and then lift your hand equally to elevate the entire structure on which you have marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with the suture, and treat it so that it may heal.
但如果您的脓肿是由您的切口或裂口引起的，用蜡和类似物封闭它，并进行包扎。
并且在某些情况下，当眼睑的毛发方向改变时，你应该按照我们所说的切口处理；但是缝合则更需要技巧。
使用竹子进行操作应按照以下形式进行： 你应该将眼睑翻转过来，并按照我所述的方式切割该区域；然后用艺术手法制作两根竹子或两根细木条，其长度应与眼睑的长度相同，宽度则应小于眼球的直径。 当你已经在各部分的末端切开，并且在那里放置了线的时候。
然后，将它们小心地放在眼睑上多余的组织上，并用强力绷带固定竹子的各个部分，让它放置几天，因为通过紧固，多余的部分会死亡并被移除，伤口会在适当的时候愈合。
If it is delayed, cut through the tendons at the joints, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs are not punctured.
And this is the shape of two canes that you will make according to this form: and there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On raising hairs with needles in the eye when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in some soft wax, and adjust the extremities of it gently. And the length of the hairs should be of the quantity of one palm.
And then you attach another fine hair below it briefly, and adjust the ends of that one as you wish.
And then place the mirror on your head in the light, and let it be near the sun so that your work is visible, for it is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert another one, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
Take your scissors and trim the hair from around the eyelid, leaving the natural hair untouched.
If the area is shaved and the hair is not removed, shave around it with a razor that you have prepared for this purpose, so that the hair in the surrounding area is also removed.
Examine the condition of the eye after shaving and using the razor, and then bandage it, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows from healthy tissue.
If the hair is too short, then attach a longer hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it so that it grows out over some space, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of ulcers that occur on the upper eyelid.
When an ulcer appears on the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, it is called leporine. This ulcer may be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, or similar malpractice.
The method for the procedure is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and secure it there until they are healed.
You should not use treatments that dry out or constrict the ulcer, as using such methods will cause the ulcer to return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use in the preparation of causes that I soften thus as fenugreek, and boil with water in which coix grass and its seed have been steeped or juice of it, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse therein the wound, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through every part that is not consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of something that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of ehacrati which is performed on the lower eyelid.
This ehacrati which is made on the lower eyelid, which is properly called ehacrati; and it can be either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is caused by plague or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and cut along it with a wide spatula. And if the eyelid then returns to its proper shape as needed, it is good; but if not, take a rod and place it in the incision, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close the two openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
Let the extremities of the two cracks at the two corners of the incision, which you have made to meet, form an angle when they come together such that a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And above this, raise the flesh by the amount equal to the width of the eyelid below, which covers the eyeball.
And then join the separated parts and stitch them together with a thread of wool; and then treat them as we have said with softening medicines and plasters until they are healed.
And if it becomes necessary to incise along a crack, seam, or cauterization, then you should make an incision in a straight line above the eyelashes as was previously described. And then place the plaster between two layers as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, it should follow the operation as it is prepared according to the form of the incision, and that varies in many ways.
And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the most favorable positions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain people so that the eyelid is solidified above the white of the eye, and its flexibility of movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a retractor below the eyelid, and elevate it with it, or extend it to the root.
And when you incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without pressing the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in which you wash the eye; or distill it with rose water dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cloth, and place on the eye a linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing substances until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the nail and of the flesh prominence of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when touched with an instrument takes hold at its root and is severed without the instrument being inserted into it.
And both kinds do not begin except at the major lacrimal gland, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and the movement of the eyelid.
Here is the translation: Take a needle and attach to it a hair from a horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong thread, and gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place this in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend this above the parts, and shave off the hair from the side of the nail where it is close to the quick. And thus you should follow that with the hair into the back of it.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and allow the tissue of the tear duct to heal naturally so that by incising it, there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is raised with heat or thread, as we have said, and then shaved off with a lion-shaped spatula of which this is the form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula so that it does not become torn, and that the quick is not perforated.
After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or finely made cerement in it, and leave that for another day; and then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot place the needle there, nor is it fixed in that spot, then this kind of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as I have described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the abscess and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape as follows: of subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and condensed and mixed with the aforementioned raisin wine or with white rose petals or salted verjuice, then strain the mixture through a cloth overnight.
And proceed with the operation until everything that needs to be removed is out, unless the opposite side has an abscess, in which case you should leave it for now and treat the initial abscess until it heals.
And then proceed with your operation on that side until it is healed.
If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh causes great discomfort and needs to be cut, do it in moderation; make an incision but do not extend it so far as to interfere with the flow of tears.
And then apply white rose petals and raisin wine to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On Incision of Boils and What Is Born of Tight Flesh in the Body.
In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, white flesh is born and it spreads until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids, making them hard to open, and it appears like the texture of a lattice.
The procedure for this is that the patient lies down with their head in your lap; then open the eyes of the affected area and remove all that flesh in small pieces as needed, using forceps or a needle; then make an incision on the flesh at the beginning until it is completely removed with scissors, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And so let the incision be made with the knife about which we have spoken in connection with the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which hair is clipped according to how it will come near this chapter.
And when the incision is complete and all that flesh has been scraped away, then fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle it with red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth dipped in albumen until it is secure from abscess.
And if any cause for concern remains and the patient’s blood is weak, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever cures that abscess, and afterward proceed with this operation when it is healed, and similarly do in the case of flesh that becomes inflamed in a wound of this kind.
But you must be careful to keep all healing of the wound from infection by natural or accidental means, use tools with care, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus that comes from red veins which are covered over the wound and prohibits its appearance on the surface, and heals the wound over several days.
At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and immediately suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or if two ounces gradually in one course according to this form:
And immediately let those veins be collected with subtle force, with subtlety, and wipe the blood hour by hour until you see those veins become smooth and turn.
And be careful that you do not lead the hand to the extremities of the skin; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise anything but those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you apply on the wound a green or red ointment due to its acidity to dissolve what is hardened by the blood.
But if it is not possible for you to do this at that time, then bandage everything with something that alleviates the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is safe from abscess.
And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute burning medicine as described in the narrative and they have not healed, then do not allow infection to develop; instead, incise over the abscess when it has matured, and remove all the moisture that is within it until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone and tissue are exposed and corruption or blackening is seen, then you should apply a tool of which this is the form:
And it is called the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like a sphere which is punctuated with small points (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press gently with your hand until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown, and the pus has ceased and remains absent for forty days, and there is no renewal of it and no abscess forms and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the only recourse is to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you uncover the bone with a probe or sharp instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply traction in this manner:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually narrowed towards the end as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates fully into the bone, and you will feel the discomfort because of the air escaping when you move your hand.
Therefore, at this time restore the place with styptic medicines that dry in a similar manner as has been described.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, at this time the matter which was discharged to the surrounding parts returns to the center, thus it is easier for the healing.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Wound.
When the wound protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in the surrounding area, then it is necessary to let the patient rest, and afterwards follow up with gentle poultices on the head without scarification and apply proper suction; then place a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla over the wound, and afterwards strengthen the plaster on the wound using powdered materials.
And the method for the powdered materials is that you take strips of linen cloth, and each strip should be folded into four parts; then make powder from those strips.
And afterwards place those powders one over the other according to the quantity that the wound requires. And afterwards strengthen them with a thick cloth tightly bound over them; and repeat the suction with gentle poultices without scarification; then remove the poultices and leave the wound uncovered day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligature becomes loosened, then it must be made tight again.
And afterwards remove the ligature both day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply again the plaster with the powder and the ligature and the suction cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
When you find a disruption in the uveal tunic, and it is prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape resembles that of a person due to this condition, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below and above, and subsequently place another needle where the double thread is located, near the lacrimal part. Allow this needle to penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then incise the site of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and strengthen it thus.
And then extract the needle and place over the swelling lint infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread comes out with the uvea.
And then treat the swelling with what comforts it until the wound is healed.
And on some occasions, apply around the swelling a circle of cloth to fit the prominent area, and then pierce it with a fine probe to reach the center of the swelling, allowing the moisture to drain, and reduce the swelling quickly.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of wounds.
This illness which is called alconati is not the one that appears on the skin like water descending, and it is not that one.
The method of treating this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, then take hold of their head with both hands, and move it in such a way that you see the pus reaching the lower parts, and once dried up so that it no longer descends, leave it be, and the patient will see the causes as clearly as they did before.
And if it does not descend to the lower parts, know that it is water.
But if the pus does not descend as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and apply it to the conjunctiva slightly above the continuation of the conjunctiva at the cornea, around the circumference, so that the pus is discharged.
Once it is discharged, then you should apply warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing, as explained earlier, according to the condition.
Now you should make the patient lie down on a bed or bench and lift his limb, using a pad to support it.
And approach with your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right.
And approach with your right hand to hold the probe if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And place the tip of the probe near the edge for the thickness of the ray in the white of the eye towards the smallest tear duct, and then insert it vertically and rotate your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the curved causeway.
And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the space from the pupil to the edge of the dark area, which is the edge of the eye; for you will see through the pupil with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And then place the probe into the area where the fluid is, and then pull it out once or twice, and if the fluid comes out immediately, now you see the patient's condition based on how quickly the fluid drains, and with the probe in the eye.
And then pause for a moment; if the fluid has drained, now pull out the probe after some time has passed.
And when it has stopped and no more fluid is draining, now gently remove the probe, rotating your hand slowly; then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in the fluid and rinse the eye with this solution. Then place a piece of cloth or leather soaked in rose oil and egg white over the eye.
Let us and those who come after us understand how to treat a wound on the thigh with a piece of linen.
And if the instrument does not obey because of the hardness of the wound — for there are some men whose wound is hard due to this — then you should take the spatum, which is called alburad, and this is its form:
And thus perforate in that joint, and do not stop your hand in the movement, so that you make a subtle passage for the instrument.
And then insert the instrument as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for recovery by placing them in a comfortable room that is appropriately prepared, where they will sleep on their back in a darkened room, and all movements must be prohibited.
And pay attention to the nature of his body so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And bandage according to his condition on the third day.
And then untie it in that dark room and show the patient the wound's condition, explain some causes to them, and then re-bandage it on the seventh day.
And you should not do this at the hour of the curative treatment or very close to it. Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and vigorous care.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should untie the dressing before the seventh day and treat it with whatever helps to resolve the abscess.
For four days you should cover the eyes with a patch and direct their attention to the mouth through which they will be given nourishment, keeping them in the darkest place possible.
And then gradually take them out of that dark place and converse with them about their concerns.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from certain visions, and now you should be bold about the operation.
And it has already been conveyed to us by some of those who know the Art, and some have said that they make fire in the Ajrad, which is perforated through which water flows.
However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of perforation for those who are unaware of them:
And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this subtlety in a triangular shape, the sharp end exactly as that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there appear various flesh growths that are attached, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion bite from poisonous words, or to a sea polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature. And in it there is cancerous flesh, wasting away, of dark color; and in some cases, the flesh is lion-colored but not dark.
Therefore, in the case of flesh that is not infected with corruption or cancer, have the patient sit between your thighs and expose it to the sun, and starve the tumor by applying cold to those parts. And then extract from the inner parts, and carefully incise what you have identified with a sharp, fine scalpel to the point where you know that all the flesh has been cut through; if it should remain intact for any reason by which separation is possible, at that moment you must sever it with one of the finer instruments with ease so that it does not remain attached for any reason. But if it is ruled by pus or an accidental abscess caused by burning, then you must wait for what is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then you should cut and cauterize it so that blood is separated and all the cavities are opened.
And then place a dressing near the incision, close to the nose with water or wine. But if the wound is suppurated and you notice moisture reaching the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as needed, then you will know that inside there is flesh still attached to the excess pus-filled bones to which separation has not reached.
Therefore, you should insert into the patient something solid to which a thread is attached, and wrap it in walnut shells, placing between each shell an amount equal to the width of your finger or less. Engage the patient and insert one end of the thread into the wound either with a ray or by another means possible.
Of pus that water does make, that one should direct the odorament into so it reaches the channels of the nose, and place it upon its gauze, for troops accustomed to this action do children at schools, and is easy cause for him who wants to perform it.
And then pause the two extremities of the probe, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a piece of flesh to cover the nuts that are inside the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh has covered the nuts within the probe.
And then remove the probe, and place in the nose near the bleeding an application, and do this for three days or more until it has corroded everything that remains of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used for purging, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small tube, like a small cone, and the opening similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used for purging should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or what you want from juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
About the holes in the nostrils.
Most often is the hole in the nostrils narrow, and it is enlarged and treated over several days during which one must pay attention to it.
And for this reason, you should treat it at the beginning of its appearance, and you should continue to treat it entirely. And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine, which was there instead.
But if the treatment is delayed until it needs to be enlarged, then consider whether it has become hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation. At this point, do not touch it with a probe because often such an abscess becomes chronic; for most of the time, when you attempt to treat this abscess too late, it is due to great negligence towards it earlier.
And if the abscess is touchable and not dark in color, and if incision is possible at all, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar conditions.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few perform this operation except on certain individuals.
Therefore, when there is any cause for those conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or with bleeding, and then you adjust the two sides of the wound with sutures, and afterward treat what lies within so that it may heal.
And if the edges of the continuity dissolution are already separated and each is made clean, then you should scrape away each part of its visible edge until blood appears. And then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and over those apply powder of dragon’s blood and sprinkle it, and place on top a piece of diafinitive plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that area for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and leave what lies within until the pus is completely absorbed, and then treat with an ointment so that it may heal.
But the method of suturing is that you join the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal sutures, or join the edges of the wound with pus as appropriate to your judgment.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two edges in their internal parts.
Often in the internal parts of the edges of some people's wounds, there are hard abscesses similar to grease from goats, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Then convert the lips and fissures of each of those hardnesses from every side, and afterwards fill the place with fine cloth so that the blood may be restrained, and afterwards wash it well with something astringent and heal the place with water that is styptic until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On incising the flesh attached to the gums.
Great care must be taken when there is a growth on the flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called "albulus." Then you should suspend that with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it at its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
And afterwards apply fine cloth or other styptic powder or astringents to the wound.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterwards the cauterized area will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On extracting teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the inner and outer parts and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, tumors, and some growths are blackened and become yellow or green until the gum becomes corrupt due to this corruption and the teeth become diseased.
And then you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth on which these rough spots appear until no such cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowness and other such discolorations so that they are cleansed.
Thus if you are at that point in the reasoning from its beginning, it is good; and if not, then return to the reasoning on those points another day and on the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have the need for various shapes and figures of forceps according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the razors with which the tooth is cut are different from the razor used to file between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare those which you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care of the tooth from its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace it once it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime that deserves exemption from such removal.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain deceives the patient and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but immediately the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of surgeons.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely, and then move it using your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
Near the root of the tooth take strong pincers or forceps firmly, and place the head of the patient between your fingers so that he does not move, and then pull out the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And then if it is not loose, take one of those instruments and place it below from all sides and try to remove the tooth in the same way as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then cover that part with cloth and bind it tightly to the root with a thin thread so that it does not break when you compress it with the forceps.
And it is necessary that you act extremely carefully when cutting around the entire gum area and be mindful of your strength so that you do not break it or leave any part behind, and return to the patient because it is better than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity when removing teeth, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for often it leads to great harm to sick people which is much harder to remedy, and the reasons for this are entirely due to them or partially, or because they extract the tooth along with some bones of the jaw, as we have often testified.
And after the extraction of the tooth, wash the mouth with warm water or salt water.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then take some quantity of egg yolk and apply it to the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and thin tongs with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
And they should be like bars of thick handle so that when you turn them the tongs are not bent, they should have short extremities.
And they should be made of Indian iron for the straight parts and at the ends should have teeth that fit into one another and turn by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends should be in the shape of a bird’s beak called a ciconia, which is a kite, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from the locked jaw.
When you must extract a tooth that is locked due to some cause, it is necessary for you to pause and apply something warm to the area for one day or two until the site becomes softened; then insert these or tongs with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or kite, the form of the forceps:
The ends of these should be made inside like a file or rasp.
And if it does not obey when you attempt with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut around the root and remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And let a small part be cut from a thick extremity, and it should not be swallowed so that it does not rattle.
Therefore, if the cutting is done by water, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
And now help yourself with this instrument which has two blades, of which this is the form as follows: And use other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because the procedure is done with this instrument which resembles a small animal's horn, and this is its form:
of the curved or short triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and it should not be swallowed so that it does not rattle.
And know that the instruments for teeth are sharp and similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if you need to, now apply proper treatment over that place with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture, of which this is the form:
And let it be removed bit by bit, and let it be held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is extracted; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this purpose.
And if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then remove that and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course due to their form being lax, especially when this occurs in women and more so in those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is very close to another tooth, and there is no possibility of extraction or treatment without causing damage, then root out that one. But ensure it does not attach to the adjacent tooth; at this point, you incise it with an instrument of this shape; it resembles a pig's tusk, and it is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
And let your incision be such that when you incise it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, it does not become inflamed or affect other teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
And let it be entirely made of Indian steel and grind it appropriately; it should have very fine points as with a file used to make needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that other teeth are not inflamed or harmed. Along the edge lines there, and cut that with razors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and you shape the tongue, immediately file that inside where the sharpness of that fracture is smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured and the speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or dislocated by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite properly due to this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then because they do not bite correctly, attach those that are strong with gold and not silver, for silver changes color and soon deteriorates, whereas gold never changes.
And let the filling be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the work is that you take the filling and place twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then build up with two tortuosity of the filling between one or more defective teeth, until it reaches the surface of the healthy tooth on the other side. And then continue the filling from the part where you started, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not defective.
And when you strengthen the filling, be careful not to injure the roots of the teeth.
And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and shape those parts as needed, and place them between the healthy tooth and the defective one so that they do not injure the tongue. And thus he leaves it as narrow as a Roman would.
If it is loose or ruptured, strengthen it or those parts with another thread in such a way for all its duration.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two defective teeth, as you sometimes see them joined:
And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper place, and they grow back as we have recounted, and remain in place.
And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a cause for using cow bones is given, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves as that tooth for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is below the tongue sometimes is natural and one has it from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
The operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head tilted back; and lift their tongue, and then cut that ligament along the nerve according to its width, ensuring it is freed from the root.
But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has occurred due to the healing of an injury, then you should incise it carefully and cut it along its width until the knot is dissolved.
And be careful that no cut is made in the skin and that you do not sever here any artery or vein, causing a flow of blood.
And then let the remnants of the incision be washed with cold water or vinegar or salted water; and afterwards place a licorice stick there; this is how the bad taste that accumulates under the tongue should be removed each night so that it does not consolidate elsewhere.
But if blood flow occurs, place over the area triturated vitriol; but if the blood spurts, then immediately cauterize the spot with a hot iron, which is appropriate for such cases. And then treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ranula Under the Tongue.
In some cases, an abscess similar to a small swelling occurs under the tongue, preventing it from performing its natural function; and quickly it enlarges to the point of filling the mouth.
And the procedure is that you should open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the abscess.
And if you see it as a dark or black color, hard, and one that the patient does not feel any sensation in, then do not touch what is clearly gangrenous.
And if it appears inclined towards a whiter color, which is moist, then you should place your finger there, and cut it with a sharp scalpel, cutting it completely; and if blood spurts during the operation, immediately apply crushed zinc sulfate, also known as vitriol, to control the bleeding.
Then return to your work after it has been treated thoroughly with water and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the incision of an abscess in both armpits and that which is near the groin, and of other abscesses.
When you find an abscess in the groin area, it involves glands that are clustered together and appear outside the body, known as armpits. If you treat them as we have described in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and insensitive. At this point, do not touch it with an instrument.
And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an instrument due to the flow of blood. Instead, leave it until it has matured on its own, and either you will then extract it, or it will burst open by itself.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the root of it is delicate, then that should be incised.
And the procedure is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested and healed somewhat on its own or if it has diminished in any way. Then make the patient sit facing the sunlight, and place his head to one side, and expose the mouth of the abscess. The assistant should hold firmly the area around the opening with their hand, and then use a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and as thin as a knife.
Thus, when you press with your finger upon that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, then apply heat over it firmly; now take some honey and place it in an opening, and draw it out towards the outer parts as much as you can. Another one you pull out from the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
Another one you pull out from the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is as follows: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one of them is aligned with the other, with sharp points, which should be made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
And after you have cut one incision, cut the other in the same manner, and then wash the wounds with clean water.
But if there is bleeding, wash with water boiled with lemon peels or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes there appear in the throat other abscesses similar to those two ears, and cut them as I have said regarding the incision of two incisions similarly.
And I had treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her throat, which abscess tended to have a dark color and little feeling, it had already closed the throat, and she breathed through a narrow passage, and she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if it had not been for my intervention within one or two days.
The abscess had burst so much that it discharged through two channels within the two rims.
Then I inserted it fistularly and placed it in one of their incisions, and pulled that out, and what was removed was of the large portion, and then I proceeded to that which included from the other side, and then I closed its mouth, and comprehended its tongue, and then I placed the incision in that abscess.
Then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood ran from it. Then the girl was completely recovered, and she began to drink water right away, and soon after she started to eat food. Therefore, I did not stop incising that abscess for many times over a long period, and an abscess succeeded in that place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Then I applied something and cauterized the girl's wound, then it became adhered; and afterwards I walked around and did not know what God would do with that right after me.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the incision of the cheek when it is abscessed.
When mucus is present in the cheek and it is abscessed and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
However, when it is cured as we have described in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and you see that it has already abscessed and is subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise those that are aggregated and round; and if it is of such length and is bloody, dark or black, and is not at the center, then it is necessary for you to attempt its incision, because there is fear of malady in that.
And when you see that it is according to the method I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which the form suits it, and place the incision in the new position, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two membranes.
And you should not incise it beyond the natural limit, for if you incise too much, you will impair their speech.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use an anesthetic during cauterization to alleviate their fear. The method of the cautery is nothing but with sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have described. Then take the water we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and apply it in a warm manner, and pour it not thick nor thin into the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the palate, and the patient lies on their back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out due to the internal medicine, thus preventing any loss of it.
And then with your hand on the medicine, apply it to the uvula for a short while until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a sponge and wrap it around the tip of the reed, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and insert the reed with the sponge into a tube so that the sponge adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cauterization clean around the grape with a sponge dipped in vinegar, and modify what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with salt water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and more enduring in terms of fear.
In some cases, the grape is cured with something that cauterizes and incises less severely, as it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take wax, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all of these or some of them in a container, and immerse them in sour wine, which should be boiled; the pot should be moderately heated, and at the bottom of the pot place a tray, on top of which place an instrument made of reed according to this method; it can be made of silver or reed.
And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
Regarding the incisions made within what is dry tissue, be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather wait for the development of the abscess clearly.
If this instrument is not available to you, now take a cane and attach at its end a cover of cloth, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the covering of cloth prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the skin and other causes.
Incisions in the tissue adhering to the skin or a fish spine or some other cause.
Then you should remove what is apparent from those things, upon which your gaze falls, and after pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that it becomes clear to you what is on the tongue.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the throat will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce juice or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the location where thorns are lodged, they will be easily expelled. Take one eel and boil it in vinegar, then remove its intestines and extract the contents; or take a poultice and apply the preparation to it and let it be treated with the extract.
If you do not forget the causes that we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a curve which you insert into its throat with ease.
And when the patient’s head is raised up, be careful not to touch the bones of the throat, so that it does not harm the body and also the bone or spine, or cause injury to the physician who performs it.
However, if the patient who inserts it is skillful, knowing the location of the cause attached and pushing it in appropriately, and pulls his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared within until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of a leech attached to the throat.
When a leech is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, now consider the patient's throat in sunlight, since you have retracted the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we have recommended.
Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with a small forceps or with fine tweezers appropriately.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this many times (until the leech dies and falls off) and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
Take a piece of flax soaked in water and place it on the wound, and work it into the mouth of the cavity, and wash out the mouth with that; and do not let any cause make you remove from there anything else and change the water every hour with its own hand, for as soon as the leech feels the water it will bite.
But if it is not possible to perform what we have recommended with this, then fumigate the wound with cimex or asafetida by means of the instrument which we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall out.
And there is another method of operation in fumigation of this, which is that you take an urn in which are burning coals and the urn is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and attach the end of the instrument to that hole; and then proceed above for the fumigation; and place the wound over the mouth of the tube, and close it so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, for the leech will immediately fall out.
And if it does not bite, then proceed with the fumigation as many times as necessary, and prevent the patient from drinking, and give causes that are salty and dry, and let them not drink water, and in this way it is necessary for this regimen to be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the body when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, but there is some curvature to it: which is placed in the joint, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork, which is a kind of claw, on which there are grooves, so that when it presses upon any cause, it does not slip.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are various types of swellings, in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And they differ in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what presses upon the humidity.
And the second method is according to the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has properly matured or they have reached completion.
There are other abscesses that should be treated when they are crosswise and not properly matured, such as those near joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its nature extends around it until you can reach what is inside it, and if the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted because of it, it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or if it is near a principal limb, and if you delay puncturing it before it has matured, it may harm the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it when it is not fully matured; but do not puncture it raw, without proper digestion, except what is near the buttocks, so that you do not leave behind pus which can extend to deeper parts of the buttocks and cause a fistula, or that it be done in such a way that it cannot heal. May it be known that you should know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And you should know that it is ripe when there is a reduction in pain and the cessation of fever, and soon after a decrease in redness and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should know that the piercing should be done in the place where the pus is below the abscess and comes from the highest part of the swelling.
And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in parts like the limbs or joints, and in places away from veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places equal to those where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use piercing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, the best time is to delay the piercing until the second stage of digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and increases corruption, and makes the lips of the abscess hardened and its depth greater.
But some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
And you should administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses, a larger and wider piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which the treatment should be hollowed out and cut open, when it is done as if with bread dough and is performed at a time when it is ready, just as occurs with those that happen from excessive debility and buboes.
And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the fingers.
And of those in which round section and lunar section are administered, similar to these.
But in the case where there is none such as their superficial lion abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial puncture, or simply scrape it.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus and unhealthy matter, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part from it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger part, and continue doing this several times according to its degree of inflammation.
And especially if the patient is a young man, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly in debility, for the animal spirit's many visits are resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you will heal them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and after your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you cleanse the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or if it is a flat section; at that time administer some of them with lint or old cloth. And if the abscess is large and the cracks of the puncture are many, then it is necessary that you place wax in each groove until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut or has become concave around it, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you treat ulcers or roots without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and afterwards proceed with it and care for it according to what is needed of ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then at that hour administer water mixed with vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding for several times.
If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should administer powders mixed with vinegar and hot oil, and apply those to the sites.
And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and keep this moistened until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and clean it and administer to its cure what it needs until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the section of abscesses which appear in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of various types of knots that contain membranes; and their types vary.
And they are soft, and those contain moisture similar to jelly. Of those things which contain humidity like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should know that the extraction of those does not contradict the art of surgery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entremes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should cut it with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should remove the skin that contains this moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may lead to further issues returning.
And then submerge a piece of lint in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, for this will dissolve everything that remains of that membrane.
And then apply the lint again with Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of that membrane; now treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise it according to this form: This is a cross-shaped incision, and place the point of your instrument between two lips of the incision and scrape it all around, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains it.
If your surgery encounters difficulties, now do what I have first recounted to you.
And similarly proceed with the incision and treatment of the abscess as we have told you; and an incision on a calcified abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are cases of abscesses in the head in some people who do not have much moisture throughout; the reason for this is that I once incised an abscess on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, and could not be extracted, and if anyone were to strike it with force, it would injure them.
However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case of this chapter; likewise, for abscesses that appear on infants' heads and behind their ears, the incision should be superficial.
And avoid piercing those in the lower region because it would cause the pus to flow to the lower parts of the body.
And treat those accordingly as is appropriate for such cases.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Often these abscesses appear in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and such as are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper sheath, and likewise as in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are knots, for some of those are lithic, and among those which contain moisture, and among those are malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is similar to that of the skin, and is soft throughout, and is not attached to the neck nerves or veins, and does not protrude, ensure that you incise it at the surface layer of the area above and below the middle line of .G. within the line of .B., and peel it off entirely from all sides, extending the edges of the skin to one inch, or more inches if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is best to be cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not disturb your hand during incision or cause pain to the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from continuing the operation, then apply a salve of vitriol trissect or other powders that promote blood flow, and staunch the wound. Let it remain inside until the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the swelling is mollified and begins to soften. When the blood is cut off.
Therefore return to your operation after you have completed it.
And then inquire of the patient whether there is any cause for the other small scrophules, therefore incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the large scrophula, be careful not to incise that scrophula from its root. Also be careful to tie it with a strong ligature and let it fall off by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrophula completely, then be careful to approximate the two lips of the wound and suture them immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is excessive superfluity due to the size of the scrophula, then be careful to incise its root, and evacuate it and administer sutures as mentioned.
And for the scrophulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a shallow incision where the place of maturation appears to you, and do not penetrate deeper into what might cause pus formation in the body, as we have said.
And then administer an incision, wash it with appropriate ointment and similar preparations, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. When you see that the wound is cleansed, then you cure it by applying fresh flesh that has been generated.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of the abscess within the armpit.
The ancients called this incision an epilhot, but I have not seen anyone in our region perform this procedure.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
But in cases where men have scrofula, it should be avoided to perform the extraction of the epilhot, as it is not beneficial because all the veins and major vessels are affected here.
But in those who have boils that occur in the mouth or armpit or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the incision of the epilhot to avoid the damage caused by puncture.
Therefore, when we want to do this, the epilhot should be incised below three circles of the epilhot's circles, or four if it is a small incision along its length between two circles in quantity. The incision should be made in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are close to the surface.
And if the physician is cautious, he should then extend the arm of the armpit and proceed to cut along it until he reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
Here is the translation:
If the swelling has been present for some time.
Therefore, as the hour arrives when the puncture is feared, add two edges of the root of the swelling, and cut to where the cartilage is.
And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already blocked the passage of the patient's breath, and the patient has come within reach of death, and the airway is cut off, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the swelling for a short time, and thus be saved from death.
And by this command the swelling should be left open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, at that time the command is to treat the swelling, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut into their own throat, severing part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat them. Upon arrival, I found the wound as it would be in someone near death, and discovered the swelling and saw the blood that had come from the swelling.
Therefore, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming from the swelling, and I treated her until she was healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the size of the body, and it occurs in females.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental one happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is cause for fear. And one should not attempt to treat it with iron unless it is small. And you should proceed cautiously and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with nodes, and extract it with water that contains the skin and bursiclam; if not, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area as appropriate for internal treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the section on types of knots.
There are various types of knots, and I have already described all their types in the division.
Here is the translation:
Thus I say that with evacuation there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; and it completes putrefaction when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But now there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and continue that regimen which is appropriate for one who has had an evacuation.
And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple and is formed as if it were voided, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two kinds, either dry or fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture vary, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, express that and inquire about it at the beginning concerning the disturbance which is called an intercurrent disease, as its form will come in the chapter which is near to this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this probe and insert it into the most humid part of the location which you find in the abscess, and you will move your fingers little by little until you know that the probe has already penetrated the tissue.
And then withdraw it gradually according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract what has been inserted and observe what comes out in its wake.
And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is expelled, then you shall incise it at a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the probe there is no moisture, then you know that it is dry.
And draw upon the dry part in a cross shape according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that part and shave the wound all around with ease, and preserve the skin or sac if possible over it and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should proceed carefully with this knowledge, and then you extract it in pieces so that none of it remains for any reason.
For if any of it remains for any reason, little or much, the node will return accordingly.
And if you see that any part of it remains, then complete the treatment with some caustic powders and strengthen the wound, and place on that which is an abscess a cautery, and cure that by another method until it is healed.
And if the node is large, then you should cut both sides of it and cure that with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein is opposite it, then you should cauterize and fill the place with triply refined vitriol and leave that open for two days or three until the wound becomes cleaner and the blood stops boiling; then return to cutting what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
Of those, there are forms of probes, which come in three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of introduction is as follows:
The form of small introduction is as follows:
Prepare sharp instruments, clean cloths, and appropriately drawn extremities, so that the instrument can be quickly inserted into the abscess.
And these are the forms of experienced practitioners, and they are called albered, and one of them is named berid.
And there are three kinds, one of which is great, one intermediate, and one small.
The form of the great experienced practitioner is as follows:
The form of the intermediate experienced practitioner is as follows:
The form of the small experienced practitioner is as follows:
Convene such that they are used for abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and buboes, so that these can be treated whether they affect the bones or have other causes.
And they make probes, thick ones, lions (likely referring to a specific tool shape), as well as large needles like those used for sewing sails, which are made of citron wood, or horn, or iron, or silver. And the best are when they are made of citron wood.
And the practitioners make them from black goose feathers, which they use to probe fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, as these are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
And there are three kinds, some of which are long, and others medium, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the great expert of lead:
Form of the medium expert of lead:
Form of the small expert of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of various kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And their hooks are round, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have hooks with two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have hooks with three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Form of a large hook with two curves: Shape of a medium-sized needle having two curves: Shape of a small needle having two curves:
Shape of a large needle having three curves:
Shape of a medium-sized needle having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are incised and excised, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
Shape of a large knife:
Shape of the medium-sized knife:
Shape of the small knife:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they shaped in such a way that there is fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the excision of nodes. This is done so that the patient may be healed and find some tranquility shortly after the adjustment following the incision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
If you want it and have its appearance like that of ram's horns in which it is made into alcohol.
And it is in the outer part beyond the dotted line and in that cord to the inner parts both inside and outside, as you see.
The forms of the spatulae, which are hidden among the said feathers for the puncture of abscesses and I do not perceive them as bad practices, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
They should be made of citrus pith, round with some length, and they should be thin.
And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be with you large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly in an emergency, and at times when there is no medicine available.
However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas, such as on the tendons of the arms and legs, and on the fleshy parts of the shoulders, and on the belly and thighs, and similar to those of the fleshly tendons.
And at times these instruments are made of other small items resembling fish scales in this form; by which the blood is interrupted when it is done through phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's nipples, which are similar to those of women.
Some incisions become swollen; the nipples of some men should be treated with care regarding their sleep, as they begin to harden, and then the nipples become swollen, and are similar to those of women, and we apply plasters.
And for one who desires this, you should cut those along a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B into the line of G, and then scrape off all the roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its size as it does in women, then it should be cut into two parts with its pus removed, along two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which should be contained within the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line B and the line G. And then scrape off the unevenness between the two edges of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the gristle, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Are Located in the Throat.
These abscesses that occur in the throat are among the types of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a core that can be extracted.
And among those, only some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And once all of the pus within the abscess has been evacuated, you then fill it with linen and leave it for another day.
And after the linen has been left in place and the area has been treated with an appropriate ointment, it should be allowed to heal.
And if the abscess belongs to the types of glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described in the section on scrofula.
And if the infection has spread and there is gangrene, then you should administer cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the membrane covering it has become consolidated, then abscesses may occur. The signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to form along the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a rustling sound in the area.
And that which is from a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And sectioning this abscess is an error, especially in those areas where the armpits are, and in the angles, and on the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is dangerous, therefore it should be avoided that its treatment may involve iron, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
In the case where it is due to inflammation of the artery opening, make an incision in the longitudinal section; and near the place where the incision should be made with hooks near the artery, and separate the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place the needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, which I explain in detail when extracting two arteries that are in the thighs.
And then press the area between two bandages with a cloth so that the blood stops flowing entirely while it is there, and the abscess dissolves.
And then administer treatment in which poultices are applied so that the bandages can be removed; and then treat it with appropriate ointments so that it may heal.
And if it is an abscess from the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess along its longitudinal direction, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie a thread around it double so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you in the grapevine bandaging of both sides along the two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that you will remove the thread, then at that hour insert the needle with the wax under all the abscess. You should make the insertion of the needle first, and strengthen its place in four places.
When the abscess is dry in its middle part and when what is inside it has come out, then you should incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is attached to it.
And then sprinkle on the powder which you have mixed with wine and oil, and afterwards administer the treatment made with cords and herbs until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when they are struck or affected by excessive labor, and for similar reasons.
And it is done with the needle in the areas of the joints or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is tight due to tension, and when the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
And it is not an abscess that aggregates in the front of the body, and for this reason it is below the cord, and it pains throughout without going to the parts before or behind.
Therefore, what is in the joints should not be wrapped in iron, for it will quickly lead to contraction.
Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a surgical instrument). If it is a small abscess, then cut it out with forceps and remove it by root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it; then apply dry dressings; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the lip as it would occur on the abdomen.
Therefore, for some people, there are protrusions on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, whose root is fine and the head of it is large; and often the edges of these are smooth, and it can be small in size, or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one case where there were two parts on his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, they were white and had fine roots.
And the edges of those were inverted and split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
And the procedure in incising them is that you should consider whether the malady is moist, and if the color of the abscess is white and moist with a fine root; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over the fire, because in such cases the section should expel much blood; and if bleeding occurs, cauterize that area.
And if the wound is small and frightening, guard against making an incision with a knife; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that place in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead as needed until it is firmly set and falls by itself when its work is done.
But if the wound is of thick tissue, there is some cause for fear and dread at its incision, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you might incise half of it, and then afterward cauterize that area so that it does not return.
And then take care of it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to incise a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is easily penetrated, for such a wound is likely cancerous.
And this will come to mind as a reminder of something important regarding that.
Chapter LII.
On the Treatment of Hernia of the Navel.
Hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the navel, and through this, either a membrane or bowel protrudes as in other ruptures; or it can be from blood that flows from veins or arteries depending on the case, or from trapped air in that area.
If it is through a crack in the scaphoid and pus issues from the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the skin; it causes severe pain, and soon appears in various situations. And if it is through the protrusion of the bowel, then its situation differs greatly from what we have recounted about other abscesses; when you press that area with your fingers, it feels concealed, and soon returns; and very lightly it is felt there, and it is magnified by means of warm baths and vigorous work.
If it is due to moisture, then it is soft and not concealed when pressed by your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears with a declining black color.
If it is due to necrotic flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it penetrates according to a certain quantity.
If it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
And the procedure in such cases is that you must consider whether the swelling of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; then be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the swelling of the navel is due to the bowel or tissue, then you must instruct the patient to take their clothing off and stand extended; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to lie down on their back; then surround the area marked by your examination around the navel with a bandage made of linen strips or cloth in an appropriate manner; then extend half of the abscess above about one inch; then bind it around the circumference firmly or loosely as is fitting.
From the side of the abscess let the membrane be extended over the bandage and insert your finger into that pus and search for the sack; and if you have recognized or guarded it by means of the bandage, now immediately extract it and urge on the sack to the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the tissue, now take that one ounce; and cut into the excesses of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, now encircle that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, which you should make penetrate; and then divide the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it has thinned out and will drain, and then treat that area with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then treat that area with what is needed and consolidate the place.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Ulcers.
We have already stated, in the division, about the types of ulcers and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for their treatment by hand so that they do not become ulcerated; and we have discussed ulcers generated in the manner and caution of their cure.
And the ancients would say that sometimes crain [cancer] is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just as with crain which is in the breasts or in the armpits and similar parts assigned to remove all of that, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and hard, there is no need for me to deal with it, because I cannot heal anyone from that, nor have I seen another who could, nor has anyone reached such a stage.
And the operation on it is when it is necessary, as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge from black bile several times, and then let them bleed if there is obvious congestion.
And then prepare the patient for preparation in which the operation is located, and then apply hooked instruments that are necessary for it; and then incise completely with a good scalpel for excision so that there remains no cause for recurrence of it. And let the blood flow, and do not apply poultices to it hastily, and press the areas, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the instruments.
But if it is contrary to you to cut thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
We have already recommended, in the division, on the types of hydrophobia from water, and the signs of each type, and the treatment of it with medicines.
Of her who is treated with iron there is only the type of wound alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the type of tympanites nor to the type of hypochondria, for that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of hydroptic tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the sick person has become weakened or is suffering from another sickness such as hydroptic, just as if it were coughs or other chest conditions similar to these. Now guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you see the sick person is robust in health, and in him there is no other sickness but hydroptic alone, and neither child nor old person, then the method of the operation on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and have the minister approach and squeeze his belly with his hand, expelling the water from below the navel, and afterward take a sharp probe in this manner:
it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like a probe; but it should have some slight curvature little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowel and thereby injure him.
And then consider if the origin of the hydroptic condition is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in the incision you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers at each side, directly over the navel.
But if the origin of the hydroptic condition is from disease of the kidneys, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the gall, then your incision must be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie down because this would cause the superfluities to rush to that place, which would be harmful.
And then perforate with the instrument all of the gallbladder, and then insert into that section, and raise your hand between the gallbladder and the duct, and you will extract it; and if the quantity is that of one fingernail or so.
And then perforate the duct so that it reaches an empty space, which is where the fluid will drain. And then extract that and insert an instrument which has the following form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut like a feather, as you can see.
And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, you should immediately stop using it so that only a moderate amount of fluid is evacuated, for if you evacuate too much in one go, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it could lead to imminent death.
But evacuate it according to the strength of the patient and according to how their condition, the quality of their pulse, and their overall state indicate to you.
Here is the translation:
After the previous day's use, clean the instrument with water if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of it from the water, and let this continue for several days out of caution, and be careful not to run out of water except in small amounts.
If you are concerned about the patient, and they use a large amount of water, now bury them in fine sand and sprinkle moisture over them like bathing, and let them be exposed to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and treat the chest and abdomen after the extraction of water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not perforated (or it is obstructed or not in place).
Therefore, as soon as the child is born, one should use a fine instrument to make a puncture for it in this manner:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and secure it, leaving it in place for three days or four.
And when the child needs to urinate, remove the instrument and allow urination; then return the instrument.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not clear this obstruction.
May that part where the wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
May those in whom the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, and the cause of this is that which is born with the wound below the tip of the penis so that it cannot urinate normally; therefore, he raises the penis with his hand from above. And it is not for generation, because thus the sperm cannot reach the major second rectitude, and it is a chronic illness.
And the method of the operation in this case is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand forcefully. Incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as if cutting a feather or shaving some part so that the middle part of it resembles the head of the penis and the wound falls in its proper place accordingly.
And be careful in your operation to stop the bleeding, as such incidents may occur; and pause at that point where you cut off the blood flow, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and on its corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Such occurrences often happen with this swelling in the penis and it is a chronic flesh prominence.
And one of these is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and remove all of the affected area; then apply a poultice over that cut using Egyptian plant material; afterwards, treat it with a cleansing agent until it is healed.
And if it is malignant and of a dark color, then you should administer cautery around the incision and at the edge of it.
But if the condition is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, there is no certainty that it will not be injured.
And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored, as well as what is likely to become corrupted or is already corrupted; afterwards, apply a dressing over it using honey mixed with flour of scorched wheat and finely ground barley.
And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
because this cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: it helps with bleeding and also when the condition has become corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the urine can pass through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and on whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it must be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bond may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you must scrape with the spatula around the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be pierced easily by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is moistened in water and passed through so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic juice to ensure it is healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution that breaks continuity as other illnesses do; however, since it is part of our practice and our will, and because it specifically pertains to children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way for their well-being.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws. The reason is that we have acquired this through experience. For this reason, I have found most artisans and barbers to use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread with cauterization with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and did not find better cleansing with scissors, thread, and cauterization than in cleansing with the nail. This is because the membrane of the foreskin has two layers, and the layer beneath remains behind; thus, it forces another incision and a certain pain. And in the cleansing method performed by a surgeon, which is done with the fingers, as barbers use, there is no assurance against cauterizing the end of the male member, as it easily enters into that area.
But in the operation with the nail, it is easy to err and corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen that.
Here is the translation:
And the method of the first operation is that you should have the child lie down if it is one who understands a little, and you should only place the thread on his penis, and leave it in for another day.
And then make that child happy in every way that is possible for what he receives with his intelligence. And then have that child sit between your thighs, prepared, and do not let him be afraid; and hide the scissors in your hand or place them elsewhere, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
And then insert your hand into his penis and blow into the tube, and pull it in so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one pair of blades be blunt and the others cutting, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of two thumbs equally.
The mistake in cleansing is that you completely avoid or partially refrain from using the inherent force during incision.
Therefore, place the incision of your choice at the appropriate time with your scalpel before the swelling in the area and make the incision according to equality.
And if you cannot have it with your scalpel, then extract it with a needle and make the incision.
But if three days have passed and the swelling above the joint has persisted, then leave it until the swelling subsides, and gently press it with ease, and make the incision according to what you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the joint, for it should not be affected by this.
And therefore, treat that with what the plague stabilizes from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the vein and you follow the parts above, note that this should not be done.
And therefore, treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter L VIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or hardened blood clots, or pus or tumors, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
And if the cause of the condition we have described is not dissolved by the methods mentioned and it is severe, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be slender like a reed tube, about as thin as a sparrow's quill and half a palm long, with a fine tube at its end.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at one end to the lana or cotton for a good binding; then insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any superfluous cause from the lana, cut it off with scissors and insert it into the tube with force. Then press the siringua gently and firmly.
And have the patient lie on a chair, and elevate his bladder with olive oil and rose water.
And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis above its root; then push the siringua inside that; then push it in until it reaches the bladder. If this is not done in this order, but rather in a winding manner, it may cause injury.
And gradually remove the wax with the wool little by little, for the urine shrinks the wool.
And extract that and make a cure with urine, and use a tube; do not cease to do this and use a tube until the bladder is evacuated and relief from the pain is obtained.
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or when pus is obstructed and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
But at the end of it, it is blunt, that is its closure. And on that part there are three grooves: two on one side, similarly on the other side.
At the beginning it is concave, in which that which is to be introduced is placed, and it should be according to the quantity needed to fill that, without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this as well, and when it is expelled far, it acts like a clampcedra, on which naphtha is applied in naval battles.
Therefore, when you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is introduced on the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the extremity of the lancet into the groove as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with water that you are using, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and thus relieve the patient.
The shape of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is subtle, and that is its form:
And it should be made of silver or ivory, with the head being similar to a small feather, and below that a grooved handle.
Then take a bladder of the patient, and place in it the moisture that you want to instill into the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two with a strong ligature of fine twine, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the groove.
Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have access to a bladder, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that throughout its entire circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes, both ways; then attach the circle as is attached in such cases, so that you place in it the moisture that you want from various liquids, oils, and waters.
Then tie that to the instrument and proceed with it as you did with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of stone extraction.
We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stone and cure by medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have said about the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will proceed with that exposition clearly and concisely.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, but contains sand-like particles; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, sweats in patches, and subsequently feels pain; and with these words you have been informed about it.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals. But in young adults it is somewhat easier compared to those cases.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is more difficult; And if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes everything that might prevent the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation; for this diet sometimes prevents the formation of the stone.
Here is the English translation:
From this side cut the skin as it is prepared, and let most of it remain attached to the things inside, so that the bladder may be made to incline toward the parts behind.
From this side examine that and all of what is inside.
Then when you feel the stone in the space, at that moment cut it open immediately upon it.
And if you do not find it immediately with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your left index finger, if a girl, or the middle finger if a boy, and insert it into their anus. And examine the stone until you can feel it with your finger. And gently move it little by little into the bladder neck.
Then press on that with your finger and expel it towards the rear from the location of the incision.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to spread the thighs apart with one hand from behind, and with the other hand to raise the flank that is below the thighs, near the location of the incision.
Then insert a spatula that has this shape: and cut in the area between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but closer to the left side; ensure that the incision is made over the stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to the amount that you can easily extract from the stone, and not more, because your finger which is inside the anus presses on the stone near the incision without difficulty.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them smoothly.
And that one resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and is made of a light and easily polished stone.
Then place that one with edges and corners into the crack.
And if it is not forced in this way, then cover it with something over that, or press on that with a suitable tool, the end of which should be like a file used to grind stone, and do not remove it; or insert a delicate instrument with a curved end under it.
But if you cannot press on that, then gently move it a little, and if you see blood flow, apply pressure to it with vitriol dissolved.
But if the stone is larger than one, then at first you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then gently move it a little further; and similarly proceed if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance lies in cutting it with a large incision, for this causes one of two bad outcomes: either death or that it leads to continuous urine leakage, because the area does not heal completely.
But administer expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a way to fracture it with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with juice of aloes and dragon's blood, and press it firmly. And pause over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
And then place the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with chamomile ointment and St. John's wort ointment until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the wound, which is adhibited and corrosive, and appears as though the blood is frozen in a bladder (and thus urination is prevented), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and with whatever other substances are appropriate for the healing process until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you should cover both the wounds and adjust the medicines that are placed on the site.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, for many have been accused of excessive use of this treatment; but I advise against it, and instead suggest that you take a small sharp iron probe, which has the shape described:
with a triangular tip, sharp, fixed on a handle.
Take some pitch, and tie it to the stem below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the stem, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone. And rotate the puncturing tool with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce the hole so that it allows urine to pass through from one side to the other; for the urine will soon be released.
And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone that has come out beyond the stem, for this part is fractured and will be expelled with the urine, and thus the malady will be healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then tie a piece of pitch below the stone and another above the stone. And then cut into the stone on that stem between two bindings. And then extract that stone. And then untie the binding and clean the collected blood, which has formed around the stone.
And it is not necessary to bind pitch below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other binding above it, because when the pitch near the swelling is untied, the membrane returns to its place and the pain subsides.
And when you bind the pitch above, it is necessary for you to raise the membrane to the upper parts, or return it gently, so that the pain subsides as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman is very light in her menses.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is honest enough to confess to the doctor whether she is chaste or has a husband.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man present.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision for removing a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a more extensive incision, and this is dangerous.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to seek an honest midwife who knows well how to perform the task, but such a person is rarely found.
However, if you lack such a person, then seek a midwife who is almost honest and subtle, or present a woman who is experienced in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is chaste, so it is necessary that they insert their finger into her back passage to locate the stone.
Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and now order him to incise on that.
But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Thus if you find it there, now proceed to gradually remove that from the opening of the bladder towards the parts below as far as its full extent until you reach the root of the matter.
And then incise upon that attachment of the middle of the vagina to the root of the matter from whichever part is accessible to him and center the stone in that place, and ensure that his finger does not dislodge the stone while cutting below it.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Thus you should know the types of stones based on what you understand and signify about them according to what you wish to convey.
And if you see blood flowing, apply vitriol thrice to that area for one hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Take note that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stone in men, so that you are assisted by those in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bandage it with powders and moderate pressure, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood subsides after some days, and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
Of the section on treating hernias.
Hernia aquosa is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white tissue below the ring of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared in the region of the groin, such that it appears to be another part; and the ring of the muscle is between the white sac we have mentioned, and this does not happen quickly.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this substance flows into those areas, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may incline to yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be clear and white, and the latter is better.
And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water is such as this: for if it is in the white skin which we have mentioned, then at that time the abscess is round inclining a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the vein appears, because the moisture extends from it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper subcutaneous tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the cords of the veins and the white skin, then feel below with your finger.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe with which its form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the marks of the probe, judge about what is inside.
When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then instruct the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and apply the body of the instrument to it.
And let him lie supine on his bed on something raised slightly, and place the moistened cloth below it.
And then sit on the left side of him, and instruct the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend one finger along each side of the cord of the veins and at the division of the abdomen.
And then take a broad probe and split the cord of the veins at the middle location along its length near the navel.
And let the section be made according to the rule equally distant from the line which should be under the pubic hair, until it reaches the white line including.
And scrape that area, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure it; and your scraping of the place which you are scraping should be done gently and carefully examine the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the white line with water through a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white line to the parts above; and do not touch the tissue beneath the pubic hair including, and incise the white line in that manner as is possible for you. And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially the lateral parts finely, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the patient is treated outside of his tissue during the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the white line, return inside him, and then adjust the two lips of the pubic tissue with sutures, and then treat that area as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the patient corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, remove the patient's affected part, and then treat that area as we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
After you have wiped away the blood, apply wool soaked in oil or rose oil to the wounds; then place another layer of wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil over the thighs and abdomen; cover this with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these layers together with a bandage as follows:
Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded wool according to this pattern; make the edges so that they are pressed against the skin or dampened wool, and attach them to the structure in the breeches belt, one of the ends reaching into the buttocks, and the other at the thigh, and two extremities over each hip bone, and all the bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a surgical incision; you should take a thin knife-like cautery and make an incision at the root of the groin, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the fluid becomes visible. Then take a cautery in the following form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
Then pierce through that cicatrix, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the cicatrix with hooks and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with a fine ignited cautery; incise as much as you can until all of it is removed; be careful that the flesh does not catch fire.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding than the dry operation.
If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess during the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then at those times it is necessary for you to treat whatever opposes you accordingly, with whichever treatment suits what is mentioned second.
But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then at that time administer a puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid.
Then it is necessary for you to have the patient sit on some elevated cushion, and then puncture the abscess at the lowest part below the navel, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough for all the fluid to come out.
And then extend over the area and ligate it there so that the remaining fluid can drain. And then treat it so that the wound heals.
But if there is opposition to the evacuation of the fluid at that time, you should puncture it: and this is done only because the white fat in the wound opening opposes and prevents the discharge of the fluid. Then it is necessary for you to place in the wound a needle or instrument with which water from edematous areas is extracted, as described; or apply slight pressure around the wound.
And know that the water returns, and it is kept for about five months or so; and when it has been prepared, then it should be punctured according to that same method, because in this way the patient will spend his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in its major dispositions; therefore, it seems to me that abandoning it and being saved by that better method is preferable.
And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and harsh excess, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to trauma.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no alleviation in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess becomes lithified, of which the color is dark, and there is no relief from it.
And sometimes it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those that have already been perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and there is no need for that area to be touched.
May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression at the site.
And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should cut the tendon of the genitales, and nearby there will be the bowel above the parts, extract that from the white fat, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and cut the suspensors after you have delivered it from all sides of the parts.
Then if the bowel has already adhered to those inflamed areas and consolidated, now it is necessary for you to extract the bowel and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between any part of the fat or between what is between the vessels, now it is necessary for you to release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, now it is necessary for you to cut all that which is there and extract the bowel as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the belly.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to that around the inflammation of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking due to the ailment.
In the treatment of this disease, one must be careful because of what preceded its remembrance.
However, it should be called an operation just as they did in the beginning.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a high stool; then lift the testicles with the fingers and place them in the scrotum; then hold those parts with your other hand and stretch them vigorously.
And then cut with a sharp knife in a transverse section between the veins so that the veins are exposed.
And then cauterize completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are done on the temples.
And then place a needle with double thread in it, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where you act, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then cut those in the middle part with a straight incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you want healing to occur, so that the veins do not cause one of the testicles to darken, for it is not harmful in this way.
But if you have to act on all the veins, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or to attach them to the veins so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or to attach them in such a way that they do not receive any benefit from them.
Chapter Sixty-Five.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs below the epigastric region extended over the front part of the abdomen near the inguinal canal, because from this rupture some of the bowels enter.
And this rupture is either of the epigastric region or from its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the epigastric region, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal in size to what the epigastric region compresses within the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the epigastric region, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from what is seen near the navel, and this is because of the displacement of the bowel, and its body extends beyond the epigastric region.
And in some cases, the peritoneum is pulled out with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called a zirbal hernia.
And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in other cases the bowel forms a fissure, and here it is retained, and this causes great pain to the patient, and in many cases it leads to severe and worsening pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of these types of this illness iron is feared, for which it must be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation in that case is to command the patient to hold the bandage with his hand on the parts inside his affected area if he obeys its return, and then lie down on his back between your hands, and raise his thighs.
And then place the incision where you will cut the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then insert into the two lips of the section hooks as needed to open the section with them.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to do so, remove it from there.
And then carefully cut away the tissue around which you previously incised the cord of the testicles, until the white hard node in each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into what contains the testicle, between the white node which is behind the cord, and between the subsequent tissue, and separate any adhesions that are in the part behind the cord.
And then grasp the cord of the testicles from the outside, and with this extend the white node upwards with your left hand, and lift the cord with the white node to the part of the section; and instruct an assistant to pull it upward while you dissolve any adhesions behind it completely.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no part of the bandage wrapped around the white hard node. If you find that there is some cause for it, then at this point you should apply that to the belly and leave it.
And then cut into the part below the cord of the testicles in such a way that from this section blood and pus can flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and place the thread we have recommended (and sometimes the white cicatrix is cauterized, which we mentioned near the cutting to prevent blood flow, as it happens at times) and leave the thread until it falls off by itself.
If the application of it is delayed, hot water should be applied, and let it remain on that part which has been injured as we have said.
And after treating the wound with the other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter lxvi.
Of hernia ventosa.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia that is treated with heat; which is that you tie the vessels near the section in a place where it is convenient to do so; and then dry it in its proper location around the abscess that opens, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter lxvii.
Of the division that is made in the glands.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the glands as we have said, and examine the area.
And they do not assign any cause for the sac to the testicle; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns to normal at all times.
But if the time is prolonged with this condition, there is a narrow passage in the scrotum through which the sac descends into the scrotum; and it occurs due to the extension of the scrotum as we have said, which causes it because the scrotum is stretched out, and then it becomes softened, and an abscess forms and needs examination.
And thus the treatment of those who are to be cauterized is as follows, after which is related the narrative concerning them.
And in some cases it is treated with an iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back with the thighs raised, and then the area of the abscess rupture is dried by section across its width according to a length of three of those mentioned.
And then stretch the white cloth that is under the bandage so that it is uncovered.
And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points at the extremity of the cautery on the cloth, and join one to the other with a suture.
And then extract the end of the cautery, and do not cut through the cloth entirely, nor stretch it out, nor any other such cause as I will make you understand in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat it as you would a wound, and when you cut the flaps, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the cloth is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, for it is nearer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the bandage for the testicles.
In many cases, the bandage for the testicles is softened in certain men because the flesh that lies under it becomes softened, and this is due to careful management.
Then it is necessary for those who are asked about the treatment to have the patient lie according to their side, and then dissect all the tissue that has been softened over the natural tissue seam; and next adjust two edges at the suture.
And if you wish, begin by removing the excess tissue that has been softened with three or four layers and then secure it with a firm suture.
And then dissect between the sutures; and subsequently treat other wounds until they are healed and the pus has ceased.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the reason it was read to me, I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except by two ways, one of which is so that when asked about it, the physician knows how to treat those who are affected by it; and the other way is that we often have need of castration for certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by atrophy or by cutting and section.
But in the case where it is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is that we should immerse the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and are suspended. And then take those with your hand until they become soft and do not appear to be hard upon touch.
Here is the English translation:
Regarding the suspenders, and incise on each side such that two parts proceed from it.
And incise those boils which you have drained of their contents. And do not apply anything to those of the spleen except for subtle medicine which is for the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by cutting, because cutting thoroughly removes any cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there appears in that space between the chain of testicles, between two testicles, a figure resembling a female vulva, where hair also grows.
And in some cases, that part where urine is emitted is located in the chain of the testicles.
In women, there is a special case: the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly raised towards the inside, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is necessary for you to incise those tight tissues until the pus drains out, and then treat them as you would other wounds.
And in the second species of men who have urine that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On lancing and on flesh protruding due to causes of women.
Lancing is properly performed based on natural causes, considering the condition and making an appropriate incision; and in some cases, it is exaggerated in women to such a degree that it spreads as it does in men and penetrates during intercourse.
Then you should have the excess of lancing done by your hand or by an inch and incisions.
And do not stop at the incision, especially at the root of the vein, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
But hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the navel of the mother and fills it, and lightly it spreads to the parts outside like a tail (and for this reason some early writers called this "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would lance, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of scrotal hernia.
Scrotal hernia is when the genital part of a woman is not perforated, or the passage is small. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh poorly joined or by a thin or thick channel.
It is done either in the region of the major artery, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you must prohibit cooking, intercourse, and childbirth, and somewhat less menstruation.
And the diagnosis of that is made by examination with the speculum, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed quickly; but if it is not apparent, then inquire about it with your questions or with the light.
But if the obstruction is due to a thin channel and it is close to both lips, then you should cut and disrupt that.
And you should place cotton pads over both lips, and then apply your diagnostic techniques from the most intimate areas.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread, and then stretch both lips forcefully so that the thin channel is cut and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the location, and have a man hold it there for as long as necessary to ensure the cut area is consolidated.
But if the channel is thick and dense, then you should cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and cut it open.
Here are the medicines that stop blood flow from a bite, such as hachyatia, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
And immediately apply a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep it like that for several days and apply dry sponges.
And then it should be treated with the other method of healing until it is healed.
And in some cases, similar accidents occur in the larger birth of other tissues, and at these times it is necessary to incise them according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess in the larger part should not be treated with any kind of iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the female genital area.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of small veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when these old hemorrhoids are formed, they become hard.
And I have already mentioned in the division the types of these and the signs of them, and to say which of these receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps when they are near the opening of the larger part and do not appear to the touch, then in these no treatment with iron should be done.
May those things be removed which are in the opening of the wound upon which one feels pain, for they must be cured.
And when you put the woman in a bath, cleanse and prepare the area with scissors or rough cloth, and cut away those parts with the razor.
And then powder should be sprinkled on those areas that bleed from one of the powders used for cutting, such as acacia and similar substances.
And then press the poultice onto them for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and pomegranate peels and similar ingredients.
And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and sour wine to make a plaster to apply over it.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, apply it to both sides, and at the nipples with scarification.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or dill or galbanum in sour wine, and apply it to the area; and afterward treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the Incision of an Abscess Accidentally Made in the Belly.
Various kinds of abscesses occur accidentally in the belly, such as stone and gravel abscesses, ulcers, boil-like abscesses, hemorrhoids, fistulas, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these ailments and their kinds and the signs of them, and their treatments in division.
And what I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the belly when they are caused by illness is how the operation should be performed. If you want to know in what manner it is done, follow along.
Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it appears red and feels hot to the touch, then do not perform an incision on it, and treat it in such a way that aids in maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
And now you should have the woman lie on a cushioned surface with two cushions; let her recline on her back and place her legs elevated below the waist, and spread out her arms below her elbows, and bind them with bandages as is appropriate.
And then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the belly will be made, the form of which will be described in these cases.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, you should place it along the line of the navel of the woman, and what is inserted into the belly with the instrument should not exceed the circumference of the navel and the extent of the ailment. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the largest wound, then it is necessary that you place padding over the tissue of the largest wound so that the entry of any instrument into the largest wound is prevented.
And it is necessary that you place the lubricant that flows from the instrument on top and that the assistant hold the instrument while rotating the lubricant within until the opening of the largest wound is sufficiently covered.
And when the wound appears and is touched by hand and is inflamed and moist, it is necessary that you dry it with a piece of linen.
And when the pus is evacuated, it is necessary that you place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the poultice to the dried area around the largest wound.
And place over the largest wound and on the bandage a piece of clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until the moment comes when you consider it appropriate to do so for its healing.
And sometimes the wound and the dressing are washed in this way that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then in water in which lily root or long-leaved arum has been boiled, and then returns to its dressing.
And if the dressing is deeply embedded in the inflamed wound, then it is necessary that you refrain from removing it with force, instead caring for it as we have described in the section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner living embryos are treated when they appear abnormal according to nature.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of light, and it is that when you see the woman strain in labor and desire to breathe the air, and she is elated by what is above her during birth, and hastens the delivery of the embryo, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence over its head first, and the second part hanging from the navel or suspended below it.
When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it emerges with its head first, the second part will follow, and it should be cleaned of those superfluities by proper cleansing.
But if it is another way than this birth, it is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo emerges on its buttocks and the body of it emerges before the head and the feet, or one hand, or the other foot first, or the head and one hand, or to the belly, and quickly turns over on its neck, resembling the figures that are not praiseworthy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those births, and which type of birth is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
When the fetus is delivered with its head first by natural effort, and it is strenuous for the woman and the birth is difficult, and you see her strength already weakened, then let this be done, or let women have it, and evaporate the condiment of fenugreek seed and olive oil.
Insert the probe between the spaces of the small incision and split it with the second instrument, or moisten that with its tip so that you can see what is inside due to moisture. And press the woman's abdomen so that the contents descend.
But if it does not descend, now cover the woman with a mixture of feather dust and fenugreek paste.
And then command him, in front of the witnesses, to be firmly pressed and make him sneeze forcefully; and hold his mouth and nose for one hour, because the contents will come out immediately.
And if both parts of the contents come out at the beginning, now you should reduce them to ease little by little. But if he does not obey the instrument, now place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the parts are not returned and the contents are dead, now incise them and extract the dead fetus or tie the body to his hand with a cloth and pull it out gently, as it will come out.
When the contents are above the thighs, now you should push them upwards, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then align it, and then take hold of it part by part and extend it slowly.
When dust has entered the eyes, at that moment you command him to squeeze them, and cause him to sneeze with conditions, for it will be expelled if God wills.
And if it is not expelled by what we have recommended, then you return the treatment little by little until you pause at the second figure of nature, for it will now be expelled easily and quickly.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's tongue and dissolved gum, and mix them thoroughly in the mortar with good pounding, and afterwards apply it to the skin of a woman, the softer part below the navel. And afterwards have that person sip hot water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the lower parts of his body are sufficiently healed, then perform a fumigation with myrtle and allow him to rest. And when the sub-fumigation lasts for one hour, then have him sit on a chair, and afterwards cause him to sneeze and clean his mouth, and take him away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently, for the treatment will quickly be expelled.
Also pass the stool laterally while using one of your fingers. Be cautious in reducing the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let it go.
And if it cannot be released, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike her back vigorously with blows, and then administer liniments which I use and recommend for soothing.
And if labor has begun, then make her sit on the birth stool, and then proceed with the reduction of the hand, and mix the stool according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to strain until it is expelled.
Also pass the stool over the thigh using your fingers and the cloth that is at her side. Let the midwife hold the stool and then rotate it little by little, and facilitate its passage.
And when and how it is mixed, then pause on the area around the anus with what we have recommended of oil and liniments.
Here is the translation: The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
When you intend to treat the horror of the major according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second one with your finger so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that of the umbilicus, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside until you place that which is needed, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and the blood will be quickly expelled if God wills it.
The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are usually born in several stages, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is rare and happens slowly; however, these causes are from nature, not from life.
And among those, whether they are multiple, make a second incision, and separate them by the cleft, distinguishing each one along the ligament at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they come out in several stages as if it were a single fetus by natural means quickly, and sometimes they come out in several stages in an unseemly manner as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver during childbirth and you reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, and acts promptly or cautiously as needed, according to every figure as it is prepared for childbirth, leading to a safe outcome.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Some weeks are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and rarely more than ten, and you should already be convinced that a woman aborts at the sixth week, and another at the tenth week, which cause was made known through measurement by the glorious wise men.
And all of this should be known by the midwife because it is very easy for her to recognize these things, and therefore she should act accordingly as what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of the treatment and it is not yet expelled, and you are forced to use operative methods, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not affected by any of the conditions for which her safety is feared.
Now the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her hips elevated.
And the attendant should hold her by both legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the birth canal with oils and a mixture of honey, fenugreek, and linseed seeds.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the birth canal, and then search with her hand for the position of the fetus.
In suitable places: then you should consider whether the operation is to be performed on their head; and at that time you place the hooks in the ears or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or clavicle, or proper regions of the ribs, or hypochondria.
If the operation is to be performed on their feet, then place the hooks in the pelvis, or middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you hold the hook in your right hand, and place the curvature of it at the location between your left fingers, and insert it with ease into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the affected area.
And properly place and fix in position another hook, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal traction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And it should be gentle in all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased as is done during the process of tooth extraction.
And it is necessary between those parts that the extension be softened; and if any part is held back, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of the mentioned areas with oil and insert them carefully and rotate what is held back.
Then if a part of the fetus is exposed, at that time the hooks should be moved to the place where it is easier; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of it, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped around that part; and subsequently extract that part until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And so do this on the other side and on both sides.
If the head of the swelling is large, or if it happens during the compression, or if it is in the head of the tight dressing, then you should insert between the aforementioned spined spatula and cut open the head to drain the liquid, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be among the forms of other instruments near this chapter.
And do the same if the swelling has a large head by nature: then you should incise it with some material, or use the alundat as we have said; and near there, grasp the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed behind the clavicle, then it should be cut open so that the moisture which is in the tissues can drain.
But if it is not complicated and does not lead to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a hydroptic condition, then you should puncture it so that the moisture within can drain.
But if the swelling is on both sides, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction toward the mouth of the urethra is also slight.
But if it is compressed behind the abdomen and tissues, then you should drain that with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and tissues so that the fluid within can flow out.
If the other members remain and only the head needs to be turned, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the patient is open, then place your hand on their chin, and circle around with that so as to bring the head into the mouth of the patient, and then insert one or two fingers there.
And if the mouth of the patient is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it should not be pressed upon it; rather, it is necessary to administer humid and greasy applications. Administer plasters; and have the patient use waters that soften and moisten.
And if the abscess is on their side, then if possible, it should be lanced: and what we have said about treating a live abscess should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary not to leave any cause inside the second incision.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about treating abscesses that occur in the mouth.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and subsequently on top of that another pregnancy, and then the other fetus was also dead. An abscess occurred in the side of the navel after some time; it became swollen inside with a hard lump, and began to emit pus.
This is from the care for him, and he treated him for a long time, and the plague was not cured.
Then he applied to him plasters of strong attraction, and he extracted one bone from him, and after some days, he extracted another bone; and he was very amazed, as there was no other bone in the belly.
And then he thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Then he questioned the illness, and extracted from him twelve bones, the woman having in her belly disposed in certain positions, and already saw in such a way for a long time, corrected him a little of his arm.
And he did not consider it strange, but because in this there is science and helpers for what the surgeon craftsman does with his hand for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a spiral in which the largest is at the base:
This is the form of a stretcher on which he equalizes the limbs, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two threads. However, this spiral should be finer than wire and should be made of reed or wooden stick.
And the width of each stick should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments of the same type of wood that are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
From these two additions, insert them into the mouth of the mother so that they are open to them when you turn the two prescribed screws.
Form another one similar to that one, but finer and lighter:
It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the similarity of forceps. However, at the end of each of those two additions as you see fit, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of those.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you have her lie on the bed with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs. And then open it with your hand using the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth until the metrona does what you want.
The form of the screw which the ancients called:
Form of the propeller with which the deed is pushed:
Form of the supporter with which the large head is held
And it is similar to forceps, at the end of which there are teeth as you see fit, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see fit, with these teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and held. Form of a small supporter:
Shape of a joint having a spine:
Shape of a joint having two spines:
Shape of a spatum having two extremities at which the head is divided:
Shape of two broad spatulae:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more of each type is needed, the varieties of them should be prepared by the artisans, as it is easier for their operation and better for people in terms of quantity.
And you should prepare any of those instruments, whichever is needed, because the necessity for them is unavoidable.
Of the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, that is good.
And if it does not come out, take a decoction and pierce the cover of it. Place this on the woman's mouth as a poultice using herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla (chamomile), Arabian scammony, cassia lignea, and saffron. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water to make the decoction, and then place this over the fire.
Place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there so that the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second time it should come out quickly.
But if this cure does not work and it is retained, then you instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or mace of altea, and then insert it into the womb and feel for the second object. When you have found it, gradually extract it little by little. If it is stuck near the opening of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second object, remove it bit by bit according to what seems right so that the mother does not fall due to violent attraction. Also ensure that it is moved from side to side with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure through sneezing and medication with herbs.
But if it does not come out despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to tire her with repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, ensure that what is expelled reaches the mouth of the mother and then treat it with a concoction and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to rot over several days and dissolve, allowing it to come out.
But when it rots, it causes severe odor at the head and in the stomach, and this gives you the illness; then it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and remedies for this.
May we consider the opinion of the Ancients, who assert that fumigation with nitre and dried figs is effective.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and for secondary conditions:
It should be made of copper or iron.
And the finer end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the fumigation should be placed among the embers of the fire.
And keep it inside until that fumigation is consumed and repeat it with another one.
For the treatment of an infant's unopened anus.
Some infants are born with their anuses not perforated, which are small and closed. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that opening with her finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp probe, being careful not to touch the membrane.
And then place over that lint soaked in wine and oil; and afterward, treat it with a poultice until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula for several days, and remove it when the infant needs to pass gas.
And it may happen that the anus is closed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterward treat it as we have said regarding treatment with lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from hemorrhoids.
Fistulas that arise in the area of hemorrhoids with pus, are hard and thick, which arise near the anus or in the space between one part.
And it is either one fistula or multiple.
And as that hardness becomes old and runs with watery white moisture or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are superficial, while others penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the nature of their discharge reveals their true condition, and it is easily discerned.
And sometimes these fistulas extend into the space penetrating towards the bladder, and into the urethra; and some of those that penetrate reach the joint of the spine and into the bone marrow.
And to distinguish a penetrating fistula from one that does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently introduce a thin probe of iron or wood into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
But if there is turbulence, then gently insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything with your finger and there is no discharge or swelling or ventilation as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and now proceed to the treatment.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then its significance is such that urine comes from there and it prohibits doing anything to it until the place in medicine becomes consolidated.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that pus can be felt here if there is not a twist within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that it will be purulent at all times; and that this treatment does not help in such cases, nor is consolidation possible without incision.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no certain cure, and the cure for those is the labor and vanity of many physicians, upon which they rely firmly.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with proper treatment is hoped for, as I will tell you, and what has been beneficial to me.
And it is that the patient lies between your thighs with his back on them and you raise the limbs of him inside, the thighs should be inclined toward the belly of him, and immediately insert a probe of lead or iron if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe penetrates.
And if the patient complains of pain around the anus, then you should immediately insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate on its own, or what you feel between your finger and the sinus or flesh is easy to pass through, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no cure in such cases, as we have said.
However, someone might say that it is safe in some men quickly.
And of the treatment by which help is hoped for in there, you should cauterize subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was mentioned before, and insert that heat into the fistula until it goes around the bowel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are tightly closed, like the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth until all those tissues that are closed heal, and then treat that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, good; and if not, it will never heal by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the part where the diseased tissue is located, and there is a membrane of flesh or cicatrix between that part and the probe, and place the fistula in something that dries the surface of the bowel; then dry the bowel from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying both with the probe, and it should be placed in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through this, it is relieved and cured.
And then cleanse those tissues that are closed and resemble the quill of a bird's feather, without damaging any of them.
However, if blood flows between you and your operation when you are dealing with those tissues, then the best remedy for that and for pus is to cauterize with fire or with a sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire has two good effects: it closes the closed tissues, and stops the bleeding by drying out the moisture.
In the treatment of those with bandages wrapped around joints or compressed deeply within that place where movement is restricted, and immediately afterward treat the swelling caused by hard growths which are generated and consolidate.
And in those medicines which have styptic and drying properties; when the wound is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated to the rectum and is extended below the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate it.
And so if you feel the tumor and between you and it there is only a membrane of tissue or skin, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it but proceed by faith and with hope.
This cause should be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you achieve the necessary contraction so that you can introduce instruments and proceed with proper treatment; do not proceed to cutting unless absolutely necessary, for fear of injuring the vessel containing blood, nor act rashly against the patient's wishes without due consideration. Then treat it with what we have mentioned as a means of healing; or lengthen that membrane and cleanse the pus by drying it out near the anus, as we have said, either with your hand or another sharp instrument, then clean the diseased flesh through section where you can reach with perforation; and strive to restore the entire wound through section, and if the upper opening does not consolidate, leaving a fistula open in the region of the rectum, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce your finger into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the rectum near the surface of the body along its margin, then use an instrument with a perforated tip, which is like a needle used to prepare flax, in this way:
Then mix in that faithful envelope of five feathers or around those; and immediately mix in a bit of honey into the fistula until it achieves the consistency desired.
If it penetrates near the margin of the anus inside, now you extract the contents of that tract as if you were putting your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the feather and tie both ends firmly, and keep this for one or two days, and when you then incise the contents in the flesh, secure it well so that those parts of the flesh which lie between the two ends of the feather may heal.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make it penetrable in whatever manner you have prepared, but do so gently without forcing it, lest you incise the artery; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the probe with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so that you do not cut what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either around the anus like coal lumps, or they appear as grape-like clusters. And of those that are small and large, and from which blood flows constantly, whether they are single or multiple, and whether inside or outside the anus, and at the extremities.
However, those that are only in the area of little moisture, where yellow water or a little blood comes out continuously, and according to the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the skin is to order the patient to sit down and compress until the skin becomes pale and the veins appear to you. Then you cover it and suspend hooks or what you have with your nails, and then cut those that are their roots.
However, if you do not have hooks due to the humidity and softness of them, then take rough cloth or a comb or wool fluff, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them and powder some hot powders near the incision, so that it serves as cauterization for them; or cauterize them as was described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with other methods until they are healed.
And if the skin does not obey evacuation, then blister the patient with a blister that has a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the skin so that it obeys quick evacuation when the patient is compressed.
However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the skin, then their cause is simple, and you should take them with your nails or with hooks, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who require suturing, you should administer it in this manner: take fine thread wrapped around a needle and then pull the hemorrhoid out at the top part, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
In this way in all of them, and leave one of those without stitching it up, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
And then place on top of the cloth infused in rose oil or wax; and place that on the wound and instruct the patient to rest upon it. And then leave that inside the cavity; and when it is closed, treat those with dressings or other treatment until it is healed.
And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, now you should shave those with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and allow the pus to drain from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they have healed.
Now you should remove those with more forceful shaving of the pus than the first time until they bleed and are scraped; and then treat them until they are healed.
Know that almesamir, which is a key condition, appears as red spots similar in color to the body but resembles the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more frequently below the waist and in those areas, causing pain in those places.
Then it is necessary to incise what is around the key area, and hold it with pliers or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
And if you want, cauterize the one that is mentioned next in its chapter.
But a warty mole is a small, rough, fistulated, round prominence on the surface of the body, and spots like this appear in most children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that mole, or to remove it with a knife or a cautery. And if you want, cauterize that area as we have said, with fire or with an acute medication.
But a mole is a small, feathered or thickly fistulated prominence on the surface of the body without pain, and when touched, it feels like an ant bite, and it is formed around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a needle tube made of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the mole so that it covers the circumference of the tube around it; then rotate your hand with the tube so that you incise what is within the circuit of the mole, and place it in the pain of the flesh, and thus eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you want, do this with a tube made of horn or iron in the following manner:
Let the upper part of the tube be sharp, but not perforated, wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger, it feels smooth and allows for easy rotation.
And if you want to cauterize the ant as mentioned above in the cautery of atīl in the chapter on cauteries.
About the shape of the instruments that you administer to cauterize.
Sometimes it is made of silver or lead or molten and hammered gold; and sometimes it is made of those instruments large and small according to those to whom you administer them, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose anus is sensitive or painful, their cauterizers should be small.
The form of the large and few cauterizers:
The head of the silver tube above, to which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just as you see.
And the lower end of the tube, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering subtly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays, slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong vinegar made from raw honey, or around them; and tie the bag securely to it; and when you place the bag on it, it should be tight at the head of the cautery between two distinct tight bindings, and immediately cauterize each thread. However, the quality of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something beneath him such as a cushion or a pillow; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; then insert it gently into the anus; and the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it vigorously between two hands until all that is in the rectum has been evacuated; then remove the instrument from the rectum, and let the patient lower his buttocks to the side.
And if the medicine induces it to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for the relief.
But if you treat him for intestinal disorders and the evacuation of the bowels with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and soft catheter, one such as is used for children's enemas.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was suitable for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with medicine according to the completion.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plagues occur.
And the causes for which plagues often occur are such as stone formation, or incision by a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which attacks the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar and only the skin has been broken, making it a large swelling and you fear there may be an abscess underneath, at this moment you should take action and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract as much blood from that area according to the quantity of the strength required unless some reason prevents phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is minimal.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the affected area; and keep the patient from overeating and from heavy foods.
But if some reason prohibits phlebotomy, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or rich foods.
And pause concerning the plague, if an abscess forms underneath it; then apply rose oil alone or in a substance that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure of an abscess underneath, then pause concerning the plague, especially if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply in small amounts.
And if the weather has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to a wound with similar characteristics and the lips of the wound cannot be approximated by simple means, then approximate those using sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of such wounds.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and deeper structures and there is no need for retention but only a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the granulation tissue, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are nutritious: meat, fish, and similar foods until he is well-composed.
And if you find putrefaction in the granulation tissue and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that necrotic tissue and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it does not coagulate with medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then incise that with a scalpel, or ligate that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; therefore, you can powder those with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the weather changes.
And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, blood of dragon two parts, and burnt copper three parts; mix all thoroughly and sieve it, and fill the wound with it, and secure it with good compression so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
From above the wound apply plasters and let that remain there, and do not remove it while it is still such that it has not become inflamed, for medicine does not reach it until it is healed.
And sometimes this cure is used alone when it is not at hand the juice and blood of the dragon.
And now this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place upon them and narrow them, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then there is no intention to apply this powder, but at that time cure those with what we have mentioned, namely placing upon them some cold applications or placing upon them flour of barley with water and honey until they begin to decay; and then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens with the wound that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a probe.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there should be no immediate treatment but rather avoid any care that causes strong contraction, such as zinc ore and similar substances that injure nerves and contract them. Do not hesitate about any cause of worry, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues to the brain, which is the source of all parts of the body.
And if this is what is meant by being treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in roasted or unroasted oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, along with other mineral substances prepared in this manner, and they find moisture.
But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or close its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or if there is an abscess in the lowest part of it, then pierce that area at the most depressed point.
But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or stop that bleed, or tie that off, or cauterize it if necessity requires such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or the entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should approximate the edges of the wound with sutures over the bones of the neck without touching them; instead, align them and reduce them to their natural position, and then support it with appropriate structure for several days; afterwards, treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already formed a callus in the bone, then percuss that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all you can from them; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound suppurates, and the exudate separates, easing the swelling.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its proper chapter.
If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and you feel the depth of it, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person lies down; at that point, you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depth and return to the heart, causing harm; rather, apply a drawing remedy, and change it twice a day.
And if the remedy is not at hand, then place a piece of cloth over the wound to absorb the moisture that comes from it; and have the injured person lie on the wound so that what is contained within can flow out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of breath have happened to the injured person, and you observe other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; at that point, treat it with dressings and other proper care until it is healed.
But if healing of it is delayed and a long time has passed, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its proper chapter.
And if the wound is from a razor or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin, then treat it as would be done with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already caused damage to the bone and some pieces are exposed from the incision, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The injury that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small disruption is difficult to handle by other means, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not carefully return them to their place immediately, as they tend to harden and swell, making the instrument for their manipulation difficult.
And therefore, the best injury is moderate, for in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, whereas it is difficult in both of the previous types mentioned.
And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitching are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds on the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and it is caused by some reason in the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce that, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or soak it in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I use that which has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which honey and mallows have been steeped, for by this the instrument of pain is alleviated slightly.
But if the instrument of pain persists near this cure, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument on which hemorrhoids have been cut.
And the first treatment is better, when it is proper that there be no cutting, and it should not be necessary to dry out due to urgency and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of the sharp end of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip subtle, and not as fine as a needle point, but somewhat blunt.
And thus when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the fascia, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, for this is better.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now you must make the patient lie on his back, and place his arms closer to his head than usual; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place his head and feet higher than the rest.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you must constantly direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this for both large wounds and smaller wounds.
And for small wounds, prepare what is necessary, and then have your most skilled assistant do this, who should hold the wound with their hand and approximate the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it carefully.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a needle holder according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then lay the end of the needle between your ring finger and little finger, and tighten the needle so that you do not put thread at both ends of the suture, but rather between the two ends of the edges inside the wound, until it penetrates from one side; and once you have brought together the two ends of the suture and the two ends of the tissue, this makes four knots.
Take a needle with double thread and pass it through the wound on both sides, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them up properly; then let go of your finger and put another needle in that one, and again tie this needle just as you did the first; and do not stop doing this until you have completed the whole stitching of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles pierce the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and thus it is best that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
And it is not good for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the tissue simultaneously, because this causes the flesh to be pierced too quickly and allows the wound to separate before it has consolidated.
And do not extend the stitches too far so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause irritation under the dressing; and place powder spread around the stitches, which will cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you can use one or two needles or around that many.
But the second type of stitching is common: it involves passing the needle through four points, two ends of the tissue and two corners of the suture, in one motion, with a needle that has thread properly wrapped around it in terms of fineness and thickness.
When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that part which you began, so that the thread may be drawn up from the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture may be like a seam on cloth where the pieces are tightly sewn together.
And pause between each stitch by the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to be suitable for humans.
And in such a suture, I stitched the wound of a man who was injured in his abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it had penetrated around two palms from the edge of the intestines, and the disruption was in the middle of the organ; then I reduced that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was treated and recovered; and afterward he spoke with words for some time, and returned to his usual state.
And other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any drug, since it was in a place where drugs were not available nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound two pieces of cloth soaked in honey twice a day and washed it frequently with water mixed with honey until it healed.
But I will describe two types of suture according to the description in the text.
And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and pass the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place twist the thread according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other extremity the needle from the inner part to the outer part at the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
And make your penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of this penetrates.
And then start from this side and proceed to the other side at the extremity that is of the suture in the other place, and extract the needle from the bone into which it penetrates, and then reduce it back to that bone and attach the extremity of the suture that is on the other side to this extremity of the wound; and extract it from the bone that is on this side.
And do this one side and then the other, and do this alternately until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins, in such a way that you sew the suture one time from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it open on another pass until it is complete.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at one end of the suture closest to you, and make it penetrate inside the wound in this way; then cut both ends of the suture. Then rotate the needle so that it penetrates from outside to inside at both ends of the suture.
Then rotate each of them and make each penetrate from inside the wound to outside at both ends of another suture on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common quick suture, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Walia.
And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means you insert a thread into each needle and begin by passing one needle through from the side where you are, making it penetrate into the opposite side according to the method used for sewing equal pieces.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the judgment for other wounds as well.
The cause is that when you treat a recent wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bleeding and clean it properly, then apply powder for healing.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and seal the wound, and make it firm with sutures and bandages; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not present, then wait for a short time, because it begins to sweat and becomes less severe, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in most conditions when the illnesses are simple.
If you fear that the illness will communicate to the principal limbs, then cover the wool with high-quality oil or scented oil, and place it around the areas between the joints, applying it there.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the body cavities, since this often happens, then apply stiptic black tea powder to it, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the cavity and an abscess has formed penetrating into the surrounding tissue.
And know that what affects the large cavity is harder to heal than what affects the small cavities.
And it is difficult to heal because the cavity called “gugun” does not readily recover from an illness that affects it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the illness is pus, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the cavities.
But if it has passed to the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply medication over the area that is discolored, do so to promote the flow of blood, as pus affects both veins and arteries.
Here is the translation:
Recollection of the problems that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because I saw one who was afflicted in their belly by a lance wound, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the affliction was old and had become a fistula, with discharge and gas.
Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, even though I was not confident in its healing, but I sought to carefully treat that part until it was healed and the area was consolidated.
And after I saw the area already consolidated, I warned about the consequences that could arise from this unfortunate event in their belly; and no one suffered any harm due to this bad accident and remained in good health by eating and drinking properly, and soon they were active as usual.
And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small problem in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has an open mouth, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when the ant bites onto them and tightens its mouth, you cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain attached in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
It is possible that the gut be tied with fine thread made from animal gut like it is done with a needle; and you take the end of this thin gut suture, and make it bare, and then tie the end of it to the suture material wrapped around it, and then introduce that thread into needles and attach it to that part of the gut, and reduce it at the disruption.
And this method of suture with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it affects one of the fine gut sutures, then at that time only partial healing can occur, and not complete recovery from it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated or healed over time without being excised, then, regardless of which part of the body it affects, it is universally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
And truly, a fistula is a felt-like nodulation, hard and white, at which there is no pain but to which there is itching as there is itching from the irritation of bird's lice; and for this reason it is called such an itchy rash, that is, irritation.
And it is in some people moist, which flows continuously; and the moisture is easily excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
Having shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their treatment with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through an operation with my method.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of them reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or intestines, or the kidney, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and others are close to the main part of the limb and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive a cure easily, and dealing with them requires effort and knowledge.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure, and you wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, explore it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to float and bend around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having horrible twists, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will go from that one to the other openings and flow out.
And then inquire carefully to know if there is bone or nerve here, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with many openings that exceeds your strength and your understanding, in which you investigate the malady, and the cause of the pain under your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and this is that you now consider whether it is a fistula apparent near or in a soft place, distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I have told you about.
Now you dry the fistula as was said before in its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the opening of the flesh or of similar tissue, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it is necessary to incise that as far inward as you are able, and then remove all its corrupted flesh; afterwards apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
And do this for several days until the sharp medicine has dissolved all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to ascertain this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any reason involving a vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what will generate flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again and carefully examine its condition and clean it with the utmost diligence, and afterwards treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the depths of the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case you should only treat the symptoms.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is up to you to remove that; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles as necessary, and free the bones.
But if it is not possible for you to remove the bones at this time, then apply to the wound what will alleviate the inflammation, and leave it as it is until such time as the area around those bones has become flesh and ligaments, and guard against the wound consolidating, and ensure that the section you have incised does not contract during your operation.
Having said that, if you fear to proceed, apply a poultice submerged in hot oil with thyme, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when these will heal those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, and those attractions are alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or ox or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape off that corruption with resistance only behind until that blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and thoroughly incise within the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
Here is what is recommended for you concerning what to do when attending to a patient so that you may follow this example and have assistance regarding your procedure.
A young man around xxx years old came with pain in his body, and concerning the internal parts where the matter inside the body has been conveyed to the abdomen, it is a large abscess, and there is not an external cause for this.
And then time was wasted due to the doctors' mistake until the abscess became gangrenous, and pus began to accumulate from the matter, and his treatment was delayed until an opening had to be made in the abdomen, and they created openings through which all of the pus and moisture of the body were discharged.
And then many doctors attended to him for two years, and none of them had skill in the art until I was called.
And I saw his abdomen and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already his body was completely emaciated and the color of his skin was yellow.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
And then I examined the openings quickly and found that they reached all parts of the abdomen.
And then I decided to incise one of the openings so that I could expose part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already turned to earth and decayed and blackened; and part of the abdomen had also penetrated into the mesentery.
And then I used what had been shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out only the corruption that was in the bone and prepared it, which I had already reduced.
And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I reopened and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I prepared what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure of it and its healing, but it did not heal.
And then I exposed it on another occasion and did not cease to excise the bone little by little particularly and forced its healing, and it did not heal until I excised around one palm of it, and that part with its marrow, and then healed that with medicines, and it gradually consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the disposition of its fever and for its lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation due to syncope malum.
And thus he was healed completely, and nothing remained in place of the hard flesh; and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned; and he resumed his usual disposition and did not act contrary to it in walking or harm from any cause.
But if it is a prominent bone in place of an already injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and order someone to extend that; pause with a thicker thread after the first one; then bind it over the skin near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus you expose the skin above where you want to cut so that the knife does not injure the flesh.
Place a board or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw through the corrupted area little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and not appearance indicates it, you must saw from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues to the other, with the corruption in the middle or part of it, then you expose the flesh from all sides entirely; and afterwards place a board underneath, and then saw off the first part where the corruption is, until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in proportion but is generated elsewhere.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then excise that part, and clean that area according to each possible disposition, and when there is no generation left to be corrected by you, do not harm veins or nerves.
And know which incisors and saws to use for cutting these bones are very much dependent on the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for every kind of operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable about the methods of this art, and witness to ways of diseases, then you have yourself what is suitable for those instruments for every disease.
And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple among those which you will process to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be in the form of the points of a sharp tool.
And it is not suitable unless those heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a wide razor:
Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with the sharpest curve and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood well made. Shape of the loincloth:
Shape of razors with a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another curved-edged razor:
Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this resembles a reed, and its tip is like a saw, and it is displayed in various places according to the size of the bones:
Shape of a reed that is appropriate for the size of the bones to be drilled:
And its tip is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it is appropriate for all the purposes we have mentioned regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
For cutting the ends and锯骨的切割。根据之前的句子，更自然的翻译应该是：
The extremities can become diseased either through an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you treat the corruption with medicine and do not see improvement, sometimes the corruption will extend to the limb without any apparent reason. At that point, it is necessary to amputate the part of the limb where the corruption occurs so that the patient may avoid death or greater harm which would be a worse outcome for the member.
And the sign of that which affects the person is that the limb becomes blackened, as if it were burned by fire. Or you will see the blackness spreading where the corruption has entered and threatens to take over the entire body; therefore, you must consider amputation of that part.
And similarly, the cause of the corruption may be the sting or bite of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and the like.
And if the corruption or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then you must amputate the finger so that the corruption does not spread to the hand.
And similarly, if the corruption affects the hand, you must amputate at the wrist so that the corruption does not spread to the forearm.
And if necessary, you must amputate the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and reaches around the elbow, then the patient's death is likely. And to treat such cases, the appropriate measure of effectiveness varies.
And similarly, if the corruption reaches the toe, you must amputate it at one of the joints.
And if you take off the skin of the foot, then you cut away the entire foot. And if you enter into the bone, then you cut along the cavity into the joint of the bone.
And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and to leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it up is that you tie a ligature below the part where you wish to cut, and tie another ligature above the location; and extend one ligature to the lower parts, and extend another ligature upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures by about a span so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is either cut off or tied up.
And it is necessary to cover the patient with a cloth on all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and that abscesses are treated.
And if blood flow occurs when you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment once it is under control.
And then bind the wounded limb with a ligature at a convenient place, and treat it until it is healed.
And I warn you about what befell a man in his foot, this accidental condition that I and you have recommended against, which turned black in his foot as if it were burned by fire.
From that corruption arising first in its proper place inside, it tends to affect all the body.
And then that man treats himself with poultices more than once before the healing goes to the limb despite the vehemence of what he endures in pain and heat, and by incising that part inside at the joint, the fire is healed.
Long time ago, that corruption occurred in the finger of the hand indicated.
And then it comes to me, and so I perforate to remove that excess through what I apply to the hand with medicines, near the purification of the body; and the excess is not reflected back but begins to move from one finger to another starting within the hand.
And he asks me to incise his hand, but I do not want to do that, hoping for the removal of that excess through repercussion, and more so because I fear that the incision of his hand might lead to death, as the power of the illness was very strong.
And after he departed from me, he returned to his homeland, and later I learned that the man treated himself and incised his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have added this narration only so that it may assist in understanding the nature of this illness and to serve as an indication for how such cases should be treated.
Regarding the treatment of sinus conditions and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends inside to form a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it remains thin like cloth, and it has not progressed to corruption nor affected the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged within so that corruption presses upon some member, it is then called a fistula and not a carbuncle.
And the treatment for it is to incise that swelling completely as it revolves, and especially when it becomes fine like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you expect that the swelling will adhere and that such corruption has not yet reached the deepest part, and there is pus in the swelling, then your treatment should be to use an enema.
And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large and the arm with which you are treating has a foul odor, then use an enema with Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, mixed together in a vessel until the mixture becomes thick like molasses.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; use this enema for the sinus, and secure the opening of it, leaving the medication inside for the duration of two hours.
And then extract that medicine carefully; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And at times an enema of ash water is used when you do not have this medicine available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water; then strain it and use that water for the enema until you are confident that the sinus is cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then use an enema of honey and water mixed in equal parts, and also use an enema of vinegar and honey mixed together, because honey has cleansing properties and vinegar helps to adhere the sinus, especially when the vinegar has a strong astringent and drying effect.
And when you see that some wounds are swollen and you confirm that the sinus is already drained, then irrigate them with water that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take a decoction of white myrtle and dissolve it with rose oil and vinegar; or you can irrigate it with various medicines and other decoctions that have the properties already described in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the cannula for irrigation to pass through, then gradually widen it with a small instrument, and pause in the dilation while wrapped in an Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction until it is sufficiently widened.
And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together the edges with stitches and leave it in a condition suitable for irrigation to be added.
And if the opening from which the fluid flows is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in a lower position where the fluid can flow downward, for when the arm is constricted at the depth of the sinus, flesh will be formed there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in a lower position relative to the bone as you wish, then proceed to prepare the member with a method by which the fluid flows easily according to your circumstances and without any obstruction hindering the flow.
Move the one who is above the opening of the sinus, which you should drain at all times so that what is inside the arm exits. And so that you know whether what comes from inside the arm is thin or thick, or is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether in there the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered or tends to adhere, then you must loosen it or do so every third day. When you loosen the crust, then change the dressing for a new one and renew the application.
But if within the sinus there is space for subtle pus to accumulate, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing will naturally occur, as some people experience delayed regeneration of flesh in their wounds, while others see the opposite happen.
And if for several days the arm remains undigested and pus is not discharged from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. And if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect in your medications. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their efficacy, they should be dried as well when there is an excess of moisture present.
And the most important thing in curing is to use a well-defined dressing and dissolve it in rose oil. Apply it over the wound as you would with an earlier dressing of its substance, and proceed accordingly.
In that action, when there is no bandage, find a dressing, honey which you have cooked so that it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and sprinkle them, and grind over the honey which is on the fire, and immediately apply this to cloth and strengthen that upon the joint; and apply this with the honey which you have cooked so that it thickens, and sprinkle over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes it is administered with the root of aristolochia longa and seeds of lily (and lily celestial) and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle these and sift and powder over the honey which I have recommended; and use this.
And if the joint is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its bone, and it affects the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; now treat it with a fistulous cure, as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and the incision of an additional finger and sectioning.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises beside the nail of a finger on the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is more difficult; it may be an abscess from cautery, or it may become corrupted, and it discharges pus which corrodes the root of the nail, and very quickly corrupts all of it, and often spreads its corruption to the bone causing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes deformed, and its color turns blackish.
And when you have that as we have said in the division and your treatment does not confine itself to it, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the superfluous tissue that is decayed from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound in that area, for cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
If the bone is sound and the tendon is healthy, and the divisions of the tendon are already closed by the flesh around them, and they begin to press upon it with pain and distress, then you should pause and cut a thin incision along the angle of the tendon where it presses on the flesh, and push that tendon up, and dissect that flesh easily, and wait over what remains of the flesh with corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and afterwards cure that wound until it is healed.
If the corruption has already begun in the bone, then you should dissect that bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
And if you find the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should dissect it at one of its joints according to where the pain is felt, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
If the tendon is affected by contusion or inflammation, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should perform venesection on the patient, and afterwards dry the tendon with a sharp spatula in a transverse cut from above to below, and be careful that the incision does not reach into the flesh behind the tendon, for this would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would result in excessive scar tissue forming in the area; and afterwards treat that place with something that alleviates pain.
But in the case of a swollen finger, which occurs in many people, it is often very fleshy, and there is little flesh on the bones, or it is often in the tendon.
And some of them originate at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some of the joints of the fingers. He who is born with weak joints in his fingers will not suffer much, and he who is born with strong joints in them suffers little.
And for those who are born with fleshy parts, the section is easier, and you should cauterize that which you have dissected with a hot spatula.
But for he who is born with the joint in a delicate state, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful not to cut it.
But in he who is born with loose fingers, it is necessary that you cauterize the flesh at the beginning with a round cautery down to the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and afterwards treat what is inside until it heals.
But for consolidation that occurs between the bones either by repeated strain or by the nature of the person born with it, or by consolidation of a wound or by burning from fire, or similarly, then you should section that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
And then place between the layers of the wound in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly consolidated.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of them on the palm, you should then section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Of cautery for veins, these are the varieties.
Veins are those that are thick and full of melancholic humors, which move through the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then it happens that you administer purge for the black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and shortly afterward let blood from the patient's basilic vein.
The cure for them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The section of the wound is according to this method: embrocate at the beginning with hot water mixed in such a way that the thick blood becomes resolved, which is like sediment in the poultice, and then tightly bind the poultice on the most prominent part of the wound below the navel with a bandage, and then cauterize the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide incisions, and then draw out the black blood with your hand below the poultice upwards and downwards until the quantity of blood is removed as you wish and as much as suffices, and which the patient's strength can endure.
And then bandage it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black cholera.
And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
But the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the poultice area of the patient if there are any hairs on it, and then put him in a bath and embrocate the poultice with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or exercise him vigorously with exercise if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
For the operation to expose the windpipe, cut along the side of the vein by incision either in front or behind it, or lower down you should cut at the angle.
To operate on the windpipe with hooks and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and you should observe its appearance as it turns black in that place.
And so when you open it, you will see the white part which is the membrane.
Then you should insert the thread where it is raised and displaced from the windpipe, and suspend it with hooks.
Then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then scrape the windpipe above the vein until it appears.
Then lift that and incise it in the rear section where the angle is, and then extract it and lift it until it comes out through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision above that.
Then do this until you extract it from the incision that is highest or most distant from all the incisions, until everything comes out; and now you can close the incisions.
And if you cannot manage to extract and lift it, now insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or insert the thread below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. Be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift that piece, and the patient will suffer harm from that injury.
And when all that is done, then pause upon the place of the wound a cloth submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it be healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with twists to which there is a covering in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along each twist of it and at the places where it is covered, and immediately suspend it with hooks until you elevate it entirely.
And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
Shape of the incision with which the vessel is severed:
It is not made sharp like the hooks nor with a pointed end so that it does not injure the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, like lion's sinew, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein because of its slenderness; however, it should be in excess of thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is found in camels in warm lands such as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm, dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
And similarly, it is found in other parts of the body apart from the camel.
And its generation is from putrefaction beneath the skin, just as worms and vermin come forth within the bodies of serpents, scorpions, and other creatures generated between the skin and the flesh.
Here is the translation:
Then when it appears at the opening, you should wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one dram, and about two drams in length, and attach that and let the lead hang from the wound.
And as many times as you apply it to the parts externally, wrap that in lead and attach it. And if it is elongated, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not incise that until it has come out externally, for if you incise that which is contracted it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, corruption, and a bad ulceration.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body and there remains no cause for concern in the body.
And in some people, this vein extends to about five palms in length, and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms in length.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the probe into the tract and perforate that along the tract through the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; and subsequently treat that as you would an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, with each branch coming out from a separate opening.
And thus treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
Of cutting above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often it happens among cows and it is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is shown through sensation because of its movement from limb to limb until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then suddenly it lightens within and enters and destroys the brain, which often happens.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done except according to the movement and appearance of it to sensation. Then tie what is above it and what is below it tightly with bandages and constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract that.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire over the area where it is. The main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see it reaching the head near the brain, then tie above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
On incision for inflammation of the uvula.
This illness is called in our land nafir, and it is pain that comes to certain members of the body, and it changes from one member to another.
And now I will describe it as I am about to recount to you. I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. And after it had been ruptured for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation moved just as quick as wax would rise, but more quickly than one might expect, like living silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location and settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was revolving throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by its change and the speed with which it moved from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never witnessed such pain being transferred from one member to another. But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
And I did not think it could be this way except that the woman was of weak constitution, with delicate limbs and exposed veins, in which this wind-like sensation appeared to change.
It is necessary that there does not appear according to this rear curvature in those who are delicate and of thin human veins weakened.
And when you want the treatment for it, and the patient feels that pain, at that moment it does not appear to be as we have said, at that moment you strengthen over that area and lift it gently so that the trapped air is expelled, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that by evacuating the body and expelling air, and apply remedies to remove foul pills and pills of saffron and similar substances.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are varied according to their types and the parts of the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, others small, some concave, others blunt; and among them there are solid ones; those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those which are like spears.
And of the signs of the head are when it falls upon the arrow, and passes through the bone, and exits from the brain which is above the head, for it happens by the soda vehement, and scotoma, and vertigo, and rigor in the eyes, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and easily cut off is speech, and destroyed is voice, and exits from the place of the plague moisture white like dust, and there are of it wetness to the appearance as of flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feels there where it is fixed in hard tissue, not soft; and easily the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and draws black thick blood from the wound, and dries that coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat; therefore you know that death approaches soon.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, spewing frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and demands a craving for cold air.
And if the arrow falls on the membrane which is in the thighs, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no strength at all in all the members of the muscles.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then very quickly there will be from the wound undigested food.
And if the arrow is in the belly, and it is fixed within it, make some incision in the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for the cure of the arrow's removal.
And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and it comes out with urine, and processes for some reason to the parts outside, and suddenly there is pain over the injury, then you know that it is fatal.
But the other members as well, such as in the face, the neck, and the jaw, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the ribs and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your own treatment.
The cause is that in a person who was struck by an arrow in the lacrimal bone near the root of the nose, I removed it from the other side, left the gray matter of the ear alone, and he healed without damage to his eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the gray matter of his eye. After leaving the eyelid intact, the arrow was already hidden and only a small part of it could be grasped to which its shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, made of iron like a lion's tooth, which had no barbs.
And the Jew healed, and no harm came to his eye.
About removing an arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, which has barbs; then I made an incision between two grooves, and it was already submerged under his skin there; then I carefully extracted that, and the Christian man recovered.
And I removed another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; and so, after thirty days had passed and there were no changes regarding his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and did not suffer any further complications.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had penetrated between his two thighs, and the wound had become consolidated on him, and after seven years, the arrow was exposed at the root of the thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her abdomen, and the wound had consolidated within her, and there were no changes regarding her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in performing any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face, and the wound had consolidated, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases are like this.
And I removed the arrow from the prince of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
Then I examined the wound of the finger with a narrow probe; then I probed it carefully but did not feel anything there; however, she felt pain below her right ear, and then I hoped that that point was at the end of the finger.
And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrature in which there is a virtue attractive and digestive, confident that the place would reveal itself to me so that I could see the location of the finger, because it would adhere to that.
And no significant accident occurred at the site where the finger had come to rest; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days without any incident; and as the wound healed, after some days I felt the finger move within its socket and reported this to myself.
Then I applied acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it became hot, and with a probe I probed that area, and found the end of the finger delicately adhering to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until the end of the finger became visible to me, and it took me four months to reach this stage.
And when the wound had become sufficiently enlarged, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, I did so but without success. Then I ceased to attempt further manipulations by other means, until one day I began to use methods of extraction with forceps carefully made, as will be shown in the form at the end of this chapter, from which I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I have restored it and the wound has been consolidated, and the patient has been healed entirely, and there was nothing else to be done for him.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may apply this rule and explanation to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood in narrative alone nor do they comprehend those who read the book.
And the wise craftsmen compare with few words; and in what is present about what is absent; and when accidents occur, they should discover new operations and new instruments for the descent of strange causes from the art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in soft tissue, and is drawn out and removed.
And if you do not obey this advice about the time when you catch it, then wait some days before removing it so that the flesh around it may heal and become accustomed to its presence and its removal.
And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you do not follow this advice, then leave it for several days and gradually move it according to its attraction and motion each day, and then it can be safely removed.
And if you do not follow this advice for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then remove it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the body's location and is out of reach, then you should probe around there, and if you feel it, then grasp it with some instruments that are suitable for extracting it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is attached to the ears along with them, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded completely with all the skill that you can; and proceed with this, if you cannot do so by avoiding cutting through the flesh in fracturing the ears and twisting them until you are able to.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it may be, then you use both a twist of your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and carefully with great care that the arrow is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and for its extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become firm, and then try again when it is easier. But if there is contrary bleeding, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the respective chapter.
And guard your virtue from cutting into veins or nerves, or tendons, and administer care in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I advise and recommend.
And therefore, make the arrow straight so that the patient is in accordance with the figure according to which you should determine the extraction of the arrow from it, for this is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But arrows that are driven in from the opposite side, or that you have already processed some part of them to the outer parts, or if the extremity of the arrow causes swelling due to pressure from the bone above and raises it; then you should cut into that area. Make the incision according to the amount by which the forceps grasp it; and then pull it out, for it will be easy to do so in this manner.
If a bone is held in the wound, then place it straight according to its opposite part until the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it thus, and then extract that one.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then try to extract it when there is less inflammation.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
But if the shaft has fallen in and you want to administer impulse, then insert and use it, if it is blunt, a hollow instrument so that it enters the cavity of it into the base of the arrow and then push it out from there.
But if the arrow is convex, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow is lightened by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is embedded, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the feet, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close so that you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it, then cut above it and guard against cutting into a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which are made like pincers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
Of those, various types are made large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the smallness of the sinew, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
like an arrow so that the instrument may be glided into its concave arrow and is propelled by that.
About the incision of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which the custom is to perform phlebotomy at xxx, of which in the head sixteen, two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two glands that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; among those is one cephalic, and it runs along the wild chestnut tree; and the people call it "the vein of the head," blunt, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it consists of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that by the people "vein of the whole body," and basilica is the vein which lies on the domestic chestnut tree, and is called "citillar," and they call that one the vulgar "vein of the abdomen"; and the funis of the arm, and it lies over the elbow, and it is in this where phlebotomy is performed, and it appears above the wrist by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the thumb and the little finger, and it runs on both sides.
And on the thigh and in the groin there are three veins; one of them is behind the curve of the tailbone of the wild animal; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the vena sciatica, and its place is behind the groin of the wild animal; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, antitics, hemorrhages, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head, and rub the patient’s head in the occipital area where both veins are with a large piece of cloth for good friction; then tighten the patient's hair with a bandage so that the two veins become visible near the ears at two lower points on the head; and press them with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger here, this is how you should proceed.
Then take the scalpel, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the bone until the blood flow reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone towards the upper parts and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers or around that amount; and let out as much blood as you wish.
And then apply pressure with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And there is mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cautery.
But of the two arteries, for the Templars the benefit of phlebotomy is to remove an ancient and persistent evil and frequent ophthalmia and acute effusions in the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient sit and put your hand under their arm so that the two veins appear clearly by sight, and feel the pulse below with your fingers; then at this time attempt it.
And then raise the tourniquet above the vein towards your hand with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy instrument below, and raise the vein up; and incise it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient's restraint, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and afterwards apply a bandage and powder over it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And there is mentioned the description of them, and the incision of those veins, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the benefit of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and headache, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I recommend to you: the patient should hold their arm with a bandage so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called a fleam, which has this form:
Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the furrow above that vein and strike it from either side or for some other reason in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then remove the perforation of the patient and bind up that area until it is healed.
And in some cases, a femoral vein incision is made, but it does not need to be of sharp extremity like the other vein incisions; rather, it should be blunt-ended, and make that incision transversely, because the bone is close by and strong, and the incision might easily break through if it were too fine.
May the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes be used for eye itchiness due to irritation and grease in the eyes, as well as for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient should hold their arm with a bandage, and then perform those incisions, while you stand above the head of the patient.
And the venesection should be made transversely along a bit above or below the vein, where there is little flesh; and if the incision is fine, the tip of it might easily break through.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause when it reaches that point, and bind those areas for one night, and then remove them.
And the venesection of the vein of the nose is suitable for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when they are chronic.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and brings it near to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet sharp long and put it in the middle place of the nose tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Move your hand with the small lancet little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
The harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction of them and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
The quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient strains each one with his neck; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet and a broad small one little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and compress the two veins gently with a moderate constriction so that the patient is not overly constricted, and let it be done in the morning as the plague is healed.
And the harm of phlebotomy of the large veins applies to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are inside the nose and around it.
Of the quality of phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie a bandage around his neck, and then roll back his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this more so because in the vicinity of those veins there are small black ones; and then you cut each with a cutting incision.
If doubt is present in you and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of them, and in the more apparent of them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lip.
But of the two veins that are below, the tongue is often near the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery for precautions that are in the throat, to the illness of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you place the patient between your hands in front of the light, and lift up his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to penetrate too deeply when phlebotomizing them, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend usually occur in all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either place on the phlebotomy site a small round object like a blueberry or olive with subtlety; or use a scalpel for phlebotomy, and test if it hurts, and this is the form of it:
Let the incisions be made as described, and it is suitable to open the concave full veins with obvious thick stems, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
And this venesection is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for venesection of thin veins that contain fine, thin blood.
But the benefit of the venesection of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases below the jaw and the neck, and from what affects the legs and the abdomen.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, when performing venesection on that vein, to be very careful with it and have great fear of it, because near it there is an artery. If he errs in the puncture of the venesection, he will cut that artery and cause a gushing of blood. Therefore, one should not perform venesection on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting blade like a knife.
And if the basilica vein does not appear by obvious means, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or seek some branch of it. Or perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is apparent; and section that vein with a knife for venesection as we have said.
If you want to perform phlebotomy on the arm, then place your hand above the constriction of the arm until you know the location of the pulse, and then slightly further; and then hold the arm steady and incise the vein with a concave cut as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of its location.
And when you see it, as you tighten the ligature, inflation occurs in the place that you marked slightly further, then that inflation is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow from the phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and then you continue and pause your hand on that for some time; and then remove your hand, and if the bleeding has stopped after several moments, then tighten the arm and leave that area.
And protect the patient from the misuse of it, and be overly cautious with it and do not use that area for several days until it is healed.
And if the bleeding does not stop, and you do not have medical assistance available, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a piece of cloth, and fold that, and place one half tightly over the vein with a ligature and with powders on the other day.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat that with what is prescribed for stopping the flow of blood from the veins.
The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is a method that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; by this means, which is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is important for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during the phlebotomy of this area because below that lies a nerve; and then if there is an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and the nerve is hit, it will cause numbness, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely is one fully healed. And this nerve appears to many as feeling; and since it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, now you must pause your phlebotomy at which point you are performing phlebotomy in the section of the elbow, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and provide relief for eye diseases.
And it is appropriate here, if you want to phlebotomize using the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
However, sometimes a tumor is found in some people, when it is not affected by bloodletting at the first attempt, and we do not notice that tumor.
The first of these is about which you should know that bloodletting is administered only to preserve health and with the hope of prevention and caution against the onset of diseases. Bloodletting should be performed on one of the veins located in the neck, namely: cephalic, fossa, and basilica. Bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at the latest by the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
However, bloodletting that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it should be that a child should not be bloodletted until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodletted except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be bloodletted.
And when someone wants to be bloodletted in any way, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the bloodletting with an enema, if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous substances into the bloodletting of the cleansed bowels, which are pure, and so they do not affect the principal members.
Do not perform venesection on patients suffering from seasickness or drunkenness, nor when they are ill with fever and intoxication until such time as their blood has settled, nor in cases of dropsy. Also avoid venesection during colic pain and vomiting, and after eating or exercising, and during times of frequent coitus, work, or exercise following fasting or staying awake, and for any cause that weakens the body or animal nature.
And in consideration of the subtlety of humors, if the blood is thick, avoid certain foods and drinks, and medicines if it is at all possible to do so.
And then take a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood more subtle.
And avoid venesection at the height of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And be careful that the time of day for that patient is protected from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical activities, such as work and excessive labor, intercourse, and similar things.
And at the time of his treatment, have present the causes that are used in the custom of men for aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity and possibility.
And let the person performing venesection sit on a seat that is higher than the seat of the patient who needs to be bled.
And then remove his arm, and wash it with soap by the venesectioner two or three times; and then wrap it with a bandage and bind it two times.
And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not equal or the ligature is too tight, then you must prevent the flow of blood; or if it is loose, and then you must strengthen the blood flow accordingly.
And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that the one who is to be bled rub their arms vigorously until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
And regarding the phlebotomy, the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little old oil properly. Then place your left hand index finger on the vein where you intend to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein moves slightly and the percussion is steady; when you find the vein as if it were like a string fleeing from the phlebotomy, and those veins are full of air. When you press the lancet onto that vein, it does not yield, and if it yields, then that vein is constricted, and the phlebotomist becomes confused; and if the lancet does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, then that vein is narrow.
And thus, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And then press the lancet, but if the vein is hard in one spot, that is where it should be; otherwise, repeat this at another spot nearby, or over an inflammation, if the area is not abscessed.
And if the area is abscessed, or if the patient becomes weaker, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, as this will draw the abscess out too quickly, nor should they bathe.
Regarding venesection, if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will flow to reach your desired amount, then repeat the venesection in that area with straightness and adjust slightly at the aperture, but do this quickly before the site becomes inflamed, for the site often becomes inflamed after a short time with just a small incision.
But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the incision there, as it will serve no purpose for you; instead, apply some poultice of oil to that area, as it helps to guide the flow of blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, apply a poultice of oil to all venesections where the veins are close to the surface of the body, and do this with theriac or al-fadhaj when applied over the area, for the blood becomes finer and less thickened when it is flowing freely.
And if a large abscess forms at the site of the venesection, which sometimes happens, especially to someone who has not been bled before or made a small incision in the vein, then you should treat it by applying a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, to that area for about an hour, as this will help dissolve it.
And it is necessary to do this near the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if a black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar to it.
From such swellings it happens that abscesses and elevations require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness, apply pressure to it; then that elevation is evil and bad. And so be careful not to do anything as has been mentioned, for the blood will flow easily from the artery.
And apply an ointment with styptic properties to that area so the location becomes hardened, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it abates.
And for one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be gradual.
And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to let blood in small amounts, and the procedure should be slow.
And the best method for venous phlebotomy is to use section transverse, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
In such cases where fainting often occurs due to phlebotomy, it is necessary that you treat this before the phlebotomy with a small piece of bread infused in grape juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the blood three times or four.
And if the patient is of a melancholic temperament, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and pleasing syrup.
And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then it is necessary that they drink water and a pleasing aromatic syrup; and use aromatics such as rose petals, and place them on their temples with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for one who wishes to prevent the stiffness of their arm and dissolve their blood a second time, it is necessary that the phlebotomy be for moderate evacuation, and its effect should be gradual, as it slowly evacuates the blood little by little, which is according to the quantity of the strength over continuous days.
But for one who wishes to prevent the stiffness of their arm and reduce their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then it should be done about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
But for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it inclines, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
May that body in which the blood has become heated and inflamed and causes fever be bled in one session, and let a large quantity of blood be taken out so as to prevent fainting, but you should maintain all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the side from which the blood is being drawn, lest death occur instead of fainting, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it sharply, for this is very bad.
Handle the patient until he can be bled again; or consider that the inflammation of the phlebotomy has caused coagulation in the vein's opening; or apply on it turpentine, or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is completely out.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is bled in place of the fossa or basilic vein when they are not accessible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
About this bandage for the middle stricture; and about phlebotomy across the small transverse part, not latitudinally nor longitudinally.
Let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy be at that place where you perform phlebotomy on the hand, near a joint, in a small area.
And if the flow of blood is restricted, now you should immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are during the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing the hand in hot water, and similarly, pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves nearby.
And the phlebotomy of the right forearm vein is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a bandage or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible; then make the incision transversely; and if you cut too deeply, do not proceed further.
And be careful not to leave your hand on the phlebotomy site for too long, because there are nerves of the aforementioned area that are exposed.
And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run out there, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, preventing its flow.
And when you have extracted the blood in the quantity necessary, pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not heal too quickly; and similarly, you should do this for all wounds.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left hand is that it is helpful for ailments of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy as you have done with the other one.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for ailments located in the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the legs, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcerations of old wounds, and similar conditions.
And the procedure for phlebotomy from that vein is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins become visible; and place a bandage around the ankle; and the location of the vein is on the back of the heel, and from there its branches spread over the surface of the foot.
And therefore, phlebotomize the larger branch or below the joint behind the heel, because it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on that part of the foot, then be careful of the nerves located below that area on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy at a point where you would cut across it.
And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
If bleeding is prohibited, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then place the phlebotomy again slightly above it, since the location is suitable; and do not fear any harm, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the vein on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the heel behind the arch of the foot.
And the time for phlebotomy is when the patient feels pain in the hip when bloodletting is necessary.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient enter a bath, and quickly and tightly wrap the leg from the waist below the heel with a strip of cloth about four fingers wide in a bandage, as it should only appear by this method.
And when it appears, then perform phlebotomy on that area according to each angle as is possible and along the transverse direction, which is better; or incise that area by incision or cut that area by cutting, since the location is suitable.
And it is in words like a half-moon; and if you find that area and it does not appear completely to the touch, then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger of the foot.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
Then disengage the constriction and place a ligature on the site of the phlebotomy and strengthen the area, for it will heal quickly.
On wind exposure and the qualities of using those [methods].
Wind exposures are specifically for horns, or ears, or hands.
And wind exposure is done in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is wind exposure without incision.
And this wind exposure that is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with fire or without fire.
And for the wind exposures that are administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Of these, one is located at the back of the head; another is in the middle of both sides of the neck; wind exposures under the chin below the jaw and beside the mouth; wind exposures of the two cheeks; wind exposures of the throat, which is near the end of the neck; wind exposures of two armpits; wind exposures of two elbows; and wind exposures of two knees.
Wind exposure does not extract blood but rather from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and through this method, one does not capture the virtue as with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for wind exposure to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
However, if necessity requires wind exposure for illness or as a continuous treatment, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at certain intervals.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I then command bleeding to be performed two or three hours before sunset.
And the benefit of bleeding from the neck is that when you encounter heaviness in the head and sinking in the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this bleeding is in the location for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use it for one who is completely fatigued, or in the one who has a cold, because it causes great harm to them.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate to use it on the elderly and those whose heads are frequently ill.
But for one who is continuously leaning over it, forgetfulness may occur; and for this reason, you should command the person performing the bleeding to pause their hand briefly when removing the cup from below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Here is the translation:
If the winded bladder is pressed a little, because if it is left below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the windedness from the left side causes pains in the head, eye disorders, swelling, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place for phlebotomy at the basilica.
And you should command the wind-bleeder not to press too hard so as not to cause incisions in the artery and prevent blood flow.
And the windedness below the chin causes bad breath in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles the symptoms of diseases that are in the mouth, and is the place for phlebotomy at aliheric which is between the two lips.
But the windedness that is performed on the two temples causes cephalalgia, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the windedness of both sides inside the ears causes relief from phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and from the smaller veins of other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the wind-bleeder not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is bare of flesh and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a windedness on which wind-bleeding is performed over the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
And you command the surgeon that there be a strong cauterization, and it should be of iron, for the place requires a strong drying; and let thin cauteries be applied lightly drawn over and it should be scarified with a scarifier.
Strong cauteries from the smaller cups with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body and alleviate ancient pains of the loins and uterus, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation and help against boils and hemorrhoids; and they serve as a substitute for venesection at two saphenous points, in the armpit, and at two chafing points.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in some men.
And the armpit cauterization is appropriate for the armpit in the same way as the cauterizations with two cups are for other parts.
And the quality of the position of the cauteries is that you place the cauterization gently at first and then suck it appropriately timed, and do not prolong the placement of the cauteries, but pause those lightly, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site by natural occurrence. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and until the rigidity of the blood appears.
And now you should scarify and repeat the suction gradually, and appropriately consider the disposition of the body.
For the person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify them once and not more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
He commands the operator to enlarge the incision slightly and to facilitate suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, now you should scarify twice, because on the first occasion the way of absorption for the blood and the moisture is opened up. But on the second occasion, use the acquired inspection for extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is mixed with impurities, now a third scarification should be performed so that the last can be achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify in larger quantities.
And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
And if the skin of the person where the incision is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for applying the cupping vessels be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is summer, then oil of aloes, violet oil, or oil of rose petals, or linseed oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar.
If the wound is of broad holes in tender flesh, it is necessary that it be covered with oil, and it should have applied to those areas around the wound water washed or warm water mixed with solatrum, or water of colocynth, or water of boric acid, and similar things.
And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with green vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it is necessary that the dressing be protected before bathing; having bathed, it should be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or two, and it should rest near the wound.
What is needed to be done to regulate the patient after bloodletting or before wound dressing.
At the beginning, consider this: if the wound or the one who needs bloodletting is choleric and there is inflammation with acute bleeding, then it is necessary to give cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in green vinegar and lettuce, and scallions, and julep, and similar things.
And pause their food such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
And for the one whose complexion is warm, it is necessary that they drink rose syrup, or syrup of boiled fenugreek seeds and sumac, and vinegar mixed with moderate aromatic substances between morning and night; and that it be recommended to them to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods such as poultry and canaries and pigeons and small birds and doves.
On the day of bloodletting and purging, drink more than you eat.
It should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac or musk medicine, such as nutmeg or cinnamon before bloodletting or purging, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is refined; and it is not appropriate for them to take hot substances.
The bloodlettings that should be done by incision should be performed on the thighs, above the groin, and for gout and hernia, and at the navel, in the places of the groins, and at the side of the hip bone, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
And it is not used for anything else but to draw blood from a member, just as we place a cup on the breast in cases of bleeding from the nose; and they use this method to dissolve congealed blood in the limb, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; because this thins the limb, heats it, alleviates pain, and resolves congestion.
And it is applied to the nostrils when they are obstructed or diseased, because by the power of suction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates diseases from their location.
And similarly when it is applied to the groin and abdomen for bloodletting in cases where blood is confined there.
And these bloodlettings should be administered only with suction; some, however, should be applied using heat.
And some should be applied full of hot water in diseases affecting the abdomen.
With this you are to make sure that the windiness is full and is much larger, so it is hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
Windiness administered near the fire: let the width of its opening be two fingers wide as we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid should be half a palm; and at the bottom of it, in the place that is around the circumference, let there be half of it; the tube should be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
It should be made of soft leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion (likely referring to a material or style), smooth and clean so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
And there should be a crossbar of wood or iron in the middle of it, upon which a candle is placed near the fire.
And this windiness should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the size smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the one who uses it.
And the windiness for children and weak individuals should be smaller than those for young and robust people.
And the quality of placing this windiness near the fire on the member is that it extends the flesh towards the fire appropriately in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbar at the proper location of the windiness, so that the fire is ignited around the lower part to prevent it from burning the patient's body.
And it should be placed appropriately on the member of the patient, and the finger should be on the tube that we have mentioned, so that when we have the windiness and do not want the finger to obstruct the vapor from rising over that tube, at that time the windiness will dissolve quickly.
Thus for burning plasters according to its method, and repeat that if you should need of them.
Make a suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there should be no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb for only so long.
And this is the form of it: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVM VII.
Lancets are not administered to all members but only to those members where the placement of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts of the body without much flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found is to use them in the waters from putrid places that are clean.
And then leave them in putrid water during the day and night until they become hungry, so that no residue remains in their body; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and suction cup use; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on the affected area.
And when they are filled and placed.
And if suction can be applied to the area with a suction cup, it is better for relief.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood is prolonged near the seat of the bloodletting and it oozes out, then you wrap a cloth in cold water, and place that on top so that the oozing stops.
And if the blood multiplies, then powder and sprinkle on it vitriol trisected, or alum and similar substances that cause astringency, until the blood is arrested; or place on the area the pods of boiled fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is arrested.
And if it is necessary to repeat bloodletting, do so when it is possible to change the sites.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or prick the area until blood flows; and afterwards place on it, for those who feel some blood will soon adhere.
And when you want them to clot, sprinkle on them a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will clot immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh, son, be aware that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and by those who have not for any length of time regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time at all; and I have not adopted what follows, but through long reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
And thus I directed myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which I have experimented; for I have abridged it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and formed in it various forms of the instruments used therein, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
A summary and collection from the treatment of fractures of bones, from those whose preliminary steps are necessary before we begin to recall the treatments of different types of fractures and their various aspects. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which one must pay attention at the beginning in order to understand them correctly; for it is necessary that you and those who wish to learn this noble art from you know these well.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone that they have a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment you must decide at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to dress them immediately, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it is an infant who has happened to them, or an elderly person in decline, or if it is a time of intense heat or cold.
And therefore be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and meat of birds and small animals; and prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body, and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe condition regarding abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter to the limb.
Then return the patient to their usual regimen as soon as they are accustomed to it.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, now it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, such as those made of wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, hens, fresh pork, and similar meats, and with this regimen the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones broken in people who are young and in the elderly cannot be repaired and consolidated according to their nature through the drying up of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and applies them around the broken bone from all sides in a manner similar to glue, where there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they coagulate together until they reach strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning does not prevent it from accomplishing its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to withhold from the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I wish to remind you of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Note the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for one type of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and closed and open fractures, there are also fractures like when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture due to plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration, which will be a reminder of them separately in their places.
Note the signs of a bone fracture. And by this, a bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of the bone, and from its prominence and appearance to the touch, and also when you press it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent deformity or swelling and upon gentle touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be a deformity or small fissure, so do not press it with your hand and with strong compression. Instead, apply one of the medicines about which there will be a reminder at an appropriate moment for what is suitable; and it may be narrow due to subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or any other part than where it suffers from swelling, then you should begin your work with the correction of the wound that the abscess affects.
And if an abscess affects it, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it in whatever way you can, making it light and secure.
And know that the restoration and adjustment of the flesh is easier than that of the bone in which the swelling occurs.
And then strengthen it according to what will be remembered of it.
But if the bone is swollen, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is a hand or a foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb down bandaged according to its natural figure, while the parts that are extended from the broken member require you to return those addictions securely and in whatever way you can back into their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient due to your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone in their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you use your hand effectively, and if you find any differing cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
And from the excessive extension and compression, so do some foolish doctors cause an abscess through their operation, or they cause contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen due to their foolish operations.
And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them in linen and hard material, because the linen wrapping connects the large limb and strengthens it evenly from all sides, thus preventing any impurity from entering.
And appropriately begin, with proper alignment of the evacuation, to pause gradually according to this, on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four depending on what the limb requires; and strengthen it gently with your hand along the bandaging.
And apply to it the most sovereign poultice for the place of the fracture, and bind it gently so as not to restrict the area where you have bound the place of the fracture. And apply an extension to the wrapping of the fracture site for a short period, and gradually loosen the bandage until you have removed most of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured site over the previous wrapping, and afterwards apply to it the dressings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the dressing and in the loosening of it as we have said about the first dressing above.
And then place between the dressings a piece of leather or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is modeled, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in that area.
And then place another bandage over it, and afterwards apply properly made splints over these dressings if there is no swelling or abscess in the area, and now place on what causes the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and now bind the splints over it.
And let the splints be about half a cubit long and carefully crafted; or they can be made of willow wood; or from palm strips; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
However, the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size; and then bind over the splints with another bandage as per your first binding; and afterwards cover it above properly as we have said about binding, and this binding should be tighter near the fracture site, and as it moves away from the fracture, the binding should become looser.
And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish paunches use cords of twisted thread for their sewing, it is a great error, when you see the stitches not lying straight.
And also very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve with them what you want by sewing, and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is suffering from pain at the ends of the ribs near the stitches in those places, then pause and use silk or carded wool between that and the skin so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and a disruption happens in the collarbone, and I will recall this case in the chapter dedicated to its uniqueness.
And know that not all broken members should be set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be placed upon splints immediately but rather after two or three days or more, according to your certainty about the danger of suppuration.
And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over such injuries.
Method of making a plaster for the rapid restoration of fractures, suitable for delicate individuals and especially for women and children, as it does not attract heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine part that adheres to the sides of the mill during grinding.
And confine it as it is, but sift it with white cloth, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of ledanum, of acacia, of inula, and migraach, which is the root of wild millet, of each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes one drachm v; alchaichol two drachms xx; all should be dried, sifted, and mixed with watered alchaichol or with white cloth if the composition of the mixture is too hot; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and helps many people.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach (root of wild millet) and extract of white alum, one drachm x; myrrh and aloes one drachm v; acacia six drachms vi; Armenian bole two drachms xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding tool, and then sifted, and compounded with water or white cloth if the mixture is too thick, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and for severe pain in them and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and warm oil and apply it to the affected area.
Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue for restoration, for abscesses, and it does not properly expel pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of preparing a poultice to administer for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you wish to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take one part each of marshmallow root, chamomile flowers, violets, and flour of barley; mix all these finely and cook them in water, provided that the limb is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, now prepare that with cold coriander water or with plain cold water.
Another method of preparing a stronger poultice for resolving an issue more effectively than the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of a limb: take equal parts of marshmallow root and linseed, pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violets, chamomile; mix all these finely and cook them in vinegar-water or warm water or wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and its color.
However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that a poultice should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration but rather recommends cerot made of wax and oil for no other reason; he also advises that it should be midway between being thick and fine.
However, Galen is seen to have applied poultices to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes such as slight drying with a bit of heat, like myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes which we have mentioned.
Method of preparing a poultice to relieve injury and pain: take equal parts of linseed, chickpeas, chopped human hair or bird's down, marshmallow root, and salt; mix these finely and sieve them, then cook them together to make a poultice.
The quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain and then be removed is such that you should consider whether pain does not occur or progress nor is the bone broken from its place; therefore, do not untie it for several days. And if intense pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it at that hour, and remove the plaster.
And take a piece of cloth and sponge the sea lemon with water, and immerse it in warm water; then use that to wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterwards let the limb rest for an hour; then place it on wool soaked in vinegar and oil or ointment, and bandage it overnight until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the limb's swelling has subsided, and the pain from it has been reduced.
And afterwards repeat that gentle compression and small plaster without making it as tight as your first one, and gradually do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and compression, then repeat that as you did at the beginning, gradually.
And if no cause arises for the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not untie it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days, as appears appropriate to you by unbinding the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and tends toward the coagulation of the flesh over it.
During the operation adjust more tightly at the point of constriction than at your first tightening altogether, and adjust according to the swelling of the diseased tissue, as was previously mentioned.
But if you see the site of the fracture drying up and becoming more distressed than it should, then you know that nutrition is prevented from reaching there; therefore, apply tepid water compresses to it every time you do so; and continue this for three days in total; and loosen the bandage slightly, and through this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it will be quickly healed.
But what the foolish restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if this were true, the Ancients would have enlarged upon it in their books and warned against it.
And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do so.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blunt object, where the impact displaces all the bone inward, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood, and thus this type is called an "ascial" fracture; or a sharp object cuts some part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not pass the cut inward to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
This is about the injury of these two fractures, either it is great or small, and of the fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of them is percussion by a weak object or falling on a stone, and similar things.
And this fracture is penetrating, which already approaches the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is either great or small.
And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the hairline, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its inner parts, and it occurs in the concave location just as it happens with ribs when they suffer an impact and break upon their inward entry.
And this is more commonly done in the bones of children, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately. And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
And you will recognize all these types of fractures by examination on them and by inquiry into their painful areas and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is on them.
And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it is treated over the painful area because the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through these symptoms that it signifies by clear indication great fear, as is vomiting from anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and such things of the limbs and stiffness of them, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, without doubt he will not be healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of the fracture.
When the cause is such that it has come to you as a complaint at the beginning as it is in this case and this is during the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer days, then it is necessary for you to expose the bone before the seventh day, because what is next to the bone may become corrupted by pus, and such symptoms as we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small fragments and abrasions, then it is necessary for you to incise the fragmented and abraded part as I will tell you.
And you should shave the head of the patient who is affected, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, or there is bleeding or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should prepare for what is necessary, and that is to apply the area with cloths infused in wine and oiled cloth, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and bleeding stops; then begin circumferential treatment of the bone and its removal.
In water let it be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of such size, and this is its shape: And then apply another incisor, this one slightly wider than the previous; and this is its shape:
And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
And it is necessary to have various incisors, some wider than others and some shorter than the rest; they should be sharp at both ends, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that you do not jar the head and injure it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the incisors along with the chisels, which are called non-deep chisels.
And they are called this only because these do not reach the inner part of the skull bone when used around it; thus, the chisel has a rounded end or margin on top, similar to an edge or small circle that prevents it from penetrating too deeply into and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that you have at hand for all parts of the skull an end that is sharp, with the quantity in length and width according to the amount of thickness of this part.
This is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and revolve it with your hand until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the trephine to another location, and continue this process throughout the extent of the thickness of the ray or around about that.
And then incise with an incisor that which is between each piece of the bone, and do it as finely as you can at the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause through some instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, such as probes and fine forceps.
And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the brain.
And so when you have perforated the bone in a circuit, and it will be separated from the brain if it continues at that point, and you will extract it; then rasp and smooth that in the roughness of the place where it is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more thin and finer than other incisors.
And if any part of the small bones remains and causes trouble, now take that with ease using what is appropriate from your instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Gualia calls and the leaf praises greatly as a praiser; and this is the speech on it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and most apparent, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and cheerful whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped part is lion and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides frontwards in length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the ciphac with the face of it cutting acute on the bone.
And for this reason, you strike upon the saw of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through all the bone with ease as it revolves, and be sure concerning the flap that no accident happens to it in any way, and if the operator were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Now if there is any cause attached to the bone of the flap in some places of bone, it will cut that which adheres to the end of the saw at the lens-shaped part, and it would deliver that which adheres with ease, for it is delivered from harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the flap, and that which is excised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains with roughness and small protrusions, now you should scrape away that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors for which you have prepared various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer those most suitable in every place and the most appropriate of them according to how your operation on that broken bone and its shape directs you.
And you should administer in your proportion at which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the widest of those razors, and then gradually use one increasingly finer, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
In each of the other small fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what has been lost for the purpose of correction.
And it is because she is not intimidated by any of those who have studied in that art. And this is about what we have written concerning large fractures.
And if the fatty tissue is rectangular when you remove the bone, now you should take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak that in warm oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and soak it in vinegar and warm oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the swelling; then apply a wide bandage to it, but do not bind it too tightly except just enough for the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the absence of abscess; then unbind it and administer medicines that are suitable for excessive dryness, such as lint poultices and flour mixtures, and powders of iris and aristolochia, and similar ones.
And it is that you should make these medicines into powder that is finely ground and applied to the wound as dry powders; generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without causing irritation.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment remains clean; do not allow it to become infected or suffer from any other issues; and do not let its virulence increase. For when it is properly placed over the fatty tissue of the brain, it corrupts that tissue and weakens it, leading to further illness due to such malignancy.
And it happens in the skull where the bone has been cleaned and especially when the treatment of it is delayed, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider the hours if such accidents happen to the patient, so that you know it is dangerous without any doubt.
And if it is not blackness but the medicine that has been applied above which causes this darkness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and with these wet a cloth, and then place that on the skull; and afterwards treat it with the spices for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except into two parts above mostly, or one of those sometimes, because there are two bones in it, as the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and only swelling, distortion, and curvature happens to it.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture with your middle finger inside and support it with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize it at the end of the rod which is slightly thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it look like this.
And if you can perform the restoration on the first day of the fracture, do so; and if not, then on the seventh or tenth day, proceed with the rest when the swelling subsides.
And immediately insert into the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or place two cloths if the fracture is in two pieces, and make sure that the cloth is thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in boiled honey, and changed every day, but I have not seen this myself; however, it is advisable to soak the plug in albumen of cooked eggs mixed with powder of rue; and then leave the cloth inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a piece of wax is inserted into the nose instead of cloth, wrapped in linen cloth; and this should be done when the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is prohibited from inhaling.
And this method is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it this way, and if you wish, use cloths.
And if another swelling occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or wax soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with honey water.
But if no swelling occurs, then it is advisable to apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and then place it over the injured area, and do not cover the nose with anything.
If bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or crushed, then at that time it is necessary to cut around them and extract them with instruments suitable for this; and promptly close the fracture, and treat it with substances that heal and strengthen, and with plasters appropriate for this.
And if it happens that there is a swelling inside the nose, then at that time it is necessary to treat this with poultices and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling at the fracture site, then check if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts with curvature inside, in this case its diagnosis is easy.
And you must, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right finger; and push the swelling of the fracture from inside with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand from the outside part of the bone; do this gently and steadily.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those you expect will break with wire or silver or thread; and promptly place on the broken jaw some wax, and then place over it a double cloth, and place over that a large piece of clean cloth, or a pad of softened dough equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it tightly according to how your bandaging equipment is prepared and suits the application, without causing destruction.
And he commands the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to stop eating liquid foods.
And if you see that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; afterwards, correct what has already been altered with powder of myrrh, egg albumen, or flour of linseed, after you have stopped the cerement from it, and place upon the dressing a piece of linen.
And then when it stands attached and adjusted that plaster upon it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave that, so do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for often this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if on another occasion an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said often in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or embedded, and carefully extract those splinters with what is necessary for their removal using instruments.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount necessary.
And then when you have stopped those splinters, and if they cannot be removed, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; otherwise, place upon that one of the plasters which are suitable for it and promote healing there, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Most often the collarbone is broken in the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without affecting the articulation; and it is easy to restore it. Or it happens in such a way that it affects the articulation, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is along the flat surface.
And the procedure in that case, when the fracture is along the flat surface, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the supporting instrument and guides the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that part.
And similarly, adjust the fracture within the bone so that its shape is formed as needed, and there should be neither a small prominence nor a depression in it.
And if you need more extension, then place below the armpit a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and raise the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand until you adjust the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches the preon, then have the patient lie supine on their neck, and place a pad about halfway in size over the muscle.
And the assistant presses the muscle from below so that the bone of the collarbone is raised to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it as needed.
If you feel pain from the fork and its points, now it is necessary to cut around them and extract those pricks easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the cutters that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have paused below the fork the instrument that serves as a reamer; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and here is its shape:
And it resembles the cup from which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of the bone or the space available.
However, the length of it should be as much as is possible for the operation; it should have two ends as you see fit, and one end should be wide while the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it may form an abscess, now you should approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess, now you should cover the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound's opening.
And if an abscess does occur, now apply a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose oil and place it over that area.
And do not let the splint press down on the broken bone; and therefore you should see the patient every day, so that when the bandaging is loose or you see that the splint has already been moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
And place the patient's head on the pillow at the neck, and place below it the bolsters so that during sleep his head is slightly raised; thus the support of the shoulder blade will be raised, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone will be elevated by the muscle; or bind his arm to his neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess or other condition within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that his face is suitable for it, and adjust it to the constriction and restore it so that the fracture of the collarbone may be set and healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula is broken in the middle part and not at its margins.
And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part of it — and this is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way you can manage.
Here is the translation:
If you place the blade in one of the concavities on the spatula, then wrap that concavity with a lion's paw and proceed to push the blade according to equality.
And then apply pressure above with the metallic strip properly constricted and with firmness of the blade such that it does not move from its place.
And check the bandage each day; and whenever it is softened, change it on another day and tighten it if the blade has moved from its place.
And place the malady over its proper side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
And when this number is completed, then you remove the bandage, and be sure that these are bones for which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the broken bone and place the bandage there, then you cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said for the fracture of the furcula or in case of an abscess that may occur here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a fractured foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains intact, but the extremities move as cicadas do and are comminuted.
And when the middle of the foot is broken, the symptoms are that it tilts towards the inner parts and there is great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and a cavity forms in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
For the restoration of the spine, lay the patient on their back and place a bolster between their shoulders; then press against the muscles, and adjust the ribs with two fingers, and delicately perform the operation and the correction in every possible way that is suitable for this, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
Then place the plaster and tow on it, and put a thin layer of linden bark or flax or something similar in lightness, after which you wrap that with cloth; then carefully bind that around the broken bone without putting too much pressure; and proceed to bandage following the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that moderately; then examine the bandage at all times, and when it softens, strengthen that.
And if necessity requires the removal of that due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and loosen that, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of treatment; then reapply the plaster if it is necessary for that; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in thick areas where they meet; and at their extremities in front, compression does not affect them because they are cartilaginous there. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation during the examination of the aforementioned areas.
And so the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture according to the said method as much as possible, entering where necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if that is required.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, it often causes severe pain and puncture-like sensations, just as those who have wept experience, and because of this, the bone places a covering over itself; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And already the Ancients were skilled in that with skillful words.
And what they say is that one should avoid foods for the patient that generate inflammation and gas, so that the belly does not become swollen and distended, and the fracture is not pushed towards the outer parts.
But we should do this to ensure it does not become a light cause for generating a pus-filled abscess if one does not occur; and if it already has occurred, then this helps in dealing with it.
And some of them say that it should be paused from wind-increasing foods and afterwards squeezed with strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them say: the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs where it is full, so that the bandage is equal when wrapping it according to its roundness; afterwards, the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly constrained by the pain which they cannot endure, and the bone has punctured through the dressing, we fear for the patient; at that time it is necessary to cut across the location, uncover the broken edge, and immediately place over that instrument which will preserve the splinter whose preservation was previously mentioned, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
And immediately adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then apply poultices of powdered herbs in warmed oil and place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And have the patient lie on their back on the side where they sleep until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
In some cases, there is fracture of the neck bones, and slowly they heal, and similarly with the spine in the back. And when such an occurrence happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if you see their hands already softened and numb and dead, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain in them, then you know that they will not heal, and in such conditions it is fatal.
And if they move those parts and feel constriction when pressed on them or pierced with a needle, then you know that the bone in the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the condition.
Now if you see that the patient is already softened, and it happens like this in most cases, and suddenly when he lies on his back, windiness and involuntary evacuation occur, and sometimes he is pushed onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know that it is fatal, and at that point do not labor in his cure.
But if none of those causes occur, the condition is better and more remote from danger.
And the treatment for him is to apply poultices to reduce the abscess until you place over the protruding vertebra olive oil that has been rubbed, or two eggs mixed and applied; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
And now apply one of the comforting and restorative plasters, and bind it on that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to lie on the side where pain is felt until he is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is disjointed or for some cause has become separated from it, then you should set it and put the bone in place; and then approximate the two lips of the wound, using sutures if necessary; and then treat it with one of the ointments to promote healing until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken at the joint, and it is the end of the shaft, then you should insert your finger into the backside, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second intention; and then apply a plaster and bandage to it, if you need them, and bind it.
And if you feel that stitches are torn in it, then at once remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been described until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad area.
The bones of the broad areas are easily broken, and if they break, then their fracture is only communication at the ends of those bones and they split along their length and deviate to the sides; and this causes pain in the location and puncture, and movement is impaired when there is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand upon it until it is in the position corresponding to the figure of the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the end of it only, then you must set that according to what seems appropriate to you by equalization until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long part or one that has already deviated to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have set that, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane upon it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no fear of puncture of the fracture or movement of the splint.
And set the concavity with what fills it until that takes the shape according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If an inflamed abscess occurs after cauterization, then at that moment you must stop the extension of it and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and wait with what was previously done; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as is fitting.
And if you encounter them in the bone or they are crushed, then at that moment you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjuncts.
The adjuncts are what lie between the ribs and the shoulder head.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
And let them be attached at both ends with two straps, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
And let the patient lie on a mattress; and then place the broken arm over the splint until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend something heavy on that, or help him extend it to the lower parts; and then the physician should keep the fracture in place with his hands, so that the fracture returns as is necessary.
And the other way is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the arm at the neck with straps; and then command two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture firmly; and the other holds what is below it; and each extends it in their own direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie one bandage across the fracture and another perpendicular to it, and each of the two assistants should pull on their respective sides.
And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then place one half of the bandage over the button (or knot) and the other below the fracture, crossing it.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then place the bandage over that location and across that joint.
Wrap it with ease and effort, and as soon as it is wrapped as needed and properly applied, then secure it if no abscess occurs.
But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the bandaging within seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then secure it.
And the method of securing it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a wet cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm with the aid of an assistant, and have the hand placed on its respective muscle.
And wrap the cloth and secure around the assistant the arm so that the arm is in a position of stability, unless some cause from the broken bone prohibits it.
And now use splints.
And place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from both sides.
And upon this draw lines along the stricture which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture in the place of the fracture be much narrower. And the longer the fracture is, the smaller the stricture should be.
And thus when you have positioned the bones and the stricture as we have said, at the moment when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess, then at that moment leave the stricture and the bones as we have said until the seventh day.
And then consider the bandaging in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs in the area; or food should not reach the limb due to excessive tightness of the stricture; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms be placed on their stomach.
And place a cushion filled with wool under the helper, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandaging is too slack; therefore, correct this according to your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until the bandaging begins; and then it is appropriate to make the diet heavier.
As to the custom of the assistants and of the dressing of the wound is that they be changed in forty days; and at this time it should be loosened, bath given, and treated with medicines which correct it.
And if the fracture is gritty, then you do not loosen the bandage from it for one day or even two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two ulnae; of which one is small and it is that which lies under the little finger, and the other is large and it is that which lies below the small one, towards the lower part.
And if the greater or lesser ulna is broken alone, or both are broken together.
And when the lesser ulna above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the ulna below is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the lesser ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a slight extension with ease until it is set straight.
But if the greater ulna is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
And if both falanges are being cut, then at this hour you must apply the traction more forcefully.
And you must place the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension spread upon a cushion, with the wrist above all parts, so that all other fingers are in their natural position, and the thumb be lower than the others, and the patient lie reclining on a bed.
And let there be a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And let one attendant extend the arm from below toward the patient's hand or bandage, and another attendant extend it similarly from above.
And let the physician then guide the bone into place as closely as possible according to its proper alignment.
And if in the process of setting the bone you encounter resistance, then with your skill reduce all parts to their proper place.
And if there appears in the resistance a separation that suggests the joint is affected and does not give you hope for its restoration, then proceed with it as we have described above and remove it according to the method mentioned.
But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, and therefore follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerote made from rosin oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and tightly bind it around so that the abscess subsides; then remove the cerote and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg white, and afterward place bandages; let the bandage placed over that fracture be wider and more firmly applied.
And know that the number of stars on the arm can be seen in major dispositions, whether it is a fracture in one fossa or in two fosse simultaneously.
And appropriately apply pressure to the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when more force is required above or below the fracture, apply the pressure slightly less forcefully according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging after several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And allow the limb to not be constrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandaging.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already realigned and appears to be in a similar condition, then correct it with your skill.
And consider carefully if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandaging for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And so the hand of the patient is suspended by its upper part of motion and agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or easily restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the condition of the bone.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the joints of the said bones, when they are fractured, nothing happens but healing in several weeks.
And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, it is now necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upward according to equality, and place the hand upon that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply plaster and cotton, unless an abscess or cauterization occurs; and then place a bandage over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, and now make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
And let the bandage be made of soft cloth that is raised, so that the palm can apply to the wound; and bind it as needed.
If the fracture is in the parts above, place one splint on top and another under the part in the palm, so that it may be open and straight; and then bind it tightly, as if turning the hand around between the fingers with bandages.
And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones of the said fingers, then place the finger as it fits and bind it to the palm, and if you wish, use a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
If the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align and bind it to its corresponding finger; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration and afterwards, the disposition of abscesses and opposing conditions — during the operation — as well as what is necessary when any cause of them arises, according to how it is described.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone, which is often fractured, is evident by touch according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
And the restoration is done in such a way that one bandage is tightly wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on their belly and face.
Let the attendant extend the bandage according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it extends towards the root of the spine, then the bandage should be applied to the front at the part above the navel, so that its extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture extends towards the navel, then the bandage should be applied above the navel, and its extension should be to the parts below.
And the physician should align the bone with both hands and reduce it according to its natural appearance, so that the bone is properly joined; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, pressing out any excess; then wrap the entire limb so that it goes to the ankle and the root of the spine.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the spine and the limb near the navel at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the highest part of both sections, then wrap around the limb and the spine any excess bandage material.
And then apply strips of cloth over the spine at the location of the fracture, and place one strip directly over the bone of the limb.
And fill the void between the bowl and the container with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be coagulated.
And then begin the binding tightly from above at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the ligatured area of the fracture, your binding should be looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides below until it reaches the nail of the toe, and secure both ends of the bandages on the other side so that the ligature is not moved from its place.
And then place the bandage over it in such a way that corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions do not occur to the limb; and if any of these causes should arise, immediately remove it and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
But if there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed in the bone, then you should try to set it as best as possible; and if not, cover it and move it, and treat it according to what was mentioned before until it heals.
And in some cases, this fracture of the bone is strengthened by binding it with bandages, as we have said regarding the assistant and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner performed, a bad limp should not occur; and if it is restored alone or with the application of another bandage, then it is necessary that the person will have a limp permanently.
And know that the wound heals in forty days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of a fractured wrist bone.
Know that the fracture of the wrist bone often occurs, but twists usually happen more frequently.
But if it is a fracture, at that moment it is merely a crack or a bruise in its parts, and this is either one pain or several pains, and all of this depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts must be equalized, and what is separated must be joined together as much as possible by adjustment, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need to use one; and bind it above strictly as is appropriate.
And then consider all the conditions we have recommended for other fractures, just as in cases of abscess and similar issues, ensure that everything opposes every accident in such a way that it is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fractured thigh bone.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the femur; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to both bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made as with the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if you break both bones together, the curvature is converted in all directions.
And if the more delicate bone is broken, the curvature is converted to the forward parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes that you are not accustomed to.
And immediately administer extension and correction and fixation of the fragments according to that method.
But be careful, if the fracture of the bone is jagged with many edges, that the extension be gentle and slower, and rely on your skill.
And when there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure, now you will take pieces of wood from plants that are rooted below causes that are placed in soil; make them similarly from palm branches; attach these to those with slight grooves, and they should not be of the grasping kind, and their length should be according to the length of the bone, and from the end to the most distant part.
And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one at the part of the bone on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be from the end to the lowest location of the body.
Place the two stakes in three places at both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the camber is forbidden to lean towards the right and left, and it stands in good position.
And now a beam of wood is administered according to the length of the arch; and let the arch be placed in such a way that it preserves its freedom of movement.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of splinting.
And each day consider the arch and study it based on previous studies, and you must guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act upon it as is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the shinbone and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
A complete fracture does not usually occur in the shinbone; but fractures can occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and among those of the foot, few suffer fractures, and they rarely experience anything more than strain due to improper positioning.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on prepared ground as mentioned.
And then place the foot on what is elevated by those bones, and proceed to press them, and bind them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and place padding above it, and below the arch of the foot, place a small board with two padded edges.
And so prepare that part of the body which is to be treated, since you have wrapped that limb or parts for the reasons required.
And when three or four days have passed, you then loosen the bandage, and you will find the bones either disjointed, broken, or dislocated, and the treatment for these conditions is as you know.
But if anyone says they are broken, then you should set them and join them as I have recommended to you in the setting of the bones of the hand. And then prepare the broken finger according to its length, and make it slightly longer; and then place this limb on the table as I have recommended to you, and wrap it with proper tightness.
But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then you prepare a splint for each finger made in the quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the limb, and let it rest on one end of the board away from the abdomen so that the tongue has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and treat each accident with what is appropriate.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the pubic bone in women and of the bone of the penis and the shaft of the penis in men.
When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then perform the surgery in a reclined position, and then tilt her slightly to one side, and let her be supported behind.
By the midwife the bladder is filled with cotton, and it is made in the womb just as is hoped; and shortly after the woman is shaken, and she raises the buttocks little by little, for all this is forgotten within until it is before the exit of the womb just as is hoped and the broken bone returns.
And then place poultices on his back, and when he wants to urinate, lift the buttocks easily so that he can urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the way you mixed it at the beginning, and then return him to his original poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for he will be restored then.
And if you want, take a sheep’s bladder and stretch over its neck a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into his wound, and then blow air through the tube vigorously until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
And then it should be filled with cotton and kept for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hip joint in a man or woman is broken, administer what we have recommended for the thigh bone in its restoration and alignment.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has studied and used this work of mine; for this fracture means to you in the major positions through straightness in its restoration and constriction, and thus you understand well.
But in the case of a man's fractured penis, take a sheath made of oxhide, and place the penis in it; then wrap it with a cloth covering, and leave it like that for three days or around that time, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when there is swelling.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture with swelling, especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you prepare yourself and cut the veins of the limb immediately if the conditions for venesection indicate it, as we have said above.
And if the swelling emits blood, then you should be prepared to treat this by preventing its retention in such a way that you powder over it finely triturated substances, unless another cause is present.
And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should reduce it and align it with your fingers as easily and with little extension as possible.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of it with your fingers is difficult, then you should reduce it using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the swelling. It is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such instruments in different sizes suitable for various types of fractures.
And let it be round, and let there be little grease on it so that it is not doubled over when you press upon it during the operation.
And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part be thick, and from the middle to the ends be tapered.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntz atelarem," which means a small palette.
So that the end of it may be placed steady with its tip raised above the end of the prominent bone.
And press it in one motion such that the bone returns to its place, and let it be equalized with some adjustment.
And thus strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is fine, and does not take the instrument well, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument has better access.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with that which seems appropriate to you among the knives we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small ridges.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient experiences severe pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do what will be of great help to the patient.
When you have completed the restoration of the bone that you are performing, and now it is summer, soak a cloth in black styptic wine and apply it properly; do not put cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that decay and corruption may not occur.
And immediately after administering plates at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, leave the wound uncovered so that you can excise any protrusions with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to press the wound on the fracture, for many times inexperienced doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or incurable illness such as gangrene. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not place plates on it, but make that bandage with hard cloths instead of plates and press it against it.
And after one day or two days, when the wound begins to generate granulation tissue, then you remove the cloth that you had placed on it soaked in wine, and immediately apply bandages, including those we customarily use to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar treatments.
And it is necessary for you to untie the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it should be prepared in such a way that decay flows away from it to lower parts with ease.
If after many days the swelling does not consolidate and is not excised from the limb, then you should know that here one must worry about small abscesses which lie hidden within the swelling. And of those abscesses, those which are separate and can be extracted and removed, do so. For those that remain within and cause pain when the limb is moved, incise them as far as is possible for you.
And if the swelling becomes inflamed or ulcerated, which is a sign of severe corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to proceed according to one of those methods appropriate for the treatment, as described in the preceding chapter on this subject.
And concerning the matter on which I must speak and you should pay attention: When a bone is fractured, it protrudes from the limb like the bones of the fingers and those of the small limbs, and do not attempt to pull it out or remove it because doing so may lead to death within twenty or thirty days; instead, leave it inside where it has lodged, for it will likely fall back into place on its own in that time. And then treat the swelling if you see fit, but otherwise leave it as is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knots that occur as remnants of some fracture.
Often enough, this knot occurs in the remnants of a fracture during healing, especially near joints, and it hinders the normal function of the limb; and frequently prevents the limb from performing its natural movements.
Then consider whether the knot is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect, such as aloes, myrrh, celandine, sercapillo (celandine), and agrimony; take any of these or all of them. Prepare a poultice with one of these styptic substances or albumen from egg whites, or make it more agreeable to the patient, and apply it over the knot using linen bandages, securing it tightly in place.
There is no extraction that does not loosen the knots with words daily; and then loosen it and apply another, until the swelling subsides; or apply a strip of lead over it, for lead has the property of drawing out all that is inflamed in the limbs.
If the swelling has already become hardened into a stone and it is necessary to remove it urgently, then cut it at its most prominent part, and excise the excess and elevated portion, or grind it down with certain instruments until the swelling subsides; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are set and subsequently the limb is moved gently not contrary to its nature.
When a bone fracture is set, and subsequently the limb is moved gently, this is done for various reasons: among which one reason is too much loosening of the bandages and binding them not as required; or excessive constriction of the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or excessive use of poultices; or unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
The treatment for this is to give the patient food and make his body soft so that blood is multiplied in him; administer baths; and apply poultices and leeches to him.
And then apply a plaster to the limb, so that the plaster draws in nourishment, or continue applying poultices with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural course.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they have been set improperly and prevent their operation from what is necessary.
When it happens that the already set limb, near its healing from its curvature and prominence of the broken bone and knotting, resembles in form as if the limb were newly broken, yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural use, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that member to be freshly broken.
But now it stands as a matter of false doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a shameful one leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to wrap them in hot water containing soft herbs such as flax seeds, linseed, and melilot, and similar ones; or apply a soft plasters like well-made myrobalan paste mixed with linseed or olive oil, ground with vinegar or sour grape juice, and applied therewith; or take fatty figs and crush them with dove's milk, and similar remedies for consolidating the healing process.
And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be done with the most moist substances, and the limb's movement should be administered in all directions at all times.
But if the curvature has already advanced and has become hard and turned into bone, and it has reached the necessity of treatment with iron, then it is necessary to discharge the pus above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and carefully cut what is superfluous from the knotting of that limb with a fine instrument, and facilitate this with care and diligence.
Chapter XXIII.
On Speaking of Dislocation.
Dislocation is when any of the joints loses its proper location, thus prohibiting movement, and the figure of the limb is distorted, causing severe pain and great injuries.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, because if it is delayed, swelling will occur, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, one should not move or keep the patient standing during the swelling, because it often causes spasms and severe pain.
But when this happens, you should prepare for the incision of the swollen area, and then allow it to rest until the swelling subsides. After that, bathe the limb with warm water and oil, and then reduce the dislocation gently.
And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
And thus I have arranged the chapters on dislocation as they were described for fractures, starting from the upper part of the body and moving to the lower parts.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
When the two jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in treatment; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are moved from their places slightly and made somewhat loose; or they are completely and entirely dislocated until they become loose at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot close it, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
When the dislocation of the joint is slight, it returns by itself in most cases with little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced urgently, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should instruct the patient to place one finger inside the mouth near the dislocated jaw if the dislocation is on one side; or both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should remain outside equally spaced; and order the patient to cease clenching their jaws and open them widely in each direction; and the physician should gently guide the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides without delay, as we have said.
And when they return and are equally aligned, but the patient's mouth remains closed and not relaxed, then apply plasters made of cloth with wax on them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and bind it gently to facilitate movement.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not turn to either side; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut up finely until pain subsides and the jaws are healed, then they may eat as they wish.
With this should be administered with ease, and he should not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and have not returned to their places is difficult, fevers and continuous sweats often occur, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and frequently vomiting of pure bile occurs.
And when you see this, then you know that it is lost; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the chest below by its continuation to the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is apparent by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then press the area with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return.
And then apply a plaster and powders and strengthen that area.
But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you prepare it.
And then apply a plaster, powders, and compression, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And this method reduces the swelling when the muscle is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
It is more often dislocated and moved out below the titillium, and especially in those whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those with thick flesh, it remains outside with difficulty.
And it often happens to some men through a blow or fall that the muscle of one side becomes swollen and inflamed, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Then you should treat that as if it were indeed dislocated, and proceed with its treatment accordingly.
And the dislocation is known when it is below the titillium; thus, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you find a concavity at the head of the muscle below the titillium by touch, and the affected person cannot move their hand to their ear or make that movement with ease.
If it is dislocated, you should place the feet above, and you will immediately recognize this clearly, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation a quick reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand above to the upper parts; and then places gentle pressure below at the joint, raising it forcefully to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand, and extends it accordingly; and then places it gently as it returns quickly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and after the initial period when the dislocation occurred, usually several days later, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a lotion to soften and relax it as if for treating rheumatism, using hyssop, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be applied.
And then the patient should be placed on their back with a pillow under the joint, waiting until it is evenly relaxed between tension and restriction; and then the physician places the heel of the patient on a ball, raising the muscle upward vigorously, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, and another assistant holds the head of the patient, so that it is not injured below, for it will immediately return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb; place your muscle below the joint of the patient and raise the joint to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from below the navel. If the malady is stubborn, then now it must be done by one who has another cause suspended, for so the weighty one is relieved, because the dislocation returns so quickly.
And it is reduced in this other manner: it is that he be placed in the ground a pole long whose top be round in shape, as if it were a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, and nearby be placed beneath the malady; then when so placed upon the top of the pole strong cloths, and the patient stand according to the length of the pole, and then stretch out his hand towards the sides beyond the other part; and extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of him by all the causes we have mentioned is difficult, then use this cure: it is that you take a pole whose length be two arms, and breadth of four fingers, and the thickness of it be adjusted to the size of a thimble according to this form:
And then above the round top cloths be placed so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then be placed beneath the armpit of the patient, and stretch out the hand or arm over the pole towards the sides, and cloths be wrapped around the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then be placed the arm on a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand be stretched out towards the sides, and the other body be suspended from the other side, for the joint returns quickly.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible to you, then place beneath the armpit a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place an adhesive plaster prepared with powder of oak bark and egg white over all the muscle, as was mentioned above, and then bind strictly from the armpit; and the bandage be wound around the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and leave it, and do not disturb the hand for seven days.
Let the food of the sick person be moderate until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier to achieve recovery thus.
And let the food be given more around seven or five times, and then let one exercise some movement; and thus if it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to repeated exposure to moisture that occurs to it or for some other reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as was stated before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and strapping are reapplied several times, but it remains unstable, and the patient cannot raise that arm above certain points, then you know that the nerves of it, which attach at the head of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the heel or the rear parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension mostly, until it returns to its place.
And let the other strapping be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. And the dislocation of it is not hidden from you as it appears below the view or touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated collarbone, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess due to cautery, for if it reaches that stage, the reduction of it is difficult, and it rarely heals completely; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people die from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand should be extended across two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hand should be on the collarbone below it, and he should push the joint with his fingers together or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as he bends his hand with his other hand, until he strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both ends so that it is not moved due to the extension.
After you have thoroughly wrapped the arm, since it is covered with a long doubled cloth around the hand or with bandages.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this aids in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its movement; then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
And after the reduction of the shoulder, it should rest on a support that is firm and secure on a wooden board, and it should be bound with moderate compression, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you loosen the bandage of it and leave it like that.
And if you see that the joint is not properly set, then you should reapply the plaster and bandages, and leave it like this for several days until it is secured; and then loosen it.
But if you encounter severe pain during the reduction of the joint and the patient is in motion, then administer hydration with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or have the patient pause and rest the joint, as movement exacerbates the condition; and then bandage it, and leave it like this day and night. And then lift that and place it in a bath; and when dry, you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply rest to it, as movement worsens the condition, once, and the second time, and the third time. Take an instrument for bathing, ensure that it is clean.
And if you want, place a pad over that moist and irritated fissure at the border and bind it there; do this for several applications, as this is moist and reduces to its proper condition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of this dislocation is relatively easy compared to other joints; however, it is important that there be speed in reducing it when it happens, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the injured hand on a table and having an assistant extend the hand. The physician then places his own hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If that is the case, the injured person should place the two sides of their hand on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed flat on the table so that the physician's hand can press directly over the joint.
And if it returns to its place immediately, that is good; but if not, then bind it with a bandage to allow for swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this procedure, as doing so could cause pain or hinder the reduction over the days that follow.
However, the joint remains rigid according to its curvature; and do not inform the patient of any reason, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; now you know that the nerves are severed or divided, and now there is no remedy in it but that it be strengthened with cauterization proper for the case and thus confer some relief.
Then when the dressing is removed, now pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left to rest for five days; then afterwards it should be loosened and allowed to remain loose, while the hand is exercised.
However, if the movement of it remains and you encounter any gravity in it, now treat that with hot water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the displacement of the said joints.
Several times dislocate the said joints completely.
And when a finger of those is dislocated towards the palm or towards the base, now press the finger and urge the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and let it remain like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
If it seems apparent that this is a dislocation at the elbow joint, bind it in such a way and perform with this the first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and they move out of their places, there is then no cure, for death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the movement of the patient's body occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often some parts of them move, such as both legs or arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is out of its place, for sometimes it moves and sometimes it returns to four directions.
When it is displaced to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
However, the treatment for this is to determine whether the kyphosis is due to weakness, because then there is no cure and it cannot be fully healed.
However, in the case where it is caused by falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described methods of treatment at length in their discourse, from which I have condensed what is most relevant; for what little I omit is excused by my closeness to understanding and exposition, with which I have made this clear and formed it from various sources different from those used to demonstrate that and explain this.
And those are not cured except for the one that occurs specifically as I mention with this water.
And it is that the patient lie extended on his face upon a bed equal to the wall, and be laid down below the bedding moistened so that the feet of the patient are not lifted.
And near a straight post should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the head of the patient, and another post on the other side by the feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post which is behind the head, and attach that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with his knees, and pull up the thighs; and then adjust all the bandages and attach them to the other post which is behind the feet.
And then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the post, and do not move the two posts and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not too tight as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or place upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
If this method does not return the desired result, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits and dig in the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places his feet on the other end, and he should gently press until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper position.
And if you want, open again the one that is wrapped around the hand; and this is how you place the patient's head between the ends of two poles, the length of which should be one arm, and behind his head another pair of poles in the same way; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and there should be grooves cut into each pole through which they are firmly attached to the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be a round pole in which is the wrap, and it should be wrapped around the two grooves of the two poles.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the pole is fitted, its length being one palm where it is wrapped; and on the other two poles there is something similar.
Then pull the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet in the groove behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied to his shoulders in the wrap behind his legs.
Then behind each wrap should be a minister who turns the wrap with his hand, and the physician should adjust the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is now necessary to apply an astringent poultice with egg white, and then wool; and afterwards place over the poultice a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should be proportional to the extent of the swelling, and on both sides of the spine.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if any hardness remains in the area at the end of the healing process, it is now necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth the affected area over a long period with the board we have recommended; and a lead plate should also be applied to that location.
And at times hardness occurs in the back of the lower spine due to dislocation; and that bone is one where it is dangerous to use this medicine, for it could easily lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways, either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is mainly displaced towards the interior parts, and sometimes towards the anterior or posterior parts.
The sign of the dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the thigh of the injured person next to the uninjured one, it is longer and the kneecap is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the injured person cannot bend their leg past a certain point, as this place where bending occurs is affected by swelling or cautery due to inflammation. Therefore, the head of the joint has already reached here.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior is that the symptoms are opposite to those mentioned in this case.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that the thigh can be raised somewhat but cannot be bent without causing pain in the knee, and if they attempt to move, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained, and their swallowing is affected by swelling, and they must walk on their heel.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot raise the knee, nor can they bend it before bending the elbow, and the thigh is shorter than the other side, and the joint is softened, and the head of the joint is in that location.
However, the reduction of the various types of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If it has been long-standing, you should then administer reduction according to its disposition, but at that time complete cure cannot be expected; therefore, no promise should be made regarding full recovery.
In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, proceed to rotate the joint and extend it towards both sides within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns, and no other treatment is needed.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the limb from below towards the back, or along its sides, or use a bandage placed above the joint; another person should hold the hand of that limb from above in such a way as to place their hands behind the joints; and immediately apply a lion's bandage tightly over the injured area, with another person holding the extremity of the bandage.
And this extension of the limb or of the inner part towards the angle of the shoulder, or of the rear part towards the back.
And perform this extension of all those parts at once while the patient is raised off the ground and kept suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type it is necessary to proceed with what I will describe regarding its specific treatment.
In the reduction of the joint when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, have the patient lie supine on their back; then place the bandages over the injured area at the point where the head of the joint and the location behind the angle meet; and then extend the bandage from above the part of the armpit to the farthest part of the shoulder blade.
Let another strong minister take his arms, and firmly grasp the swollen part of the diseased joint and extend it outward forcefully, for that returns to its proper place.
And this method is the quickest for curing the one to which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
But if it swells on you and does not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the injured area tightly with a strong, quick bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each be four fingers in quantity, and let the diseased side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the diseased one be suspended above the top of the post, and hold him by his hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong youth to pull on the head of the joint, and let another youth suspend the diseased one, while the other youth pulls the joint with great force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outward part, let the diseased one lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down; and bind the bandage tightly around the injured side and over his feet.
And then place two posts, one at his feet and the other at his head; and then place adjusted posts on each side of the shoulder laid upon which are wrapped wet cloths, so that the diseased one is not harmed by the post being between his arms, to prevent the extension downward from being pulled.
And each minister extends to his part, and the surgeon with his skill completes the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended quickly, and according to this narration, he should lie on his back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with this compression, he extends it from the lower part towards the front.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower part, and he should be raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for him similarly if the shoulder joint is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the shoulder on two boards; and he lies on his face with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no cure.
And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Therefore, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the shoulder reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both arms of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his arm and expands it naturally without difficulty, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust two things and apply a bandage so that the shoulder is not injured in any part; and adhere to the patient resting for three days or four.
Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Now, if you see those marks on the skin, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and dress that area, and gently stretch it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
Then undo that [binding], and have the patient delay in walking on each [affected area] for several days until it is strengthened.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the joint.
The joint can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated towards the outer parts, towards the inner parts, and towards the lower parts more than towards the rear; but it does not dislocate towards the front.
And the sign of a dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to the chest; now you know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is that you command the patient to straighten it, so that they can extend their hand as much as possible; place your thumbs against the side of it, and put your feet between their feet; then press the joint with both your palms, and hold them firmly around the joint with strength, while another assistant extends their foot so that the joint returns to its proper place.
And the sign of recovery for him is that his belly adheres to his ribs without laboriousness.
And then apply a plaster to that and make the belly adhere to the ribs, and then tie those bandages with a cloth for three days or four, and then untie them.
And do not use the method of walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of him to you is unnecessary, now administer a strong extension with bandages as described in the preceding narrative about the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh is sometimes displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely; the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease and equality until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is completely dislocated, you must perform the procedure correctly, and let him have a strong and capable assistant behind him at the middle location of it.
And then place your right hand on the uppermost part of the thigh, and your left hand below the knee at the location of the joint.
Take the leg and straighten it towards your right side, then pull it with both hands towards your left side, and extend it to the left; and press down with your feet on the leg towards your right side as you work.
Do this twice as we have counted.
Then press down with your feet on the leg for the third time while you are at the nail.
Then return it in one attempt or two according to this method, and if you find the leg equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation immediately as it returns.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce the leg as we have recommended, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and fix a board firmly on the ground under the injured part, and place it between the bones, and wrap the area in cloth so that you do not displace the injury.
Then have one assistant hold the patient's limbs, and another assistant extend the leg with his hands or with bandages around the ankle; and then each assistant should pull against the extension on their side, and the board should be placed between the bones of the injury holding it in place so that the body is not pulled away from the area during the extension.
Then the physician should realign the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy limb on the opposite side, as the dislocation will return to its place with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you are sure of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and firmly bandage it with strong bandages, and bind the leg to the board with bandages.
Be careful and guard against the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the ligature upon them is not violent and weakens them greatly.
And apply that for two days or three; and if the ligature has softened, remove it.
And untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is necessary for them to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the displacement will not dissolve and corrupt, and therefore it will not be receptive to treatment.
And if it happens that the abscess needs to be cauterized, you should then administer according to the guidance of the liquid in which our narration proceeds, in another place for treatment and application until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the said foot bones.
Ensure that the one who is dislocated rests with some extension without work; and what is not difficult is easily accomplished.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the two feet, then you should have the patient lie on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and let them be positioned as if they were walking.
And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot on the area that needs to be reduced, and then step on it firmly until it returns to its proper position, so that it appears level and no longer protrudes.
After the pause, place the foot on a board that will support the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a proper and firm structure for three days; then loosen that and allow it to rest from walking for ten days, until it is strengthened and its improvement is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
About the types of dislocation that are caused by injury, fracture, or any such circumstances.
When one of those causes occurs, and you fail in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death results.
And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced over long use, merciful and compassionate, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning, let them use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, but seek help from someone to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, in whom there appears some hope. And then strive to perform the reduction for them as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from the available dry remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you must treat the condition as we have said for simple injuries, dealing with it as has been described for such places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has been preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and most wholesome for your true body you will see these in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
