O, my children, now I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by fulfilling its purpose in it, and through the explanations and clarifications within it; to me it seems that I have made difficult for you to understand this treatise, which is part of the operation as I know it, that is, surgery.
For the practice as I know it is deprived in our region and in our time of everything, except that the science of it has become rare, and its practitioners have diminished; and we find only small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered to such an extent that they contain errors and hesitation, obscuring the intentions of the practice and weakening the power and art.
And it seems to me that I should vivify this treatise according to its order through the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and by presenting the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work as they are with added descriptions and preparation, which is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman is not readily found in my time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and it requires the practitioner to be well-versed in anatomy, which includes knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunctions and separations; having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and arteries, including their number and distribution; and understanding the locations of veins and where they pulsate.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in deed little, and especially in the art of the hand.
This we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not versed in what we have said about anatomy will not be free from error by which men may die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and forget what they know and what they have experienced.
For I saw a physician who foolishly cut into an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died because of it.
And I saw another physician who attempted to remove a stone from a man who was suffering from kidney stones, and the stone was large. He came to him and extracted that stone along with a piece of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
And I had already called to remove that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
And I saw another physician who received payment from a duke of our land to perform surgery on a black castrated man who had a fracture in his chest. Because of the physician's ignorance, he removed the splint over the wound and applied poultices and bandages with strong pressure, without allowing air circulation to the wound.
And he was loosened according to his desires, and then he was relieved, and after some days, he commanded us to loosen the bandage. And thus it happened that the chest and the arm became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and as a result, he found peace and relief from his pains.
However, if corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it ulcerated near the armpit, until the malignancy spread throughout the body of the lord of the manor.
The cause of which is that the malignant cancer is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to spread throughout the entire body, but rather remains in the member that can endure such affliction.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a deed in which there is risk even under the best circumstances.
And I have established this in every place in this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak ill of me and dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave aside terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not betray you: for it is better to remain in your glory, and later in the world and at the end of your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
And I have devoted this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head within, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar things; a chapter ordered about the head within, and of the forms of the instruments.
I will speak about the quality of the actions of that cautery and of its ingredients, and in which condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the action of cautery and its ingredient is long and tedious, subtle by knowledge, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they are disagreed on this matter, but for me, a little of their speeches is enough to avoid prolonging.
Therefore, I say that cauteries conform to all complete formations universally, whether they have material or not, except for two formations, which are tail formations without material.
In the dry tail formation with material, it dries out; for some say that cautery is helpful in this case, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry tail formation with something as hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite are wrong, that by cautery there is help in all dry and tail diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say according to the speech of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But it does not suit someone who has already been taught and trained in the chapter of cauteries by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human formations and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes of those diseases, and their accidents, and the time span of them.
But in the other formations, there is no fear for you, especially in cold and humid diseases, since all doctors are already in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery in such cases.
And you know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness is that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member that is cauterized and does not spread to other members unless it is applied to them, causing only minor harm.
Here is the English translation:
Keep the fire, by its high position and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but cause superfluity. And it is known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it would not be read in my book, at this pause I hide from you secrets about fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and the expulsion process by which you expel diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your thoughts.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from the cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, strength and boils, which cannot tolerate delay due to the fear of malice, which is worse than a small injury entering through the time.
And this does not concern your thoughts, or, children, only the common people and foolish doctors think that for the disease that is cured by cautery, it is not necessary at all times, and they pause at that consequence.
And the reason is not as such that they believe this, because cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which is the cause of the pains.
But keep in mind that cautery is excellent above medicine due to the speed of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has been acquired in it through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return to it, but this applies only slightly.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because they understand it, but because they believe there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause before cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines are ineffective, and at the end of the cause, cauterization is administered, and it proves beneficial then. And now I say here that cauterization is not the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I grasp of the common and excessive practices of foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its superiority in substance.
And they said that the location for cauterization does not matter, which is absolutely not true, for I have already experienced this and found that it works differently on different bodies; in some cases, using gold for cauterization is good and better than using iron as they say. However, when you use fire to melt gold for this purpose, it is not clear how much to use due to the hardness of the gold, and it requires preparation to receive friction. If you place some thin sheets over the flame, the gold will melt from the heat, and in this way, the craftsman can work with it.
And thus is made the cautery of iron, which should be applied gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those of the head among the important ones, so that I alleviate the difficulty for those asking for what they want.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the head for the accidental condition caused by cold and humidity, which are also causes of weakness, rheumatic fluxes called chilblains in the parts of the face and ears that weep, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, as well as generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is as follows: First, command the patient to evacuate their bowels with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and their age and usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a tilted bench so that he rests his head on his hands.
And then place the palm of your hand near the eyebrows on the shaved part of the nose between the eyes. But when the temperature of the middle part has been felt, mark that place with a probe, and then apply the olive cautery, which is made as follows:
And approach him on the side marked for the incision, in such a way that it descends, with which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn him.
And lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of bone already exposed, as much as the quantity of grain in one's palm, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place and leave it for three days.
And then place on the wound a pad soaked in broth and leave it there until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the place with a quadruplex ointment until it is healed.
And when it is said that if the wound remains open, it heals better and is more beneficial, then let the arm be kept exposed.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and that the cautery should be kept until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the depth where it presses firmly on the bone until the bone softens, and this is the method of alpeccati (likely a typo for "alveccati" or similar term) in a small manner: And from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And if the wound has been infected for a long time, it should be treated before it is fully consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery in all cases, only in some people due to a certain method of fear; and one leaves that, in my opinion, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is easily affected by the disruption of continuity as we have testified with other members, and especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and from that one uses it for the benefit of health.
Chapter Second.
Of cauterizing the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, and one uses plasters, poultices, compresses, ointments, baths, and other remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we have described but to no avail from those causes, then consider whether the constitution of the patient's head is strong by nature; and if it is not cold and there is no great tendency towards inflammation, at that time one should cauterize again with another type of cautery after some interval. And then cauterize that spot on the crown of their head with a cautery before the condition becomes worsened. Incise the affected area and expose the amount of bone that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place called "vas," — which is the location where the vein is situated. And approach it in this way, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will thereby come to feel great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And here I shall describe this cautery in its place, for it is necessary that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On the Cauterization of Non-Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When there is severe pain in the forehead area, or persistent pain inside the head, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the sections on diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization is then done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
But if you want to use a burning medicine for cauterization, take a piece of amber and scrape it, then hold the ends of it from both sides. And then you should make an incision at the site of the pain on the temple with a scalpel, carefully so that it is done just below the skin, making it hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with a cloth by tightly bandaging it, and leave it like this for three hours; then loosen the bandage and remove the amber, and let the wound be covered for two or three days; afterwards place something cool over the area until the spot becomes warm.
Let the wound be treated with care until it is healed.
And if you wish, use some of the medicines mentioned in the second chapter on burning medicines.
For the cautery, do it according to this method: make fire for cauterization, and this is its form:
and it is called a clamp with nail tips, for its head has the shape of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
And then apply it to the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered—and rotate the tool gently but quickly.
And if the amount that adheres due to the nature of the tissue is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the site, and leave it for three days; and then apply dry cotton around it, and treat it with care until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the tip of the radius according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cauterization of an ancient ulcer.
When you treat an ulcer as we have described in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white. Place it on the site of the pain along a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly more; then raise your hand once and press it firmly so as not to cut the artery but reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is malformed due to chewing, and that the lizard [likely referring to a muscle] does not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because there is fear in its cutting, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not diligent and experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recollection of the regimen of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
And if you see this illness does not suffice with these cauterizations and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you proceed, administer the cauterizations that we have mentioned in the chapter on the cutting of an artery with a cautery having two edges, and this is a better cauterization and more effective.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery treatment for ear pain.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use cauterization. This is the one called puncta, and this is its form:
And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part. Lead the cautery of the hair removal from the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery reaches those points throughout the ear, and wherever it does, then take care of the places until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of torticollis.
Torticollis, which is cured by cautery, is nothing but a condition caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the type that results from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of torticollis with herbs and purgatives and other remedies, and your treatment does not relieve the condition, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the disease in three places: the first near the ear, and the second a little further from there at the temple area, and the third should be at the junction of the two lips [likely referring to a specific anatomical point].
And pause your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The form of cautery is that you cauterize at the place near the uppermost part of the ear on the right side, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of a thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the substance is consumed.
This is the form of cautery, and it is specific to the surgeon, the form of which is set out above. However, what is more subtle is that there is a little bit of what you see; and it is necessary to use the knife instead of excessive coarseness in this little bit.
And then treat the area with water as it was previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery for chronic apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with water as we have said and your medication does not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: over all the temples of the head; and at one cauterization and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and at one cauterization on the nape of the neck. And the method of the cautery is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and then treat it with water as you have processed.
Chapter VIII.
On the cautery for forgetfulness performed with flame.
It is necessary to give the patient large doses of juniper berries and cleansing pills at the beginning.
And then shave the patient's head completely and place a plaster on the nape of the neck, as described in the chapter on plasters.
And pause at certain points, for that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if the wound is clean it is well; but otherwise, at that moment apply three cauterizations to the rear part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head into the part nearest to the neck. And pause between each cauterization for the thickness of a finger, and then proceed with the next cauterization.
But if you prefer and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cauterization in the middle location; and if you want a stronger effect, then cauterize over both sides.
Then proceed with the healing process; and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped as described previously.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and as we have discussed; then shave the patient's head, and afterward cauterize in the middle part of the head, on both sides of the head, on the rear part, and with three cauterizations along the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to do so excessively and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauterizations along the spine of the back, and finally apply one cauterization inside, just below the shoulder blade, and raise the heat moderately. For one side treat that which is to be healed, and this side let it be olive cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, it is necessary to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the treatment and to use the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gum ammoniac and masticatory substances that purify the brain, for several days before this, along with the improvement of the diet.
And then shave the patient's head, and subsequently cauterize one area at the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the occiput of the patient, and on each corner of the head as well. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize according to the methods I have mentioned, with paralysis and relaxation of the body on the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be olive cautery as was previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11.
On the cautery for melancholia.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess that inclines towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink something that purifies the brain as mentioned previously in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make an incision properly around the circumference, and then place that [incision] in the middle part of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held steady from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more suitable to use an antiseptic ointment made from sheep fat. And warm that [liniment] over the fire with moderate heat as required, which the patient can tolerate when applied. And then apply that [warmed liniment] to the middle part of the head in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this for the patient once a week according to his regimen until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area with small points as needed, but ensure your hand is guided by a properly ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain in equilibrium.
And then place that poultice soaked in ointment or in chicken fat.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization by water descending upon it.
When it is declared by the signs which I have mentioned in the division that the time has come for water to act upon it, then give the patient water that purifies the head from it, and guard against all humidity.
And let him sweat in baths for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that part where the cauterization should be on the head; and afterwards cauterize that part with two cauteries above two temples if it is the beginning of water descending in two eyes, or from one side if it is the beginning of water descending in one eye.
Inciase the area around the cauterization all the veins and arteries that lead to it; and let the cauteries be at a distance in that part, at the latitude of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flowing from him, apply some medicine to that area, as is possible for you.
And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the ligation of them and the prevention of bleeding.
And in some cases, it is cauterized on the neck behind two bones with two cauteries deliberately applied.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and persistent and travel through veins and arteries that appear in a visible part of the head, and it is verified that this is due to cold phlegmatic excess, then cauterize that area with cauteries as we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water descending into the eyes, and one cauterization at the middle location of the head, and two cauteries above two temples, and two cauteries behind two bones in the neck. And if you need an addition, now cauterize that in all the skin of the hand above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter xiiii.
On Cauterization of Nasal Discharge.
When you treat him with what we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit from your treatment, now prepare and give the sick person coriander to drink for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize him with a moderate olive cautery. And then cauterize him with a moderate clove cautery on both eyebrows above the hair slightly.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is the form of the clove cautery.
Chapter .xv.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, now cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you do so, cauterize that above both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand when using the cautery, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
About cauterizing the eyelid when the hair turns white and spreads to the surrounding area.
When the hair of the eyelid turns white and spreads to the surrounding area, causing pain in the eye, cauterization should be performed in two ways: either by burning or by using a combustible medicine.
If cauterization is done with fire, instruct the patient to shave the hairs as others do, making sure they are long and even; and if pain occurs where the hair grows, then wrap the eyes with a bandage so that nothing interferes until new hair begins to grow.
Once the new hair has grown and is even, then instruct the patient to place their head in a warm position, and gently press on the eyelid where the cauterization was performed, marking it in the shape of a leaf, with the beginning of the mark near the hair.
And then place a small piece of egg white or mucilage of flypaper on the eyelid.
And then perform the cauterization, which has this form.
And then cauterize over the marked figure little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the area shaped like a myrtle leaf is thoroughly burned.
And the sign of health in this treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye become contracted and the hair around it raised above the surface of the eyelid.
Then raise your arm and keep it raised for three days, and then pause on the wound edge until the scar is healed. And then take care of it in this way until it is healed.
If the hair returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes inflamed, then perform cautery on it again just as you did initially.
But if the hair is on the lower eyelid, then cauterize it until it rises to its natural position and heals so that the hair does not touch the eye.
But with cautery and a burning medicine, this is what you should order the patient to do: have the hair extended and healed, and then make from cloth a leaf of myrtle shape.
And then take known soap and one ounce of living oil, or something similar, and mix these oils well, applying it quickly so that it is not rubbed; and spread this over the cloth made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and cover the eye wound with albumen from eggs, and have the patient's head in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, as this stinging is like that of fire.
And as long as the burning sensation persists, leave the medicine on your finger and apply it; when the stinging stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; then check if the eyelid has risen properly after washing, and you should proceed with cautery or incision if necessary; but if not, return to applying the medicine to a place where you have not yet applied it until it heals without discoloration.
Then pause over the cut until the pain of the operation is eradicated, and then treat that which has become inflamed or another condition until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard your operation with diligent vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye. And if after some days the eyelid becomes inflamed and any cause of hair growth in the eye, then repeat your medication on the place where the eyelid is inflamed, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then around until it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirror leaf.
And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this you should adjust your treatment.
And the way to treat will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not find success in your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold the head of another person between your knees in such a way that it does not move or shake.
And then place a cut piece of egg white or mucilage of flour on the eye.
Here is the fire for cautery, which has this form:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or the quill of an eagle, at one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
However, the one that is concave is better for this work.
And press the fistula if it is open, and then dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
And then apply the cautery to it, which should be well heated, and hold it there for a short time but do not bring the cautery near the eye or else you might injure your hand or disturb the malady, and then place the cautery on the gums and burn that area.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then apply a poultice around the area and use an astringent inside until it is healed.
But if after these days it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as appropriate according to its chapter.
And this is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which the ancients first described: Introduce into the place of the fistula and insert there something thin with the form of it. And put in there one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand well and with good retention, so that not too much of the pus does not pass by such that the molten lead may reach the wall of it; and cover it upon the wall of the fistula cut off in egg white or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, it is now necessary to administer a tragus of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterization of the Splitting of the Anus.
Often enough, fissures occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, now use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
And the sharpness of it should be according to the fineness of the blade.
Then place that hot cautery carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then treat that with cerotics until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth below there is an abscess and it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks open, and afterwards it becomes old, and pus flows and a fistula forms; if you treat that and it does not improve from treatment, at that time you should cauterize according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place the heated instrument into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand guide it so that the hot iron reaches the base of it; and afterwards do this once or twice. Afterward treat it as we have said for its healing until it is healed.
And if the fistula is severed and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and excise the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterizing the teeth and softening the gums.
When the gums are softened due to moisture and the teeth become loose, if you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the tip of the cautery on the tooth, and afterwards ignite the cautery in the shape of which will be described later; thus, you should place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, guiding your hand slightly so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and afterwards repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Take the patient and wash his mouth with salt water and let him do this for an hour, then stop that, for the bad tooth is rendered firm and the softened gums are strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is pain or numbness in the area, and if you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery or with fire.
Cauterization with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and boil it in iron rust water, then cut cloth and wrap it around the end of the horn. Then immerse the heated horn briefly in cold water, and quickly apply that to the painful tooth before it cools down.
And then repeat that several times until the effect of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the aforementioned horn water, and place that on the painful tooth, then place heated iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's pain.
However, cautery with fire is such that you should attend to the thickness of the tube or iron so that its inner width is sufficient and the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the form it will take, and place that on the tooth with your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain subsides either on that day or the next day.
Take a cautery of that kind which fills the patient’s mouth with good smoke and let him hold it for an hour, then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whom you want for arthritis as much as is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Prolapses.
When prolapses are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicine and you wish to digest them lightly, then you use a cautery whose form is as follows: it has two open ends so that the smoke may escape; hold the cautery by one end and place the ignited part upon the abscess once, or again if needed, until it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and afterwards leave it for three days, and place it over the site again in smoke until what the fire has consumed is renewed.
And afterwards care for it with applications and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of Throat.
When the humors come over the main vessel of the lung, and especially when it is of cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that part near the root of the navel.
And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the navel, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize that area with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And let the cautery be applied in the manner described previously.
And then treat that area with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIIII.
On the cautery for lung diseases and coughs.
When there is cough and lung disease due to cold humidity without fever or consumption and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries above the collarbone in the lower parts of the hollows; and with another cautery at the middle location of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous method.
And if you wish, use a punctate cautery with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which precedes in the section on piercing ear pain.
And let there be punctures between the cauterized areas; and then treat that area with what you have prescribed until it is healed.
Here is the English translation:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of the plica that is at the root of the urethra.
When the root of the urethra is displaced due to moist lubrication and is not fixed during its return because of its displacement within, it usually returns to its place by itself, but then through a slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have witnessed. Therefore, first reduce the displacement, and subsequently lay the patient on his back or on his side; then lift the part which is inside the plica with your left hand fingers if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then use a cautery with two tips; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the part until it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of the cautery will appear when you have cauterized with four tips.
And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus the cauteries number eight.
And then place the cautery over hot salt, and subsequently keep the patient quiet to allow relaxation, and do not move the limb for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the displacement is upward and this is done promptly, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or sharp cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dispersed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On cauterizing the stomach.
When you bleed the stomach, mix and stir the moisture inside so that it extracts from its composition and multiplies rummages within it, and if you continue the methods of treatment without interruption, then at that time the patient should be lying on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and immediately cauterize that area with three cauteries: one caustic below the feet by the width of a finger, and two cauteries below both sides of the first caustic, so that the figure of the cautery forms a triangle; and space them such that they are not too close together to avoid rotting.
And if the depth of the caustic is the quantity of two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
And the figure of the cautery should be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large caustic in the middle of the stomach in this form; and this should be a caustic in the shape of a circle as follows:
And the stomach should be cauterized with punctures for those who are afraid of this type of cautery: mark points on the stomach in the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points; and subsequently treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On cauterizing the inflamed spleen.
When there is pain in the spleen due to coldness or moisture or excessive gas inside it, which causes its normal composition to be expelled through excess egress, and if the patient is treated as we have described without interruption, then at that time the patient should lie on their back with their head raised, and mark three cauteries in this form and quantity over the spleen below the hypochondria, according to the patient's position.
And let there be spaces between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be in length according to the height of the body.
And do not place your hand on the cautery tool.
And if the amount of water adhering is equal to half the specific gravity of the chain, and it should not be more tightly attached; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having already spread out their belongings, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to use this cautery with a knife cautery when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too quickly during the cauterization, and let it adhere with the specific gravity of the entire chain so that the whole body adheres and penetrates into the veins, for here the chain is delicate; and understand this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess in the kidney with a cautery.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the kidney and want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the kidney or in its capsule, then if it is in the flesh of the kidney, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the capsule of the kidney, the pain will be sharp and often exhaust the efforts of the physicians to treat it.
Then place the patient on his back on the couch; and immediately mark the location of the abscess with ink; and then prepare the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which has been shown on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the diseased tissue is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until healthy flesh starts to grow.
And then treat him with the treatment for other abscesses until he is healed.
And it should be used only by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has known many maladies; but this must be attempted several times before daring to perform this operation, but rather leave it to those more experienced, for that is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On Cauterization of Ulcers.
The ancients recommended cauterizing the ulcers with thorns from an artichoke according to this method: take a thorn from an artichoke that is long and thin, about as thick as the middle finger.
And then dip that thorn in oil and heat it over the fire; and then cauterize with a cautery at the location between the clavicle and the neck; and place two small cauterizations below, slightly inclined towards the part under the beard, and two cauterizations inclining between the fifth rib and the waist, slightly inclined to the back parts; and another in the middle of the hips; and one over the stomach; and three at the back parts; and one in the location between the two shoulders; and two on each side of the hips, below the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not think that you should apply your cautery before the swelling has become apparent in its true form.
And just as some ancient authors have said that certain men used to apply a cautery made of iron resembling a sword and fire to it, placing it in the location between the shoulder blades until they reached the abscess so that it was thoroughly cauterized, as we have mentioned regarding the abscess on the testicle.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident occurs at the site of the fistula where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the mole.
When you treat the disease of the mole with what we have said about treatment in division and do not confine your treatment to that alone, then at this time the cautery is done in three ways, all of which are appropriate. One way is to make three or four cauterizations according to the length of the mole, following the figure of the cauterization of the testicle, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be a space of about the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cauterization of the testicle.
And do not apply your cautery before the swelling has subsided; and when the disease is worse, place it on its side.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery with two vertical edges, as we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and raise the swelling that is on the right side where the pain of the disease on the left side extends.
And so raise it as high as you lift the collarbone according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two ends, one ignited, into the opening where they penetrate the collarbone on the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
And then take care of the cautery so that it is not shaken by the arm for too many days, for it may be more convenient than other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Cauterization of Hydrophobics.
Cauteries should not be applied to hydrophobics except in certain specific cases.
When you treat the hydrophobic with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize four times around the navel, once over the stomach, once over the liver, once over the spleen, twice between the vertebrae of the back, once on the right foot, and again once over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the collarbone.
And then leave the cautery undisturbed so that the arm does not move for a long time.
If you do not remove the corrupt matter from the wound before applying heat with water which is appropriate for joining the two edges of the wound, it should be done quickly with the help of healing agents.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a nail as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its preceding description.
Chapter XXXII.
On Cauterization of the Feet and Other Matters.
When the feet are inflamed with hydrothorax and filled with thick water, it is appropriate to cauterize them above the second toe using hot water between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand and do not return it completely, for the thick water will drain.
The cautery should be in this form: And then apply two cauteries to each of the two areas, and on each area use a cautery at the tip of the cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the area: place one below the joint and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area, apply two cauteries.
And leave the wound uncovered for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
And then treat it with the causes we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization of abdominal wounds.
When abdominal wounds are to be treated and the moisture inside weakens the functions, which are the digestive and retentive functions, both of which are in the stomach and intestines, it is cured with these methods of treatment and should not be delayed. If the patient can endure exposure of the affected area, then at times cauterize that area with a strong cautery over the navel as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four small cauteries around the navel, or a small nail-shaped cautery; or on the flanks, use larger cauteries or two cauteries.
And if the excessive moisture is present and the patient can tolerate it, then at times cauterize that area over the hypochondrium and intestines, and gently apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect method of treatment from which you will not deviate.
Chapter XXXIV.
On cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When such conditions arise from the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, they are cured as we have said in the division and should not be delayed. Then cauterize with three small triangular cauteries above the buttocks, and a single cautery above the navel using two of those mentioned.
And if you find that the patient's stomach is weakened and food is not being digested properly, and their face appears inflamed or has an abscess, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and apply one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver using a nail-shaped cautery; leave this cautery for some time, and then treat them internally so they may be healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery of the artery near the extraction of the tooth.
When you extract a tooth, you then use fire to apply the cautery, which resembles a nail. Near the extracted tooth, introduce the fire into it with great care until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the tooth is too sensitive, then cauterize each one as we have described, and afterwards treat them with the appropriate medicine until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the gum, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cautery of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the body in various parts of it.
When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is alarmed by this, it should be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the body that is old and emits foul-smelling pus and corrupted moisture, what should be done first is to probe it carefully, and then determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Then use fire to apply the cautery, which resembles a nail. Then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the depth measured by the probe.
And repeat the cautery until those corrupted parts are consumed once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And guard against burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the bowel, then guard against all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it does not penetrate.
And then treat the place so that it may be healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the substances are absorbed from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely cured.
And if the substances do not come out from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the bone which is corrupted, or it falls into those causes of which there will be memory in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On Cauterization of Fistulas.
When pain in the fistulas occurs due to friction or excessive gas, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each fistula using an appropriate cautery nail for which there will be memory.
And perform the cauterization lightly after a short while, so that three cauterizations are lined up, and thus they will be more effective in treatment.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When it happens that in the bladder there is debility and softening through rubbing and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then you should cauterize at the place where pus flows just above the bladder, namely where the hairs of the pubis begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the pus notes; and cauterize with one cautery at the lower part of the two where the pus is, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a nail-shaped cautery according to the process.
Chapter XXXIX.
On Cauterization of the Urethra.
When there is rubbing and moisture in the urethra, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs upon its occurrence, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and one cautery above the place where the pus is closer to the two sides, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be nail-shaped.
Chapter XL.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
When moisture and effusions occur in the area of the joint, and their causes are due to the displacement from its proper place, and the sign of it is that the swelling extends over the other when they are compared between them. The place for reduction is found where it bends.
Then when you cauterize the malady on the part of the arm, cauterize in a similar manner around the part as it is encircled, and thus that the part may fall to the middle place of the circle.
And let the cautery be of such form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spicitude of the entire wound; and then take care of that which needs to be healed.
Chapter XLII.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the part of the arm, and it is caused by friction and humidity, the malady is cured as we have said without conferring, and this is outdated; now you should purge the malady of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar, and then cauterize it.
And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with combustible medicines or with fire.
It is done according to two known methods, one of which is that you cauterize it on the part of the arm with three triangular cauteries; and do this with good depth. And let the spaces between each cautery be the width of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
And in some cases, the cauteries should be on the top of the head because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize the circle from which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, and let it be a continuous circle and burn the length of the entire bone.
And this is the method of cautery when pain is attached to the joint and does not spread into the surrounding tissue.
But if it spreads into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you direct the malaise that is the pain; and one cautery on the bone, four fingers away from the bony part.
And if the cautery is circular, let the depth of the cautery be according to the length of the bone.
And if the malaise directs that the pain is spreading near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there with a cautery at three points or four or more as you deem necessary.
And if the malaise directs that the pain is below the elbow in the tissue, then cauterize there with one circular cautery.
And be careful in all cauteries that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by this you are guided by the malaise without harm or contraction.
And I saw one and another of those who cauterized upon the nail and ended in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the swelling reached the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And after a strong purging of the bowels, and thus death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said about the cauterization of an area that should be cauterized in this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date bone or somewhat less.
And inside that circle should be another one a third smaller; and the space between them should be the quantity of a pea; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those bars should be the size of a pea or two peas, and make along those edges an iron margin appropriately prepared around the circles; and this is the form of it.
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then it should be paused on the affected area, the malady placed on the skin. And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then let it rest for three days; then bandage that area loosely and leave the dressing in place for more than ten days; and then cure that area with herbs until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have rarely used due to the fear of its consequences, and thus few have found those who oversee it.
Here is the translation:
Take the cautery and medicines as you make two circles using a ruler with a hole, in which fits the grip of an iron door key; let the length of the edges be about the size of two walnuts or whatever suits them.
And if the spaces between each are the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be raised both above and below, and let them fit within each other according to this form:
And place it on the part of the body where the patient is seated, and press your hand on the part of the wound; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quantity of that be from a small fire gradually increasing, and for that amount about one hour, until the patient endures the burning and the sensation — since that biting sensation is like fire — until the burning ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the wound with cool water.
And then let him rest for three days and place it on the border until the darkness of the inflammation is reduced, and let him continue resting for several more days until pus formation begins; this is the proper treatment.
And then care for him with remedies until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or armpit, treat it in the manner described for the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take of alkali and of the egg whites in equal parts one, and mix them and pour into a new bowl of which the lower part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that will enter into use.
And pour below the bottom of the bowl another bowl inverted, and sprinkle over that alkali and quicklime with water drawn to a lye, which takes them at one finger’s breadth, and when you perceive them warm by good compression, and let the hole through which the sharp water descends from the lower part of the inverted bowl.
And then concentrate all that water, and sprinkle it over another quicklime and fresh alkali, because at those times it will have great strength, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, as this operation does with fire.
And similarly with some medicines with which it is cauterized widely, such as vinegar and honey mixed with natron and quicklime, so that they are mixed.
And Gaul described the operation and cure for treating pain in the sciatic nerve and vein of a person from ancient times, and praised it greatly as being very effective, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that once treated in this way, one is healed permanently as recommended, since lightly treating it in a bath and with these methods has already proven sufficient.
And it should be applied near the affected area, and if not green, a fresh fig should be used; mix it with a little flour and apply it to the limb where the pain is, or on the buttock, or on the hip, and bandage it.
And let it remain for three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels comfortable with the application.
Then lead him to bathe, and when his body is soaked, immerse him in the soil, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Galen says that when the vein is cauterized with the skin of a kid goat, it benefits the child greatly; and this is how the cautery should be applied: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and the bones.
And then take dry kid goat skin and burn it over fire until it turns to charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it spread out. And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the limb and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cautery for Tooth Pain
Sometimes tooth pain occurs due to various causes, such as from a cavity or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
And cautery is not used for any other condition but this one, which is done by the application of corrosive matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter with pills and similar remedies, place the cauteries on the tooth in which the pain is located three lines away according to its latitude. Then apply ten cauteries or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the remedy.
And let cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four, using the middle nail-shaped cautery in this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
This disease often affects small children; the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their limbs, where there are elevations and movements.
And you will notice in the last vertebra of the back and in those that are beginning to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery in this form: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And let the points be spaced apart from each other.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
But be careful not to administer cauterization in chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.
When pain in the joints is caused by the rubbing of humors that are infused into each member of the body, usually doctors then call upon opodragua properly.
And thus, when the gout is cured due to rubbing in a manner of treatment and not by removing the pains, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is when you cauterize that area of evacuation near the joint of the foot with burning.
And this is an olive-shaped cauterization, which has this form:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then make a point cauterization. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you often find this necessary, then cauterize there above each toe with three cauterizations or four from all sides with this olive-shaped cauterization.
And if you are to cauterize, that these cauterizations be necessary for you, then cauterize there and do not press too hard with your hand before the cauterization, but only around the specificity of the spot.
And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauterizations which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the sole, and it is called podagra, then puncture around the toes as it revolves, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the mentioned areas, then puncture around the toes on each toe and on the palm.
And if the pains come near every day to the joints or to the muscles, then cauterize the places on all parts of the helpers.
And if you do not evacuate the malady by good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done well with regimen and phlegm is evacuated in this way, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you find a fracture in the thighs and the intestines are exposed in front of the wound, and this begins from nearby, then it is necessary that you order the patient to abstain from food on their usual day and use laxatives so that the passage will start from their belly.
And the patient should then follow you closely on their side, and command them to keep their body turned so that it is forced to lie flat or the wound or intestines appear.
And then return to explain it to them and show how to locate the fracture on the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
so that it is round and emits sparks. And then reduce the intestines or wound to their original position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestines do not dry out.
And you have already placed padding between the joints of the patient and leave one joint supported, another on the thighs of the patient, and another on the feet of the patient, which should be kept in place.
After the pause of the cautery on that mark, hold the cautery straight and enter with it where you can reach the bone of the fingertip within the joint; and repeat on that other side if you did not succeed in the first attempt to reach the bone.
Observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or another great harm come to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
And it should be that the cautery for children is delicate according to their age and size.
And afterward, treat the site of the cautery for three days with a dressing until the burn scar has healed.
And afterward, treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the wound healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the duration of the healing period during which the intestines are weak, so that the bowel does not protrude due to excessive strain.
And afterward, when it is time to remove [the dressing or restraint] after forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that in place for another forty days.
And let the patient avoid work and overeating of food and drink, and loud speaking, for when using this complete regimen of healing, they will be healed.
This is about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, when you do not want to delay, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and it should be as wide as one-third of it; then treat that area as we have said, and no adjustment is necessary.
And some earlier practitioners said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
and draw a line horizontally across the navel above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first mentioned cautery is faster and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Twists.
When pain occurs in some members due to falling or impact and persists for a long time without being relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its nature and condition, and the location of the twist and pain.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the procedure with the cautery. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured from one member to another nearby one, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On cauterization for leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cauterization, but it is not effective for the type of leprosy that arises from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured by what we have mentioned in the division [of cases], and do not proceed unless this is confirmed. You must also be cautious about the possibility of corruption spreading throughout their body and entire complexion. Then cauterize them on the head with a hot cautery: one at the middle part of the head, and another below it near the forehead; place two on each side of the temples; and one at the back, either on the nape or in the hairline.
Finally, press the cautery a little into the skin so that it leaves a small indentation and displaces the scaly layers, thus allowing the expulsion of thick vapors to be eased. Cauterize over the affected areas as required.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifested, then you should cauterize those areas with the cauteries mentioned for the head; one on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on each side of the neck vertebrae, six along the spine, one large one near the waist, one on the waist itself, two on each thigh, one on each ankle, two on each wrist, and two on each muscle and tendon of the feet; also cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, as well as each heel and the elbows.
And guard against the nerves, especially those on the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pubis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and appropriate they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the nature of the tools used.
And properly apply the cautery with flour of oats mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until he is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On Cauterization for Inducing Stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb.
And let the heat of the cautery enter deeply into the skin a little. And properly treat that area with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes numbness in certain areas is cauterized, such as those affecting the thighs and hips, and along the vertebrae of the back, and also the points where the nerves that govern that limb are located, to relieve the numbness.
One should not attempt this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that become indurated.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize over them, and precede this with a little according to the quantity of the substance inside until the whiteness and color change.
And then apply that which is made of flour of oats and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of dove or the blood of roe deer, a part of each, and all are mixed together, and then place a cloth on it until it heals.
Chapter L.
On cauterization of cancer.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize around it in a circular manner as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with a hot iron in the middle; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is more appropriate to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Chapter LI.
Of cauterization for abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturing, and this is due to the excess of phlegm present there, or because of the patient's condition, being old and debilitated with little blood, or because of the time; then if you wish to hasten its maturation, cauterize around it slightly with a small pointy cautery; and immediately let that which will hasten its maturation be applied.
But if you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then you take the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the core.
And if the cautery is applied to a place that is farther away, so that the arm may be spared; and then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of cauterization for corrosives.
A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see the corrosive in a place where it can tolerate heat from fire, then use cautery with small pointed instruments and larger ones as is appropriate for the location of the corrosive.
And then cauterize it thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for recurrence.
And then apply treatment for three days, and pause over the cauterized areas thrice daily with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
Regarding the treatment, apply a dressing that generates flesh.
If after three days the flesh is born healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then cauterize again over that which is rotten in the corrupted places.
And corrosive is the treatment with certain sharp medicines, for that one serves as an alternative to cauterization. However, cauterization with fire is quicker in producing relief.
And now I have described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and so take that when you see an indication for it.
Chapter 53.
On Cauterization of Nails and Other Similar Areas.
Often in the lower parts of the foot there is a malady called a nail, which is hard and protruding, causing pain; and cauterization in these cases can be done in two ways, one with fire and one with hot water.
However, cauterization with fire is done by heating the cautery, which should be concave like a ring, made of iron according to the size that contains the nail on all sides, and it should be smooth.
And then place the heated cautery on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days until pus begins to discharge. Make a plaster with wild mallows torn apart with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, for that will eradicate its roots.
And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if you do not convert it, and spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with water. Take a small tube made of earth or iron or copper, and place it over the wound; then pour some hot water into the tube, and hold it tightly so that you compress it with your hand all around, and let the edge of the tube touch the root of the wound. The hot water will flow towards the point of the root; wait a little for the scalding effect of the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, for the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this with each of them in turn until you cover all the places where they appear on the body.
And then treat the pus where the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with the water from the ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery of trembling.
When you find that someone trembles due to friction in the nerves or from a fever caused by friction, or from some similar cause, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one caustic; and at the joints of their feet, and above their stomach, use an olive-shaped cautery.
And when the shaking subsides, hasten the health of the patient by friction.
Chapter 14.
On the cautery for various accidents to the body.
When on the body there appear various eruptions, and so pustules and fissures which are formed from gross, corrupted matter; then it is necessary at the beginning as appears to me, that it be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended towards the fire; or with razor blades of erestologia (a type of reed); or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is applied immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not considered excessive, and the superfluity causing those conditions is dispersed, thus healing them.
But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation or phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On the cautery for bleeding accidents due to cutting of an artery.
Often when an arterial bleed occurs due to the cutting of an artery because of the plague that is within, or near the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and in similar cases, it is difficult to remedy that.
Then when such a situation occurs, immediately place your finger at the orifice of the artery, and pause over it with your warm hand until the bleeding of the blood stops, and ensure it does not continue.
Take out of the fire some olive cauteries, both small and large, in number, and blow upon them until they are lit.
Take from them one small or large depending on the location and the condition in which the artery is ruptured, upon that vein quickly before you have bent your finger, and hold the cautery until it is heated and constricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those which are in the fire and prepared, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is then impossible to constrict the blood in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or apply traction when it has not been done, for when it is done, the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or bind it with honey or a binding agent due to its strong structure, or place it on medicines whose effect is to restrict the blood; and tighten it with padding and appropriate constriction.
But he who administers appropriate constriction with binding and tightening with cloths or by placing it near burning objects and similar methods should do so cautiously.
But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine available, then carefully place your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that with great pressure within, the blood should be stopped from flowing out of the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over it until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On cutting and piercing and about phlebotomy and plasters and their similarities.
In the first chapter, we have already discussed all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and medicines that promote combustion, as well as the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters on the subordination of the head among the parts.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the reader may be praised for understanding what has been asked about.
And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter what is discussed is similar to what was covered in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great caution is required, because in the operation discussed in this chapter many precautions must be taken regarding bloodletting from veins that sustain life, whether by applying pressure to stop bleeding after an incision on an abscess or opening an exit for pus or cleaning a wound or extracting gravel or starting a stone and similar procedures. And with all of these there accompanies fear and trembling, and in most cases their mistakes lead to death.
And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, because some cases depend on your methods of dealing with people and many types of diseases. And among them are those who become enraged by their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they experience from their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and the illness itself brings about fear which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives you his property and says, hoping for that from you health, and the woman's illness is fatal.
And therefore it is not fitting that you consent to him who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause about this without certain knowledge which verifies what belongs to you, and to whom by succession the commendable praise.
And use in the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that is your helper concerning acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your mind and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it preceded in the chapter of cauterizations, of the cure of the head among the chest issues, so that you may be pleased with what you seek regarding this and what you need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often afflicts children after birth when the nurse presses the child’s head too hard.
And sometimes it afflicts for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appeared to me as a deadly work in them.
I saw that a child had their head filled with water, and the swelling of their head was so great that a king could not place a crown on it because of the size of their head, and more than that, the moisture caused further enlargement until it became fatal.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the skull.
For if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with a split in its length, and let the length of the split be about two fingers wide so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the cut:
And if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then at this point there are two incisions made in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from the outside to the inside, and it does not return immediately. You should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
and immediately extract all the moisture; then close the incisions with strips and bandages; then apply ointment made of wine and oil starting from the fifth day, and then loosen the bindings and treat the wound with soft cloths and herbs; then cover the head evenly; and manage the illness with dry food having little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers the location and collection of water in the abscess, for sometimes it is better at the occiput or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of fluid, and proceed accordingly as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and let blood flow, for the illness may be cured by that outflow of blood along with the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When dealing with catarrhs or rheums in the legs or feet, and if this is an old condition, and if the cure cannot be achieved by medicine alone, then the last resort in such cases is to incise those two arteries.
And therefore, when you wish to incise those arteries that the patient uses to touch their head, first rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; then secure the patient's neck with a cloth. Next, feel for the pulse of the vein; these locations are near where the ears would be if they were lower down, and in some people they may be hidden.
And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then incise each one with a sharp knife, making an incision that penetrates slightly into the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatum before the artery and cut it where it branches above.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, the blood spurts out in a pulsating manner, which comes forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear in the incision, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sign it with your finger, and make an entry into the bone.
And the amount of blood to be let is a quantity of one vi uncie, and it should be more or less depending on what appears regarding the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the condition, and if there remains on the bone any cause of swelling, now cut that so it does not become an abscess from cauterization.
And then strengthen the condition with poultices and bandages of cloth, and afterwards treat it with medicines until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from severe headaches or sharp pains due to excessive moisture in the membranes of the temples or hardening similar to that, and is not helped by medicinal treatments, then we resort to the extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
Of the method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shave the hairs which are in the temples; and understand to the artery apparent in the temple where it is shown to you by its hair, and is hidden only in few men by vehemence of rubbing.
And if it is hidden from you, then tie the head of the patient with some cloth; and afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly. And now you take the spatum which has this form: And then you cut the skin with that which is easy until you reach the artery; and then place it where you intend and extract it to the parts above until you extract it from the skin and reveal those of the tunics which are beneath it, from every part.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the point where it needs to be joined, and then cut a part of it according to the quantity by which the ends need to be lengthened or contracted, and there will not be any bleeding, for if they are not cut as such, the blood will not rise properly.
And then remove about one ounce of blood up to three ounces.
And if the artery is large, then make sure you tie it in two places with strong silk thread doubled or with long cords, and do not allow it to rot before the consolidation of the wound and prevent any bleeding.
And then cut the excess that is between the two ties; do this at that hour or shortly after.
And if you wish, cauterize that which must be cauterized inside the bone which must be cauterized with a knife entering where the extremities of it are incised, and let it remain in place of that part which is to be worked on.
And it is better to perform the procedure if the patient has a fever or is of overheated complexion; for cautery helps to eliminate excessive moisture, and thus is more beneficial in such conditions.
And it is appropriate for the removal of arteries to fill the empty space with pieces of cloth, and place them on powder that has been properly prepared, and nearby apply dry medicines that help flesh grow and use poultices until it is healed.
And if during the procedure there is a sudden flow of blood from the artery, then you should act to stop the bleeding, either by cauterization, or by filling the space with cloth, and press firmly until the blood is stopped. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is constricted, and apply the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and press as necessary.
And what is quicker in the removal of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two probes, after you have marked the two spots with thread, and then place some material that ignites within until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein at two points, so that it stretches what is between the extremities, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And so let the sharpness of both blades be tested. However, if the sharpness of one instrument is better than that of two blades, because even though they are very sharp like two blades, it approaches each incision without cutting the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of the fire should be applied to it, and the flesh should be excised quickly.
And this method is better than all other methods and faster.
And let the space between two blades be the width of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, it is due to the condition of those veins which are above the head, and if no cause for treatment with medicine is found in this, the face of the sick person may become red, and a feeling like ants crawling can be felt on their forehead. The eyes from that point become very tired, and the moisture in them becomes so noticeable that even the hair around the eyelashes can be seen clearly. The eyelids are burned by the sharpness of the tears, and in treating this condition, ancient practitioners often used a specific method which was quick to effect.
And what you command is for the sick person to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of each incision is about two fingers: one incision should be made evenly in the middle of the forehead at a distance equal to the length of the nose, and the second according to the length slightly toward the direction where the tears flow from the lacrimal area, and the third on the opposite side.
And guard against the beginning of the arteries, which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dried cloth with which you can dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the form of the incision as follows: which is from the edge of the plate to the second incision. Excise from there all the tissue that is between two incisions at the cifrad (a term likely referring to a specific anatomical location), and then make this median incision to the second incision. And then stretch with this spatula and insert into the first incision another tool called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp side against the adjacent flesh and the curved side within the bone, and insert it until you reach the median fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the thighs.
But ensure that the incision continues along the appearance of the tissue, and then make this in the median fissure to the other fissure.
And when the flow of blood is moderate, press the areas where the clotted blood has collected.
And then place in each fissure small pieces of old cloth, and apply powder mixed with vinegar, oil, and sweet wine over them to prevent an abscess from forming.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer great infusion of hot water or thyme, and thereafter treat with an ointment of basil and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of headaches through catharsis and the expulsion of humors from the inner parts of the head.
When you encounter acute and continuous bloodletting, and sometimes the patient's humors are weakened and small, and if their condition shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and there is severe pain in the temples of the head along with extreme dryness, then from these signs you should understand that the matter and catharsis do not come but from veins located in the inner parts.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision in the middle of the forehead (beginning from the left temple towards the right temple; this incision should go through the bone; extend your hand between the temples where chewing muscles are located), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with hot oil or lint. And then apply powder mixed with oil and vinegar on top to prevent the formation of an abscess or sore.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover it by rubbing the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and thereafter treat it with a drying regimen that promotes new flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of aloes wood powder, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture to be applied to these wounds until new flesh forms.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant, such as thorns or beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine or their like, or some animal.
And when a stone or any other cause similar to those mentioned affects the ear and causes pain, expose the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip into it some substance like violet oil or cumin oil, and shortly afterward administer its extraction under certain conditions, and make them sneeze by inducing a condition, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing. And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upward to the sides, as movement over several days is helpful in dealing with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with an instrument called a gentle epistome, which has the following form:
And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a fine piece of linen through gentle pressure.
And if it is not expelled by any of the above methods, then make a tube of reed and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube. From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
If it is not forced in this manner, now take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught, a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap around that part properly placed. And then insert it into the passage of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
And if it is not forced by all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to cut that part before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting that part is that you first puncture the malady of the vena sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of its nature, and then make it cut between your fingers and turn the ear toward the upper parts, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it is most pressed. And let the incision be of a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the incision at that moment quickly, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the grist that grows and becomes inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed accordingly, then take some fine cotton according to this form: and administer the removal of that grain which is lodged in the ear.
If you do not want to use water when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the atmosphere, place it in several places, and press out from those at the joints or with fine strokes, or as we have said about incision, for pressing out is gentle.
In the water that has entered into the ear, it is useful for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning with certain conditions, and fill his own ear with some old cloth, and place over that ear in which there is the water. If this causes it to be expelled by force, it is good; if not, then take small pebbles or stones according to the length of a finger, and heat those in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of them into the tragus of his ear and jump on that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is inside the ear. Do not remove the stone inside until all the water has been expelled.
Do not remove the stone inside until all the water has been expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way that you take paper or tow, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until most of it is burned.
And place another piece of tow and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and press it with a cannula as was said above about removing the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into that ear, if it is a small object, treat it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with strokes and by pressing at the joints, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confer your treatment, now you must guard the ear from the sun.
And therefore if any cause of the worms appears, now extract them with gentle movements or subtle instruments; but if no cause appears, now take a cannula below narrow and above wide, which has this shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the quantity that suffices for the patient; and then suck it out with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are removed.
But if you do not follow the instruction, now plug and seal around the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, and you will find this in the chapter on distillations.
And make your application with the instrument with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, and this is the shape of it: And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And therefore it should be like pressing against the curvature of the cannula where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap the end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth on top and press it with your hand moderately so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And let that which is to be inserted into the ear be already heated over the fire a little. And be careful that the cause for which you will distill into the ear is not too harsh, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal which cannot be seen, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear, which cannot be seen, is in the most difficult conditions to heal.
And in that case where you can see it, make sure to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
If the end of it where it is narrow, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should have two blunt edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine scissors and cut it firmly but gently until all the flesh is removed.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, now take a thin reed and heat that in fire for a little while, and then put that into the ear canal.
And if you find an obstruction with what the patient finds difficult to hear due to hearing difficulty, exert pressure on it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wax that you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the obstruction; or take something and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle finely powdered substances over it and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, now you should extract what you used and replace it with another thing that you wrap in cerotic wax mixed with rose oil until the inflammation subsides; and then care for it until it is healed.
But if there is a bleeding, now soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the blood flow, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of stitches that occur on the eyelids.
Stitches that occur on the eyelids sometimes appear moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have those available in small containers or jars, and then scrape off the scabs with a spatula, and then sprinkle finely powdered substances over the affected areas.
If pain and bleeding come from a vein, then at that moment you should cauterize those that can be cauterized with a fine cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and troops that return when there remains any cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for an ailment that affects the eyelids.
Recurrent conditions that occur in the eyelids due to some cause that is similar to a severe ailment in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called severe.
And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the procedure in such cases is to consider at that moment whether the ailment has appeared on the surface of the eyelid and affects it entirely; and the cause of this is light.
Therefore, place something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it entirely with ease until you can see clearly, and then suspend it with an ointment and cover it.
And if the condition is severe, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is mild, you will not suffer harm from it because the warmth of the treatment restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should apply a compress to the inside, thereby suspending the swelling until it subsides, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid due to incision is elongated, this is not noted as a cause for concern.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that will heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of abscesses above the eye on the eyelid.
Abscesses are more common in the tissues above the eyelid, and particularly among children, they worsen the eyes of those affected and lead to their weakening; and they cannot bear the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate for them.
And for this reason you see them holding their hands over their faces all the time, and they sleep with their hands over their faces; and thus their eyelids are covered by moist eyebrows, which have been overshadowed by inflammation, and the likelihood of an abscess is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel tenderness there.
And one method of treatment is for the patient to rest their head in your lap, then place a cloth over it and apply cold to it; make a circle according to the size that contains arternach from all sides, and then place this on top and press with your fingers from all around so that an abscess forms in the middle of the circle; and afterwards drain the moisture within using a spatula inserted along the length of the incision, ensuring that the incision is not larger than what would be made in phlebotomy.
In the main incision cut through the skin completely until you reach the gristle, for in major dislocations you will expose the gristle by a cleft according to the form of white parchment.
Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths between your fingers from the sides and roll it between your right and left hands until it is spread out.
And be careful not to insert anything into the cleft so that you do not reach the bone with it and damage it.
But if the tendon does not appear at the beginning of the cleft, then insert into the cleft a small probe until you find the tendon; and then extract it as we have said; and then immerse cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the area and sprinkle with powder.
And some people sprinkle salt and apply it to the bottom of the cleft so that what remains is dry.
And then care for it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then care for it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of palpating the bone.
When in the eyelids of the bone there grow hairs inserted below the natural hairs and when these cause sores to the bone, they can lead to various ailments such as continuous tears and inflammation of the eyelids and membrane, which is called palpating the bone, and it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or with canes as I will explain.
And thus when you place the head of the patient in the bed; turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into that which is pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the pus above, and this — near the edge of the eyelid from where the hair grows — near the hair, and pull out the pus in the parts above with the eyelid, and turn it to the light.
And then apply to the part inside of the eyelid below the hair attached to the inclined spatum of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small dust of wood or cloth, and then press upon the eyelid with a probe, and it shall be as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it should be the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, since there are those whom you need to incise a large amount from the eyelid according to the extent to which the eyelid is swollen.
And then apply to the spatum along the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal. And if your fissure near the natural hair is as thick as the king's.
And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the chain, and then excoriate that entirely, and then attach to the cut the two lips with a thread or fine wool lint, and remove the blood, and make adhere what you consider superfluous from the pus on two eyebrows with some adhesive causes if you want to do this, and if not, do not worry.
About three or four days after sewing up the wounds, begin to care for them with water.
And if you wish to treat the wound without suturing, care for it with water that dries and constricts, as the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of tissue; however, suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
But rather than being worried about the outcome, act with good technique, and do not be fearful.
And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small separated and gathered incisions made according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do this with the incisions alone, then take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the figure, and insert the other suture near the larger tear duct, and the second suture near the smaller tear duct, and adjust them between these sutures with equality, and then lift your hand evenly, lifting the entire marked area as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with the suture, and care for it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
And sometimes you will find that the eyelid's hair is reversed, in which case you should proceed as we have described for incision; however, suturing is often more artificial.
Make flutes according to this form: and so that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure as it is inside, as I have recounted; and then make two flutes or two slender sticks whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which should be slighter than the width of the pupil. And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the flutes of each section with strong binding, and leave it for several days, because the excess will die due to the constriction and be rejected, and it will soften until you can remove it.
But if it is delayed, now break it with force, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
When it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two flutes which you will make according to this form: and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye with Forceps When the Hair is Firm.
When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough, that sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine forceps with a delicate curved point, and adjust the ends of it carefully and grip each hair in a subtle manner. And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
And below that, prepare another fine layer briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
And then place the patient's head under a canopy, and position it towards the sun so that your work is visible, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires removal, and quickly guide it through the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into an opening, and let there be one, two, or three hairs but no more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is pulled out from the opening in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled from the opening and the hair is not removed, pull the opening to the sides towards the layer you have prepared, so that it releases the eyelid sufficiently.
And look at it with the eye, for now you will pull out the opening and the layer, and tie each one securely, leaving them tied for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows back on that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it, and elevate it with that, or leave it until it grows longer over some space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When an abscess occurs in the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine. This type of abscess can be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar mishandling.
The method for the operation is that you should cut open that consolidation and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
And you should not use treatments that dry out the abscess or constrain it; for if you do this, the abscess will return worse than before and will never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften the abscess, such as fenugreek; you can boil the seeds and leaves in water or use juice from dill, which should be mixed with some oil to make it liquid, then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture for treatment.
The goal of your treatment is to ensure that you open any area that has not properly healed according to its original form at the beginning.
And this operation we have described is merely a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of ehacrati which is done on the eyelid below.
This ehacrati which is done on the eyelid below, which is truly called ehacrati; and some of it is natural, others are accidental.
The accidental one is caused by plague or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which you make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh in the parts above the needle and cut it around the needle with a broad spatula. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a spatula and place it in the incision, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two openings be from two angles of the incision that you have made where they meet, and let their formation create an angle such that when they come together, a shape is formed.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there in the amount of the width below it, which dries the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat those as we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if you need to incise, either through a cut or suture or cautery, then at this time it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat knife along the edge of the eyelid as was previously described. And then separate the fat between two layers as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as was prepared for the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various patterns.
And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way that is possible within them to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some people such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, lift it up with it, or extend it to the side.
And then you should incise the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp to avoid cutting, keeping it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula carefully to avoid injuring the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
And so you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in the place of rose dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a probe, and place on the wound wool infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing agents until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the formation of swelling and elevation of flesh in the area of the tear ducts.
Know that swelling occurs in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard and fine knot; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched by a probe either allows the probe to enter easily without obstruction, or it is divided and the probe is not inserted into it.
And both types do not begin except from the larger tear duct, gradually spreading to cover the eye and preventing light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working on the swelling is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the swelling with a probe by slight pressure and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong thread, and duplicate the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the swelling, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind with thread the swelling; and extend it to the upper parts, and scratch with the hair the edge of the swelling which is near the pupil. And thus you should follow with the skin into the rear part of it.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by this incision there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is applied with the sun once extended or with glue, as we have said, and then it should be removed with a lion's spatula, of which this is the shape:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not become torn, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or cotton made of silk in it, and leave that for another day; and then treat that with what is needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it placed in that way before, then this kind of nail should be treated with medicines, and it heals as mentioned and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the patient and take a fine spatula made of steel with sharpness according to this shape: with finesse. And if you find that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your eye into the wound with silk or linen or powdered salt, and dress the wound for another day.
And then proceed with the operation until everything that is inside has been removed, except for the opposite abscess which is in the groin, because if you leave that one, treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
And then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
If the lacrimal flesh protrudes in the groin causing great harm, suspend it at that point; and incise part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then instill in the lacrimal chief root some medicine made of myrrh until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of hemorrhoids and of what is born from flesh tightly joined in the groin.
In some cases in the groins of certain individuals, protruding flesh forms, and it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids, forcing the eyelids to bulge outward and is assembled like a balustrade's edge.
The operation there is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the groins of that person and collect all that flesh at appropriate points with forceps or a probe; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scissors, and be careful not to damage the groin during your operation.
And your incision should be with the scalpel we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is extracted, depending on the form that will come next in this chapter.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is swollen, now fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle over it powder of quicklime and similar to that of corrosive medicines, and apply a bandage over it made of cloth that is safe from abscess and cautery.
And if for any reason there is danger of the wound becoming infected or inflamed and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat the abscess with whatever remedy will cure it, and when it has healed proceed with the operation again until it is healed, and similarly do this for the surrounding tissue which may occur in wounds of this kind.
However, you must be careful to remove all foreign matter from the wound naturally or accidentally using instruments, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge regarding wounds.
Know the veins that run over the wound and avoid operating on them, and allow the wound to heal over a period of days.
At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which the swelling occurs is strong and if there is no other illness but swelling, then you should collect that swelling.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins for one hour or two according to your discretion; and let that hour be of subtle double duration according to this form:
or two hours gradually in one session according to this form:
And if those veins are bound tightly with fine ligatures and the blood is drawn off little by little, until those veins become flattened and empty.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood pure green or red wine because of its sharpness to dissolve what is thickened by cold.
But if it is not possible for you to do this at that hour, then apply everything with something that alleviates the pain, and let him rest for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of no abscess forming.
And then repeat upon him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute burning medicine, as was described and not healed, then do not allow pus to form in it but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is in it and the debris until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
He is called the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by lime or acid etching with subtle puncturing (as in the following form).
Place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand gently little by little so that you know the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with astringent and drying agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed or forming an abscess and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, now there is no generation but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose one side of the bone with forceps or an acute instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then you take three points according to this form:
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should be gradually tapered towards the tip as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a bit to the side, and then rotate your hand with the forceps until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain because he feels air escape when you do this.
Now treat the area with astringent and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Thus when the flesh and the place have hardened, at that time the matter which was flowing out to the parts outside returns to the nose, therefore it is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in vision, then you should allow the patient to rest, and afterward apply windy poultices to the head without incision and use proper suction; then apply a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla around the eye; then strengthen the plaster over the eye with powder.
And the method for making the powders is to take lion's skin strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; then make the powder from these strips.
And then apply those one over the other according to the amount that the eye requires. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth tightly bound; and repeat the windy poultices with suction without incision; then remove the poultices and let the eye rest day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament becomes softened, then it should be tightly bound.
And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if you see the eye already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and the windy poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal layer.
When you detect disruption in the uveal layer, and it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a human, and you wish to incise it, then proceed with the operation as we have described: insert the needle into the outline of the uveal layer from below and above, and similarly place another needle at the double thread near the lacrimal part, allowing the first needle to follow its position; subsequently, cut along the double thread and lift that portion of the uveal layer around the needle, and strengthen that movement.
Then withdraw the needle and place it on the woolen cloth infused with egg white, and allow it to remain there until the thread adheres to the uvea.
Then treat the wound with what will strengthen it until the injury is healed.
And in some cases, apply a circular piece of cloth around the wound to fit the prominent area, and then pierce it with a fine needle so that it adheres to the wound, and let the albuminous moisture run through, and the wound will heal quickly.
Then strengthen it so that it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of contusions.
This illness, called alconati, is not actually a wound but rather a condition that appears on the skin, resembling water descending, though it is not actual water.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not descend lower, know that it is water.
And if the preparation for descending what we have mentioned with water is not done, now make the patient sit and take fine spatha and apply it over the conjunctiva near a little above the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea at the circumference (entering inside), until the pus is discharged.
Once it is discharged, now you should instill warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which is suitable to puncture, as explained earlier, now do so according to the health status.
Now it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and lift their eye with a gentle force.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their eye if the water is in the left eye; or with your right hand if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the instrument, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the instrument near the circumference for the thickness of the membrane in the white of the eye from the inner corner, and then press the instrument gently and rotate your hand with it.
And so penetrate into the white of the eye, and feel that the almond is already reached because it has turned away.
And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, and it is the rim of the eye; for you will see with that pupil the appearance of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And so place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down into another space nearby, and thus if the fluid descends immediately, you will see the defect upon which his vision rests immediately, and the almond in its eye.
And then pause for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you should press that other space before the almond is displaced.
And when it has hardened and does not descend, now you extract the almond with ease, and rotate it little by little; then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the fluid and irrigate the eye with that solution. Then place a patch over the eye made of cotton or lint infused in rose oil and egg white, and secure it to the eye with that.
But we and those of our time prefer to place that compress on the eye with egg white.
And if you cannot introduce the instrument into the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard for this reason—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, of which this is the form:
And so pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not stop your hand in the trauma, but only to make a way for the almond to move to a subtle location.
Then he should introduce the probe as we have said.
And when you have completed the treatment of your patient, prepare a dark room for him where he can sleep on his back, and prevent all movements.
And pause in the nature of water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to his condition on the third day.
Then remove him from that dark room and show him a weak light, and let him see some objects, and then re-bandage him on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the hour of treatment or immediately after infusion. But you should delay this because the water needs to flow freely and quickly due to great and violent swelling.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to allow the abscess to drain.
Now you can uncover his eyes and pause the treatment on the side of his mouth through which he has been breathing for several days while in the dark room.
And then gradually move him out of that room and converse with him about his condition.
And remember that in surgery, the apprentice is not exempt from seeing some things, and now you should be bold about the operation.
And I have come to us from some of those who are experts in it, and some said that fire is made in the Airac with a hole made in it through which steam comes out.
But I myself have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of perforation for those who do not know them:
And they are made of horn or properly of iron, and their extremities are made with this fine triangular shape, the sharp end just as it is in the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that are attached, some of which have causes similar to a spider's web made of thick threads, or to a sea polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that sea creature. And it is cancerous flesh, pale and dark in color; and there is flesh that resembles a lion's but is not dark in color.
Therefore, for the one who has these flesh growths that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, make the patient sit between your hands and expose the nose to the sun, and starve the nose, and pierce it gently with a needle in those areas. Then extract that from the parts inside, and then carefully cut away what you have grasped of those with a sharp, fine spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason by which separation is possible, then remove it with one of the fine instruments easily until there is no more remaining for any reason. If the master has control over the bleeding or if an abscess is affected, then wait for what is appropriate; but if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that which should be severed from the blood and let all cavities be opened.
And it should be inserted in the nose near the incision with water or vinegar. If the nose is swollen and the process of humidity extends into the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh over the pus-filled bones of the nose to which the abscess has not spread.
Then it is appropriate to insert some thickened substance, and use walnut shells, placing between each shell the quantity of a finger or less, and create a passage and insert one end of the substance into the nose either with a needle or for another reason that is possible.
And once this has been done, let the smell of it be drawn into the channels of the nose and let it be applied to its gums, for those who are accustomed to such an action do it as easily as children in school, and it is a light cause for one who wishes to perform it.
And then place the two ends of the substance, one end protruding from the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and subsequently apply a layer of flesh over the walnut shells that cover the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the walnut shells of the substance.
And then remove the substance, and place in the nose near the blood extraction a plug, and do this for three days or more until it has eroded everything that remains of the flesh.
At the end of the treatment, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you use this method of treatment, it will dry.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal irrigation, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon with a curved end, like a small bowl, and the tube similarly.
And if you prefer, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used for nasal irrigation should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can place it in the oil or water that you want to use from substances and absorbable causes.
Chapter XXV.
About the glands naturally found in the extremities of the nose.
Often a gland is found in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and swollen within several days until proper care is given to it.
And for this reason, you should treat it at the beginning of its appearance and carefully manage everything related to it. Here is the translation:
If it is delayed in its incision until it becomes hardened, then consider whether it has become pusified, hard, of dark color and with little sensation; now do not touch that part with a sharp instrument because there are many instances where one who incises this boil does great harm to the person on whom it was done.
And if the boil is touchable and not of dark color, and there are times when incision is possible in all such cases, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with substances that dry and constrain until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On suturing the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by plague or similar causes.
Know that when there is disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some cases.
Therefore, when there is any cause for one of these conditions, consider whether it is a recent plague or the result of blood, and then you should approximate the two sides of the wound with sutures, and subsequently treat it until it heals.
And if the sides of the disruption of continuity are already separated and each is healing well, then it is necessary that you scrape away each part of its apparent edge until blood appears. And then approximate the two sides with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and thrisse (a type of powder), and place on top a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave it for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster, and leave it until the exudates have dried up, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Here is the translation:
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that cause bleeding in the two lips in the partitions within.
Often in the partitions within the lips of some men, there appear hard swellings similar to fat from birds, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and cut each of those hardness from all sides, and when the incision is made, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with something astringent and treat the area with water that has hemostatic properties until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Often there arises on the gum flesh that is adhered a condition which the ancients called "albulus," then you must suspend it with an arrow or what you have at hand and incise it near its base, allowing the pus to flow out or for the blood to run.
And then apply to the area finely shredded wool or other astringent powders or substances that promote drying.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth in the upper and lower jaws and between the adhered gums there are rough edges, sharp points, and sometimes they are blackened and appear green or yellow due to corruption of the gum, and thus the teeth become decayed.
Therefore, make the patient sit between your legs and place his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth in which appear those rough spots and causes similar to sand until nothing of them remains, and do this for the blackness and yellowness and other such matters until they are cleansed.
Therefore, if that is sufficient as at the beginning of the treatment, it is good; but if not, then repeat the treatment on those [teeth] another day and on the second and third until it reaches the final stage in what you wish.
And know that the teeth have need of various tools for rasping and of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the rasp with which the tooth is filed from inside is different from the rasp with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of rasps you should prepare those that you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Carefully treat the tooth of its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no substitute for it when it is extracted, as it is a substance sublime that excuses the extraction of it.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which tooth is painful, for sometimes the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen by the practice of barbers.
Therefore, once you are certain which is the painful tooth, and when you know well, it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it dissolves from the tooth and gums completely, and then remove that with your said instruments or with fine forceps little by little until you have cleared away all of it.
And then use strong pincers for good handling or strong crushing, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you hold them firmly without hurting them, and then pull out the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not forcibly extracted, then take one of those instruments and place it underneath from all sides with ease and exert effort to remove it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must cover that fractured part and secure it with a thin wire so that it does not break further during your constriction on it with pincers.
And you must operate extremely carefully around the incision in the gum all around and guard against your strength so that you do not break it and leave any part behind, and return to the patient for the sake of their well-being so that it is better than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their attempts and audacity regarding the extraction of teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great harm to sick people which is more difficult to cure, and the roots of those teeth are broken completely, or partially, or they extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
And after the extraction let the mouth be washed with either vinegar or water salted.
And if blood flows because of this, just as you would do for similar wounds, then apply some quantity of dust and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and holding them with subtlety at which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in extremity, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when using them to work.
And they should be like handles of thick material so that when you grasp them they are not bent, and their extremities should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron with straight extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth, some of which fit into others and grasp firmly by constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, which is a heron, and they are very strong for constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from the clenched jaws.
When you must extract a tooth that is clenched for some reason, then it is necessary to place something cold on the area for one day or two until the area is softened; and afterwards insert tools or forceps with extremities that resemble the beak of a bird called ciconia or heron, the shape of the forceps:
Their extremities should be dressed as if with wax or pitch.
And if he does not obey you when you attempt to use these forceps or tenaculae, then you must cut along the ridge and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And let it be of short length, thick at one end, and not enclosed such that it cannot rattle.
Then if by this the ridge is opened, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of finer end.
And now assist with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form as follows: and with other instruments which will be described for scraping teeth; because this instrument is helpful, and this is its form:
of the triangular end twisted or short, which has some thickness, and is not enclosed such that it cannot rattle.
And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar and likewise resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave any proper instruments, with forms of different kinds.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is broken, or if necessary, proceed at that moment with the treatment in its place using those instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots, and help him as follows:
And do it gradually bit by bit, and apply or hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
If there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that part of the hole and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
When the teeth that protrude do not follow their natural course and especially when they are in places where they should not be, particularly in women and more so in those who are respected; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to file or cover it, then remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument which has the shape of a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
And when you cut it, do so gradually over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not become inflamed or affect other teeth.
And if it is a protruding tooth that can be filed down, then file it with an Indian iron file which has this shape:
And take Indian iron and the hammer and shape it accordingly; and with small points as with a file, on which needles are made, grind the tooth little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not become another crooked tooth or break. And sew that line at the end, and cut that with scissors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and you use the tongue to speak, now you should file that inside so that the roughness of that piece is smoothed out and evened, and fill it in so that the tongue does not hurt nor the speech be impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of crooked teeth with gold or silver filling.
When you encounter front teeth that are loose and displaced due to impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite on them when eating, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, now in order to prevent them from falling out, you should strengthen those that are crooked with gold filling and not silver, because silver changes color and will be noticeable right away, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the restoration is that you take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then build up with two tortuosity shapes of the filling between one or more crooked teeth, until it reaches the surface of the adjacent healthy tooth. And then sew the suturing at the part where you started, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not crooked.
And let your thread be such that you can pull out the pieces of the tooth without any difficulty.
And then cut off the excess part of the thread with forceps or scissors, and attach it at each place with your fingers, and convert and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue. And then make it as narrow as a Roman coin.
But if it is loose or broken, pull out that thread in such a way over the entire period of time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two damaged teeth, as you see them tied:
And when it happens that you return one tooth or two back to their proper places after extraction, and they grow back as we have recommended, and remain in place.
And only skilled artisans and wise people can do this.
And sometimes a cause for using cow bone is given, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is attached as we have said, and remains and serves in that place for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cutting of the band that goes around the tongue and prevents speech.
This band that goes beneath the tongue sometimes is natural, with which one is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
Of the operation in which men open the mouth of the patient, his head being placed in a convenient position; and raise his tongue, and then incise that nerve-band horizontally within which the tongue is loosened from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or swelling in that area, which has become consolidated due to disease, now you should gently cut it open along the same horizontal line where you previously divided the band, so as to dissolve the hard lump.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh, so that you do not divide here an artery and cause a flow of blood.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with cold water or vinegar water or simply clean water; and afterwards place a piece of linen under the tongue; this is done so that the patient will keep something under their tongue each night to prevent it from healing too quickly.
But if blood flow occurs, place over the area powdered vitriol; but if the bleeding persists, then cauterize the site with a hot cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And then proceed with the treatment along with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a sublingual cyst beneath the tongue.
At times, beneath the tongue, there appears a swelling similar to a small abscess that prevents the tongue from performing its natural functions; and it rapidly enlarges until it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient facing the light and examine the swelling.
And if you see it of dark or black color and hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the incision into it, and divide that with a thin spatula, and divide it from all parts; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then pause above three times, which is vitriol, until the blood constricts.
And then return to your work once you have treated it properly, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat that with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are in the cheek, and other abscesses.
When you encounter an abscess in the cheek area, which are glands that are assembled somewhat together, some of which appear outside and are called ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, with little sensation. At this point, do not touch it with instruments.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with instruments due to the flow of blood; rather, let that remain until it has matured, and then either you will remove it, or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is thin, then that is what should be incised.
In the operation on which you are about to perform work, before your operation, consider whether the abscess from the cautery has healed completely or if it has diminished in any way; and now place the patient facing the sun, with his head towards the east, and breathe into the mouth of the patient, and the assistant takes between his fingers the tongue of the patient below this noble instrument which is of this form:
And let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be thin like a knife.
Then as you press with that on the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, quickly place it in the center and pull it out towards the sides as far as you can. Do the same for any other area for the removal of pus, and then cut that area with an instrument whose form is as follows:
Do the same for any other area for the removal of pus, and then cut that area with an instrument whose form is as follows: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, sharp, made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut that with a scalpel whose form is as follows: It is sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
And after you have cut one incision, cut the other in the same manner, and then wash the patient's wound with fresh water.
But if there is bleeding, wash the wound with water decocted from lemon peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringent substances until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And in some cases, we incise on the gum boil or abscesses and others on those two ears, and incise those as it is said in the incision of two glands similarly.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in the gum of her tooth, which abscess tended to have a dark color, little sensation, which had closed the gum of her, and the woman breathed very difficultly, and had prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if it had waited another day or two.
And the abscess had swollen so much that it had formed two channels inside, through which it discharged through two openings.
Then I decided to act surgically and inserted into one of its cavities, and pulled it out, and most of it came out in large pieces, and then I incised that from which I could reach the other opening, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the cavity back into that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. And then the gum of that woman healed absolutely, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not need to incise that abscess again for a long time, and an abscess succeeded in its place, which was incised before it could prolong.
Then I heated it and cauterized the gum of it, which was an addition to the treatment; and then I walked around and did not know what God would do next with that situation.
Chapter xxxvii.
On incising an abscessed hovel (likely meant to be "boil" or "abscess").
When the discharge from the boil indicates that it is abscessed and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is located below and is thick and round, it is then called a bubba.
However, when it is cured as we have described in the division and your treatment does not conflict with it, yet sometimes an abscess persists beneath the surface and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; and if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, dark brown, or black, and is not at the center, then you should attempt the incision cautiously, for there is concern about malformation.
And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient sit down and press with an instrument that reveals its form and location, then place your thumb below it and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the procedure for double incisions.
And you should not incise it beyond what is appropriate within the natural limits, for if you incise too much, you may harm its function.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the care of double incisions, and treat it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should proceed with cautery without fear, and the method of cauterization involves only sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your lap, then press with the instrument as described, and take the sharp water mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the area causing pain, and place something not too thick or thin over it, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is like this:
Here is the extraction from the cautery in which the medicine is placed as with the cautery of copper alloy, and place the instrument over the wound with the medicine on it, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall onto the fresh dressing because otherwise it could cause infection in that area.
And then take the medicine and apply it to the uvula for half an hour until you see it become blackened and numb from the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the cautery, then dip the cloth in the medicine. Insert the cautery with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to this tube. Do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization clean around the wound with a cloth dipped in vinegar, and modify it with what is around the wound from the medicine. Wash it with fresh water, then treat it externally with an ointment, and keep it clean until it heals.
And this particular method of treatment is safer and more effective than incision and the prolonged fear it brings.
In some cases, the uvula is treated with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision. It is healed through sublimation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, mint, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, adjust all these causes or some of them in a container, dip them in sour wine, and boil; the vessel should be heated moderately, and at the center of the vessel place a tube upon which is placed an instrument made of reed in this manner: it should be made of silver or reed.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula above which the uvula is obscured.
And then proceed with this treatment until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too harsh on the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather let the abscess declare itself by heat.
But if this instrument is not at hand, now take a cane and attach to the end of it a cloth of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, for the cloth of wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and what adheres in the flesh and other causes.
Pads adhering to the flesh or fish spine or some other cause.
Then you should remove what is apparent from those, on which your sight rests, and press the tongue with an instrument in front of sunlight, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the flesh.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the flesh, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the flesh will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of dry bread or lettuce juice; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, bind it tightly with thread, and have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where spines are lodged, it will then expel them. Take a eel and prepare quicksilver with it, let the interior be emptied and let the preparation be extracted; or take a rod and apply the preparation to it and let the preparation be drawn out.
If you do not remember those causes which we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it let there be a hook which you insert into its throat with ease.
And when you raise its head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of its throat, so that it does not cause harm to it or to the bone or spine that you press upon, or that it causes pain to the patient.
However, if the patient inserts it gently, due to their knowledge of the location of the cause and presses down, and pulls his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity that is prepared within until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of a leech attached to the throat.
When the leech has been treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and bandages, now look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you have retracted the tongue of the patient with the instrument which we have recommended.
Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with your fingertips carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it, now take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a heated iron in the cavity of the tube, and do this several times (until the leech dies and falls off), and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
Take a flask full of clean water and place the mouth of it over [the wound], and wash the mouth with that; and do not pour out any of that for any reason and change the water once an hour each time by its time, because the leech will take in the blood as soon as it feels the water cold.
But if it is not possible to use what we have recommended with that water, then smoke the wound with cimex or with asafetida by means of the instrument which we have described for smoking the uvula.
Do this, and so it will fall off.
And there is another method of operation in smoking that one, which is to take a vessel containing ignited charcoal and cover the vessel with a cover through the middle of which is a hole; and secure the end of the instrument over this opening; then proceed with the smoking from above; place the wound on the mouth of the tube, and close it so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the leech, because the leech will fall off immediately.
And if it does not work, then repeat the smoking several times, and prevent the patient from drinking, give salty and dry foods, and do not allow water to be drunk; and it is necessary that with this regimen the treatment be effective.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech from the groin is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you may see, but it has some curvature. which is placed in the groin, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is roughened with a file, so that when it grips something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are various types of swellings, in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And they differ in their puncture and incision by two methods, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and also due to what we derive from their humidity.
And the second method is according to the locations in which they occur on the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in fleshy areas is different from one occurring at joints; each has its treatment by operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has properly matured or they have reached completion.
There are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crossed, even if they have not matured according to their completion, such as those near joints, because an abscess near a joint can spread inward until you reach what is around it, and the tendons or nerves of that joint may become corrupted due to contraction of that limb; or the abscess is close to a principal member, and if you delay puncturing it while it is not yet matured, it could cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, so puncture it before it matures; but do not puncture it when it is raw and incomplete digestion, except for one that is close to the buttocks, to avoid the prepuce of it being elongated into the inner parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula, or causing it to occur at its term without healing. May you know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And you should know that it is ripe when there is an alleviation of the pain and the cessation of the fever, and shortly after a reduction in the redness and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should know that the piercing should be made at the place where the pus is deepest in the abscess and coming from the elevation.
And the piercing should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the thighs or arms, and in places where there are tendons, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other equal areas where there is no reflection; for those that do reflect, use a piercing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, the best time is to delay the piercing until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before this, it prolongs the illness of the patient and leads to excessive corruption, and hardens the lips of the wound and its depth.
But some abscesses should be pierced across the grain of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And you should administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses, a larger or wider piercing according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where the treatment should be hollowed out and incised, when it is done as such, it should be at a time when it has already begun to develop, just like those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
Of those which are cut open with a three-angled section; and of those in which it is cut open as the figure of an olive leaf, just like the abscesses of the angles.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to these.
But in the case where it is not such as their superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture that with a superficial incision, or just plane it.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus and corrupt matter, you should puncture that and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, then scrape the abscess on another day, and then extract a larger portion, and continue this process several times according to its degree until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is a vigorous man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in frailty, for in these cases the vital spirit is quickly resolved through the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you should treat them accordingly.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the puncture through which you open these abscesses, you must clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or if it requires a flat section; in that case, you should administer some of it or use cork bark. And if the abscess is large, and the incisions from the puncture are many, then you should place wax on each part until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the bone is cut away or you have hollowed it out around the circumference, then you should fill it with old cork or thread made from linen cloth, as when you treat ulcers or tumors without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed to care for it according to what is needed among the remedies until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then you should administer water to wash and prepare cloths in which a cloth is placed, and place that over the spot where the blood flows for several times.
If the bleeding continues, then you should administer treatment and cure and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and cauterized oil, and place those on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you should lance the abscess and cleanse it and administer to its cure what is suitable for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the section of abscesses which appear in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and there are various types of nodes which contain membranes that are similar to their formations; and these types vary.
And they are soft, and those contain humidity similar to lime. And of those which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those which are lithic, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose the structure.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entrobes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should excise that part which contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause for recurrence, for if any cause remains, it may return.
And then immerse a piece of cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that area with the dressing and leave it for another day, for in this way you will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
And then apply the piece of cloth with Egyptian ointment again and again if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and place needles between two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If there is opposition to what I have written about surgery, now you should read what I wrote first.
And similarly, I deal with the treatment and cure of abscesses as we have told you; and the incision for a lithified abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and less moisture.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses in the head of some people who do not have much moisture throughout their body; the cause of this is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be softened, and if anyone were to strike it, it would hurt them.
However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case with this chapter; similarly, for abscesses that affect the heads of children and behind their ears, the incision should be superficial.
And pause the incision of those parts that are lower to allow the pus to drain into the lower parts.
And treat those accordingly with what is appropriate for their cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they also appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper membrane, just as in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
There are species of these scrofulous growths that are nodules, for only some of them are lithic, and of those only some contain moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one which you find to be well disposed upon examination, of which the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and it is soft throughout, and it is not adhered to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it does not hurt, so you should incise it at a dry superficial part above the upper part of the body from line G down to line B, and scrape it out entirely, and extend two flaps of the skin an inch or inches if you need that, as we have said concerning the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And let the incision not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to use your hand in the incision or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is unnecessary; for if you should incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from further operation, then pause with a vitriol powder or other powders which induce bleeding, and apply a bandage to the wound, and leave that inside where the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the inflammation is mollified and begins to form pus. When the bleeding has stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for other small scrofulous growths, and then incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, avoid incising that part of its root. And be careful to bandage that area firmly with linen and leave it so that no harm comes to it.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then treat it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then be sure to approximate the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is room for superfluous fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then be sure to incise its root, and drain it and administer sutures as has been said.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial puncture where the place of maturation appears to you, and proceed with a puncture to allow the pus to drain from deep within, as we have said.
And then proceed with punctures, apply ointment and treatments suitable for such cases, so that it corrodes what is necessary for the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and no one has seen such an operation in our land.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men who have a weak constitution, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as doing so would not be beneficial because all the veins and major channels are here.
In those who have boils or abscesses in the mouth, throat, or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss that would be caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, the epilhot should be incised below three circles of its own circles, or four if it is a smaller section along the latitude in the place between two circles by quantity. The section should be made in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning because there is little flesh and the blood vessels are large.
And if the physician is cautious, it is advisable to first stretch the throat skin for an inch and then make a cut until reaching the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then incise the ciphac as we have recommended; this is significant for the section of the canal by the membrane which is attached to that part and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Thus when the hour arrives in which the perforation is feared, join two lips of the wound, and cut away that one alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recommended is to observe that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath has been cut off, and some people incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by respiration, and thereby be saved from death.
And for this reason, it is commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice lasts for three days; therefore, during that time, treat the wound until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into their windpipe and cut out a part of the trachea, and I was called to treat them, and I heard the moaning as if it were the groan of the dying, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood that had come from the wound.
Thus I admitted that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to the use of her usual condition.
Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the skin, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental one happens in two ways, one of which resembles fatty knots, and the other way resembles an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is fear. And it does not help to apply heat except in the case where it is small. And you should avoid that and investigate it as described, and if you find it resembling fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with knots and extract it with water mixed with oil and bursiclam; and if not, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is necessary for treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the section on types of knots.
There are various types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And so I recommend that you distinguish between a knot and an exit wound where there is doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an exit wound there is heat and fever and severe pain until the effervescence of the excess stops; and complete putrefaction occurs when at that time the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that which happens with the lion's paw which is in its own skin.
And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a vesicle and it forms in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you should express that and inquire about it at the beginning of the chapter which is called introduction, as its form will come in the chapter which is near this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all knots, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve it a little at a time until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the tissue.
And then withdraw it gradually according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the instrument and examine what has come out in its wake.
And if the moisture flows out, of whatever color it may be, then you shall incise it at a shallow section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the penetration, then you should know that it is dry.
And if it is dry around the wound in the shape of a cross according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend the dressing over the wound, and carefully remove the crust from all sides, and preserve the hair or skin if possible over it, and extract that pus at the nodes.
But if it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and most times in such cases, you will extract it gradually so that none of it remains due to any cause.
For if any of it remains due to some cause, little or much, the abscess will return according to the severity.
And if you see that some of it remains in a small part, then cover the wound with some caustic powder and harden the wound, and place over it something suitable for an abscess, and treat that from another method until it is healed.
And if it is a large abscess, then you should cut both sides of it and treat that with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is opposite it, then you should cauterize and fill the area with three applications of vitriol, letting that remain open for two or three days until the wound heals and the blood stops boiling; and then return to incising what was torn from the abscess.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
Of these there are forms of the probes, and they are of three kinds, that of these is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They should be made of iron, of aluminum, with conveniently curved ends, so that they facilitate the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And they are of three kinds, for one of them is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
It is appropriate that they be used for abscesses and constrictions and fistulas and buboes, because they are useful among those affecting the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like lions, as well as large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrus thread, or silk, or iron, or silver, and the best are those made of citrus thread.
And they are made of black goose feathers, which are agreed to be used for fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, as they are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
And there are three kinds, of which some are long, and of others medium length, and of others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the great experienced lead (This seems to be an incomplete phrase or title, possibly referring to a method or form used by a skilled practitioner involving lead, but without additional context, this is the closest translation.)
Form of the medium experienced lead worker:
Form of the less experienced lead worker:
The forms of the hooks for different types of threads are as follows: some are simple hooks with only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And their hooks are curved, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have hooks with two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have hooks with three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Form of an inch having two curves: Form of a medium inch having two curves: Form of a small inch having two curves:
Form of a large inch having three curves:
Form of a medium inch having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and boils are cut and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium, and one small.
Form of a large knife:
Form of the medium knife:
Form of the small knife:
The ends of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp, and they are not made in such a way as to pause, so that during the scraping of nodes there is no fear of incising a vein or nerve. And by this means the patient may be healed and find some peace from the inflammation which follows the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of probes, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Thus are made the leaves of wormwood and its appearance is like that of the sun from which alcohol is made.
And it is in the outermost part marked with a dot and in that place keep it hidden, both inside and outside, as you see.
The forms of bandages, which are hidden among the said leaves for the incision of abscesses and I do not perceive the evils, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is cut off, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; these are their forms:
They are made of citrus leaves, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the blood flow quickly in an emergency, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
However, do not use them to cut off the blood flow in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as on the tendons of hands and feet, and on the tendons of arms, and on the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy human tendons.
And sometimes they are made of other small instruments resembling fish scales in this form; with which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's nipples, which are similar to those of women.
Some incisions are swollen; the nipples of some men become prominent as they begin to develop hair, and then the nipples swell. They are similar to the nipples of women, and we apostemate them, evacuate.
And for those who need this treatment, cut them in a crescent shape as follows: from line B to line G, then scrape away all the roughness, and afterwards fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound. Heal it until it is fully cured.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its size, similar to that of women, then it should be cut into two parts so that their pus can drain off, in two sections resembling a crescent moon, each contained within the other at their ends such that one line contains the other as shown from line B to line G. Then scrape away the edge between the two sides of the wound and remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is fully cured.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's discomfort and blood flow, then you should fill the wound with cloth soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what is left of the tissue. Then heal it until it is fully cured.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Come from Lymph Nodes.
These abscesses that come from lymph nodes are among the types of scrofula, hard lumps covered with skin that can be moved.
And only some of those contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything has been evacuated that is inside the abscess for healing, then you fill it with mutton fat and leave it until the next day.
And afterward, the area should remain covered and be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type associated with lymph nodes and scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described in the section on scrofula, similarly.
And if the condition has spread and there is putrefaction, then administer cauterization as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the wound has healed over it, an abscess may occur. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the upper part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound.
And that which is from a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And surgery on this abscess is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; for it is very dangerous, therefore it should be avoided that its treatment with a knife be eschewed, and those that are in the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided.
But for that which is due to inflammation of the artery opening, make an incision in the appropriate section along its length; and near the place where you will cut with hooks near the artery, and dissect the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and secure the artery with a double stitch of fine thread, — which procedure I explain in the extraction of two arteries which are found in the thighs.
And then apply to the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood flows out completely while it is there, and the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is drawn out so that the ligaments can fall; and then treat it with appropriate remedies so that it may be healed.
And if it is an abscess due to a vein incision, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess at that place, and then insert the needle below the place where you had placed your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie this thread doubly so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligature the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you about the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread's extremities.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then now insert a needle under the abscess; first place the point of the needle, and strengthen its points in four places.
Approach the abscess in its middle part when it is full inside so that when what is inside comes out, then you cut open the excess of the skin, and leave what is attached to it.
And then apply to the wound the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with cauterization and herbs until it is healed.
Chapter I of the abscess which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a blow to them or due to excessive work and similar causes.
And it is done with the hand in the places of the assistants or at the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually troubled.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is among the worst conditions when it is constricted by violence, and when it affects the patient, they seem to be in a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that forms at the front of the body, and for this reason it is below the skin, and it affects all parts equally and does not spread forward or backward.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need for it to be encased in iron, as it will easily lead to contraction.
Cut in what is on the head or forehead with a spatum (a type of knife). If it is a small abscess, cut that out with forceps and remove it by roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with incisions, and expose that, and remove that subsequently; and stitch the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
About the incision of an abscess that occurs on the lip as it would occur on the abdomen.
Indeed, in some people there appear swellings on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, the cause of which is subtle but the appearance is large; and often the edges of these are smooth, and it can be small in size, yet magnificent in its nature.
And I have seen one in whom there were two parts on the abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of delicate origin.
And the edges of those were turned inward and would split open, and moisture would constantly flow from them.
Therefore, I incised those and found inside one weighing about eighteen ounces and the other about ten ounces.
And the procedure in incising them is to consider whether the condition is humid, and if the color of the abscess is white, moist, with a delicate origin; then you should incise it with a broad knife, and immediately over your presence cauterize it in the fire, because when performing such an incision much blood must be expelled; and if there is bleeding, cauterize that.
And if the wound is small and fearsome, guard against cutting with iron; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that part in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead until it is detached and falls off by itself.
But if the part is of thick tissue, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially when it is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you can cut half of it, and then cauterize the part so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut a part that is dark in color, has little sensation, and appears unhealthy, for such a part is likely cancerous.
And this will come to mind as a reminder of that point.
Chapter LIIB.
On the Treatment of a Swelling at the Navel.
A swelling of the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdomen that are above the stomach, and for this reason, a patch made of cloth or intestine is applied as with other ruptures; or it can be from a wound where blood flows from a vein or artery, depending on the circumstances, or it may be caused by trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the appearance of a cloth patch, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is painless, and soon appears in various situations. And if it is due to the exit of the bowels, then the situation is different from what we have described, with much greater diversity, and when you press that area with your fingers, it feels hidden, and immediately returns; and it is very light in there, and is magnified by the introduction of bath and vigorous labor.
And if it is due to humidity, then it is loose and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears turning black.
And if it is due to flesh that has rotted, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is seated according to a quantity.
And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in this case is that you must consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or gas; now it is advisable for you to be cautious about treating it, because there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowels or the membrane, then it is advisable for you to order the patient to hold their breath and stand extended; then feel around the entire circumference of the navel, and then order them to lie on their back with both hands under their buttocks; then surround the area with a strip of linen in the circumference of the navel over the place where you have felt with your hand; then extend half of the abscess upwards for about an inch; then tie it around the circumference tightly or loosely according to a proper method.
From the side where the abscess is spread over the membrane, insert your finger into that area and search for the bag; and if you have found or secured it with the membrane, then extract it immediately and push the bag to the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the membrane, then take that one inch and incise the excess tissue from it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong points and insert two needles around the circle you made around the abscess in a cross shape, which you should make penetrate; and then divide the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it becomes thinner and will drain, and then treat it with water from a suitable liquid until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, then you should proceed to conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with a suitable liquid that will heal and consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Cancers.
We have already discussed in the division, the types of cancer and how to approach its treatment with medicines, and that it is cautious in treating it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also mentioned cancer generated in the breast and the care in its treatment.
And let the ancients say that in some cases cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just as when it occurs in the breast or on the nipple and similar parts assigned for extracting all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and hard, do not try to deal with it yourself, for I cannot heal anyone from that nor have I seen another who could reach such a state.
And the operation on it is when it is assigned, as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge from black bile for some days, and then bleed them if there is obvious congestion.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and then place hooks around those that are needed for it; and then hollow out completely with a well-sharpened curved knife for thorough excision so that no cause of recurrence remains. And let the blood flow freely, and do not bind it too tightly, and press the areas, and clean the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the available tools.
But if it is contrary to you to have thick blood coagulate in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with another method until it heals.
Chapter 46.
On the Treatment of Hydrops (Edema).
We have already recommended, in the division, on the types of hydrops caused by water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment for it with medications.
Of her who is cured by iron there is only the species of throat alone, and not approximated by iron to the species of drummers or to the species of administrators, for this is deadly.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrophobic drummer with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has already become weakened or is afflicted by another malady such as hydrophobia, just as if it were in the chest or lungs like those cases. Now be careful that you do not treat them with iron, for fear lies over this.
But if you see the patient with abundant vigor, and in him there is no other illness but hydrophobia alone, nor is he a child or an elderly person, then the method of the operation on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and the minister presses his belly with his hand, expelling the water from below the navel, and then take spatum spinos in this form:
It should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like spatum; but in it there should be some gradual shortening little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowel, and thus harm him.
And then consider if the origin of hydrophobia is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in the section you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
But if the origin of hydrophobia is from disease of the kidneys, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the gallbladder, then your incision must be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient feels pain, so that the excesses do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument all the tube, and immediately insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the tube and the bladder, and you will extract it; and if the quantity is of one ounce or so.
And then pierce the bladder so that the fluid reaches the empty place, which is where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut according to the manner of a pen, as you see.
And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, immediately you should place your finger over the instrument, thus evacuating only a moderate amount of fluid in one go, for if you evacuate too much at once as is not needed within an hour, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or may be brought to the brink of death.
But evacuate that according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated by the patient's condition, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
Here is the translation:
And prepare it again with the instrument every day if the patient can tolerate that, and extract a small amount from the water, and let this continue for several days out of fear, and be careful not to err so as not to run out of the water before then.
But if you are afraid for the patient and give a large amount of water, then bury him in fine sand up to his armpits, and pour sweat-inducing substances over him as a bath, and let him remain exposed to the sun for a long time; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the melons and gourds after extracting the water from them, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not perforated (or it is blocked or is out of place).
Therefore, one should perform the puncture as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and secure it, and leave it in for three days or four.
And when the child needs to urinate, remove it and let the child urinate; then return the needle afterwards.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows to that place will not clear this obstruction.
May that part where the wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for enough days until it is enlarged.
May those in whom the wound is not in its place, as mentioned, which causes one to be born and the wound is behind the end of the penis, preventing urination on either side; and it is not for generation, so that sperm cannot reach the major second rectitude, and it is a long-term illness.
And the method of the operation in this case is that the patient lie on his back, and then with your left hand extend the head of the penis away forcefully, and incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, like an ink quill cut, or shave some part so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and that the wound falls in the proper place as needed.
And be careful in your operation for bleeding, as this often happens; and pause at that point where you cut the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and on corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This swelling often occurs in the penis and is a prolonged elevation of flesh.
And one of these is malignant and the other is not malignant.
For benign cases, suspend an ounce of the subtle substance and cut away all the diseased part; then apply on that spot a poultice made with Egyptian onion; and afterwards treat it with a cleansing dressing until it is healed.
And if it is malignant and of a dark color, then you should administer cautery at the point of attachment and around it.
But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside as soon as it begins to heal; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts together with the foreskin, there is no assurance that it will not be damaged.
And if similar conditions occur in the genitalia and on the foreskin, such as darkening and corruption, then you should excise everything that is discolored or prone to corruption; and afterwards apply a poultice over it made with honey mixed with ground and sifted bran and wheat flour.
And afterwards treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
because cautery is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and for the plague when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the urine can pass through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and upon whom circumcision is not obligatory; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it must be that you scrape with a blunt knife so that the bond may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you must scrape with a knife some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness, it can be perforated easily by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is already moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic juice so that it may be consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution that involves continuity in the same way as other illnesses: but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and because it specifically pertains to children, it is necessary to assign the best method and the easiest path for reaching safety.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason I have observed is that most surgeons and barbers use a razor and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread with pitch and incision with the fingernail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors, thread with pitch than in cleansing with the fingernail, because many times one avoids the danger from above, as the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains below. It is forced to undergo another incision and certain pain. And in the cleansing that is performed by a pharmacist, which is done digitally, as used by barbers, there is no guarantee of avoiding an incision at the end of the male member, because it easily enters there.
But in the operation with the fingernail, you easily err and corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times they are born in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Here is the translation into English:
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child sit down if it is one who understands a little, so that you put only the thread in his urethra and leave the other end for the next day.
And then make him cheerful in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding. And then make him stand between your legs, prepared in a calm manner, and do not let him be scared; and hide the scissors in your hand or place them somewhere else, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
And then insert your hand into his urethra and blow into it, and pull that out so that the end of the urethra is exposed, and then clean what has accumulated there from dirt.
The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of the blades be blunt and the other set be sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not protrude, and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of two thumbs equally.
The mistake in cleansing is that you remove too much of the intrinsic skin, or part of it, which should not be excised.
Therefore, you should apply the dressing of your choice to the affected area with your ointment before the abscess develops, and incise it according to equality [i.e., symmetry or proportion].
And if you cannot obtain your ointment, then extract it with honey and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling persists below the abscess near the groin, then you should leave it until the pus has matured, and excise it with ease, and incise it according to what is prepared [for you].
And be careful of the head of the groin, for it should not be like that.
And therefore, treat it with the powder that consolidates the wound, from among those we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the skin, and you follow the parts above, do not note that.
And therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
And if the cause of what we have said is not dissolved with water and is strongly affecting the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a reed pipe, about as thick as a sparrow's quill and a length of half a palm, at the end of which should be a fine tube.
And the method of inserting urine with that is to take a thread and tie it securely at one end to the syringe or cup; and insert both ends of the thread into the lower part of the syringe, and cut off any excess length of the thread with scissors. Then gently push the syringe with vigor into the urethra along with some gauze.
And have the patient lie on a chair, and lift their bladder area and the penis with ointment, olive oil, and myrrh.
And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the base of the penis; and then bend the penis above the part where it meets the abdomen; and then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and that area should be reached without causing any discomfort. If not done in this order, there may be tortuosity in the passage.
And slowly extract the lint along with the wool little by little, for the urine dyes the wool.
And extract that and use for treatment urine, and use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the pain is relieved.
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enema for the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or when pus is obstructed and you want to introduce waters and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
But at the end of it, it is blunt, that is its closure. And in that one there are three parts: two of them are alike, as you can see.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which that which is to be introduced is held, according to the quantity that needs to fill it, without addition, until when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with it can be expelled, and when it is expelled far, as the clampcedra on which naphtha is smeared for naval battles does.
Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw with it the water that is held in the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Take the extremity of the bandage and place it on the splint as we have recommended in the circle; then press the moisture with what you are using, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and thus the patient suffers from it.
The form of the catheter with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
It should be made of silver or ivory, the head being shaped like a small feather, and below it should be smooth and slender.
Take a bladder made of leather, and place in it the moisture that you want to introduce into the bladder. Then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with wax, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the catheter into the splint.
Here is the translation:
If there is no bladder available, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; then perforate it all around its circumference; and then pour strong vinegar into those holes, as if it were turned inside out; and then add the circle as if it were added in a similar manner, so that you place on it whatever you want from humidities, oils, and waters.
And then you attach it to the instrument and do as you would with the bladder, and press your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone in which this operation is performed, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will now describe that with clear explanation and conciseness.
Therefore, I say that stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children; and the signs of this are that the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety but appears as if it contains sand or small particles; and the patient scratches his genitals, often urinates in small amounts, and then feels a need to go again; and because of this, you will notice him frequently turning around.
This is the treatment of children who have reached twelve and a half years; and it is difficult treatment in old age. In youth, it is moderate because it is between those extremes.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment more distant; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, how we reach the treatment of that condition is to begin with cleansing the diseased area around the kidney, which extracts all the fissures that are in its bags; for those fissures sometimes prevent the formation of stones due to their investigation.
And then place the patient on their side and press firmly and vigorously so that the stone descends to the bladder or jumps from place to place or sometimes in some other way.
And then have the patient lie between their thighs, well prepared, and let them hold objects in their hands, so that the bladder is made to tilt towards the lower parts.
And then examine that and all of that area thereafter.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately prepare to act upon it.
And if you do not find it immediately by touch, then you should anoint your index finger with oil, using the left hand if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are a complete young adult, and insert it into their anus. And examine for the stone while your finger is inside. And then insert it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And press on that until the time mentioned, and then expel it to the outer parts away from the place where the incision was made.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with his right hand, and with his other hand to pull back the part below the thighs, in the area where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula of the following shape: and cut what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle but towards the left side of the body; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse cut so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much you can extract from the stone as possible, but not more, since your finger strongly compresses the area around the incision inside the anus without difficulty.
And know that some stones have sharp angles and edges, which make their extraction difficult because of this.
And that one resembles a round acorn and is easy to extract because of this.
Therefore, if the stone has sharp angles and edges, adjust your instruments to fit into the crack.
And if it is not easily accessible, now you must devise a way to work on it, or apply gentle pressure with a proper gesture, the end of which should resemble a file with which you can press on the stone without slipping; or insert below it an instrument with a curved tip.
If you cannot do this over there, then enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, staunch it with a cloth dipped in vinegar.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you should urge your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and subsequently incise over it; and shortly urge a little further from there; and similarly proceed if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance lies in you incising it at once in a large section, for this exposes the patient to two causes of harm: either death or that he suffers from continuous dripping of urine, because thereby the place does not become completely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it until it is expelled, or contrive to fracture it with forceps so that you may extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with leaves of aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that any abscess may yield.
And then lift the patient onto their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, cleanse the area with water and some oil, and then care for it with honey and myrrh until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the wound that is hard and painful, and it appears as though the blood is congealed in the bladder (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
For washing a wound that is foul and full of corruption, use water and salt, and according to the nature of each case, use what is suitable for healing inside until it is healed.
It is necessary throughout the entire treatment that you change both things and adjust the medicines which are applied to the site.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then during treatment you should proceed as I recommend until you reach a point where further action is necessary; for those treated this way are often accused of neglect. And now I will explain that which follows: take a fine iron probe, which has the shape described below:
with a triangular end, sharp, inserted into a handle.
And then take some wax, and apply it to the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, gently until the probe reaches that stone. And rotate the probe with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will make a passage through it until you can pass one end from the other side; for the urine will soon be relieved.
And then press your hand on that part which is above the stone outside of the urethra, for this area is congested, and it will allow the urine to flow freely, and the illness will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some cause that prohibits it, then apply wax below the stone and another piece of wax above the stone. And cut across above the bone at that ligature between two ligatures. And extract that one. And then loosen the bandage and change the collected blood, which is done on the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the stone below with cloth, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above should not be loosened, because when the cloth around the swelling near the stone is released, the wound reopens and becomes inflamed.
And for this reason, when you bind the cloth above, you must raise the wound to the upper parts or return it carefully to its proper place, so that the wound heals as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone appears in any of them, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One reason is that women have narrower passages.
And the second reason is that you rarely find a woman who is willing to disclose whether she has visited a doctor when chaste, or if married women will admit it to their husbands.
The third reason is that you rarely find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation itself.
And the fourth reason is that the site for incision to reach a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need to make a deeper incision, and this involves risk.
If necessity compels you to use this, then take a woman who is wise and experienced in it, but few are found.
If you are lacking in that, then seek someone who is quick and subtle, or present a midwife who is well experienced in the matters of women, or a woman who is deeply knowledgeable in this art.
Therefore, have that person present and command them to do everything you instruct, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, then they should place their finger in her anus to feel for the stone.
If that stone is found, mark it below their finger, then command them to incise upon it.
但如果她不是处女，那么命令助产士将她的手指插入病人的阴道来检查那块结石，让她用左手放在膀胱上，并仔细地找到它。
If that stone is found, then it must be gradually removed from the bladder's orifice to its lower parts as far as the limit of its capacity until it reaches the place where it can be retrieved.
And then incise upon that spot in the middle of the vagina at the place where the stone is to be reached and fix the stone in that place so that the finger does not displace the stone during removal.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to how much you know the stone will be extracted from there.
And know that the types of stone are sharp: for among those is one small and hard, and lion and rough, and long and round, and having points.
Thus you should know how many types there are of the thing about which you signify what you want.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriolated tartar to the site and keep it there for one hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
And make sure you prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the vessel that is incised, then sprinkle powder over the site and bind it with powders and moderate bandaging, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
And when the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the site has healed, then return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about hernia surgery.
A hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane below the groin muscles that contains the intestines, and it is called a sac.
In some cases, it is in the proper panniculus, which nature has prepared in the part of the bowel, so that it appears to be another bowel; and this is the ligament of the testicle between the white fascia we have mentioned, and it is not otherwise.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the testicles, because this matter effuses into them, and sometimes it happens due to impact upon the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors; the color of it may incline to citrine or blood-red, or reddish, or black and thick, or watery and white, and these are what they are.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water occurs are as follows: if it is in the white fascia we have mentioned, then the abscess is roundish, slightly elongated like the shape of a bowel, and the testicle appears, because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round and near the bowel, and for this reason it is estimated to be another bowel.
And if the moisture is between the ligament of the testicle and the white fascia, then it is felt below the crease.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture in the abscess near the crease where its form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the traces of the crease, judge about what is inside it.
Thus when we come to the treatment of iron wounds, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and then examine the body carefully.
And let him lie supine on his back on some raised surface, and place a cloth underneath him.
And you should stand on the left side of him, and command an assistant to stand on his right, who will extend his arm from one flank to the navel and to the part where the intestines are.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the navel region from the middle location along its length towards the pubis.
And let the section be made according to the prescription equally distant from the line you should follow on the skin of the abdomen until it reaches the white membrane that encompasses it.
And dissect that area, and observe carefully so that you do not incise too deeply; and your dissection should be such that it is suspended on the main structure and examine the dissection as thoroughly as possible according to its quantity.
And then puncture the white membrane with a wide incision to let out all the fluid.
And then separate the edges of the incision with forceps, and extend the membrane above the area; do not touch the navel region that is encompassed by it, and incise the membrane in such a way as is possible for you. And incise that area completely or in pieces, especially the lateral part carefully, because if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the fluid will not return.
If you proceed to remove it from its wound at the time of your operation, after you have completed the sectioning of the foreskin, return it inside and then adjust the two lips of the genital seam with sutures, and afterwards treat that as with other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary for you to tie off the vessels which are near the suspensory ligament, and extract the organ, and afterwards treat that as we have said.
But if the swelling is divided into two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other similarly; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
And then you wipe away the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or in refined oil; and place over another wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread that over the two genitals and the area of the abdomen; and cover with folded cloths and poultices, and bind those with bandages as follows:
And then take two cloths and fill them with crimped wool according to this example; and make the edges such that they are pressed by wood or wet cloth, and attach them to a framework in the belt of the pants, and one end of the bandages should go under the buttocks to the other side, and the second end should reach the part of the hip, and two ends over two knots and two other ends over two angles, and all the bindings should be adjusted in the belt of the pants.
And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of section with iron; and that you take a thin knife-like cautery and insert it into the groin area, and it is ignited as we have recommended until it becomes visible where the white membrane containing the fluid is, and then you take a cautery in the shape of this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter.
And then pierce that membrane, and it is ignited until all the moisture has been expelled.
And then extend the membrane with hooks, and lift it with hooks, and excise it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise it as much as you can until all of it is removed; and be careful that the wound does not come into contact with fire.
And know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding than the operation with cutting, and better than the operation with section.
But if an abscess forms during the time of cutting or during cautery, or if there is bleeding, then you must treat whatever complication arises according to what is appropriate for it, with treatment suitable for it as described.
But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its severity, then you should administer a puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid-filled.
Then you should have the patient sit on an elevated stool, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part with a lancet, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the water to drain out.
And then pause at the place where it is cut and tie it there so that all the remaining water can drain out. And then take care of that wound until the illness is healed.
But if there is resistance to the escape of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the wound opening causes resistance and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, you must place a needle or instrument with which water is extracted from blisters into the wound; the form of which has been described previously; or apply pressure to the wound with a small object.
And know that the water returns, and it happens again after about six months or so; when it accumulates, then puncture it according to the same method, for in this way the illness will run its course.
Chapter LXIII.
On the incision for a flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision for this hernia there is great danger of serious harm in major cases; therefore, it seems best to me to avoid it and save the patient by another method.
And I recall the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in places where the arteries are compressed and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute, irritating excess fluid that is discharged into the arteries, or due to trauma.
The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A mature abscess has a dark color and there is no longer any sensation in it.
And some abscesses are formed by the constriction of arteries, and by the inflammation of those that have already been perceived through memory, or by the inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and there is no need for that part to be touched.
But what is formed by the inflammation of a vein does not disperse because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible to perform a section on this type and on other parts; you should incise the tendon of the thigh muscle, and nearby there are nerves above the parts, extract the white fat, and free the suspensory ligaments, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all sides of the part.
Therefore, if the abscess has already consolidated in those parts, now you should extract the pus and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion between any part of the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should free all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion behind it, now you should incise all of that and extract the pus as we have said.
Thus, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and subsequently treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve viscera.
A vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to a boil, and it makes exercise and walking on the affected side difficult.
And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious due to what preceded it, remembering its cause.
However, one must proceed with the operation as they did with the first ones.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised stool; then apply bandages to suspend the testicles below; and afterwards use your hands to grasp the genital area with force; and have another assistant do this alongside you, extending it vigorously.
And then incise with a sharp, wide blade in a transverse section between the veins so that the vessels are exposed.
And then carefully cut away from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which should be done cautiously.
And then insert a needle with double thread into that area, and tie it at the first place where you made the incision, and tie it again at the last part of it. And then incise those in the middle area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
Regarding the treatment of this plague, it is like the cure for other plagues in which you wish to cause healing by removing what falls from vessels, one of two genders, because it is not bad due to that.
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be cut off due to what affects the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by cutting the vessels, and thus become weakened, or for this reason that it not be beneficial among them.
Chapter Sixty-Five.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that exists in the caphac extended over the abdomen from the angle at the junction of the abdomen, so that when the bowels descend through that rupture, some of them enter.
And this rupture is either of the caphac or of an extension of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting something heavy, or by similar activities.
And the sign of this, when it is an extension of the caphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal within beside the navel because the caphac compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is a section of the caphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from the one near the navel, because the bowel has protruded, and the part of the body involved is outside the caphac.
In some cases, the membrane is detached from the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
In some cases, they are formed with air, and some pass into the bowel through a fissure where they become trapped, causing great pain to the patient, and some cause severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of illness with iron there is fear, because it is feared that it should be avoided in such cases.
And the method of the operation for this condition is that you command the patient to retract the bowel with his own hand into the parts inside his abdomen if it obeys its return, and then place him lying on his back between your hands, and raise his hips.
And then press the cord which connects the testicles to the parts above, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then place hooks in both sides of the incision as you wish to open it with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible for you allows it, detach the contents from it.
And then carefully peel that layer which was previously attached to the cord of the testicles, until the hard white tissue of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into that which contains the testicle, between the white tissue that was previously attached to the cord, and between the subsequent layer, and separate the adherence that is in the part behind the testicle.
Of this make a ligature of the testicles to the parts behind, and with this extend the white thread on top with the left hand, and raise the wound with the needle at the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend it above while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind when the solution is complete.
And search among the things said that there be no cause of the bowel wrapped in the white thread hard. But if you find any cause in it, now you press that to the lower abdomen.
And then incise in the part below the ligature of the testicles at a section from which blood and pus flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
Take a wool pad immersed in oil and apply it to the wound; then apply the bandage we have recommended (and sometimes white pitch is cauterized, which we mentioned concerning incisions out of fear of blood flow, as it happens at times), and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself.
If the dressing is delayed, now hot water should be applied and placed over it until it falls off as we have said.
And regarding the treatment of the wound, follow the other methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Of Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia that is treated with oil; which is to tie off the vessels near the section where it appears, and then dry it in a suitable location using the fluid that causes it to shrink, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the division performed on the inguinal regions.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the inguinal regions as we have said, and it becomes apparent in that location.
And they do not assign any specific cause for the hernia sac to the patient; and even if they do, it is rare; and it returns at all times.
If the time is prolonged with it, an adjusted fissure occurs in the cavity within which the vessel descends into the cavity; and this happens due to the extension of the cavity which is at the angles as we have said, the cause being that the cavity is stretched, and thereby becomes softened and there is suppuration and swelling.
And the treatment for it is as with cautery as was preceded in the narration of it.
And in some cases it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on his back with his legs raised, and then the area of the suppurated swelling is dried with a section horizontally according to the length of three fingers.
And then stretch the white cavity that is below the collarbone until it is uncovered.
And then take the probe and place it on the prominent part of the cavity, and press it against the wall of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points at the end of the probe in the cavity, and join one to the other with a suture.
And then remove the end of the probe, and do not cut through the cavity entirely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as I will explain to you in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat that as you would treat wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound until it is healed; for the cavity is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this case, for it is closer to healing.
Chapter lxviii.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In many men, the cord of the testicles is softened because the flesh within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who treats this condition to position the patient according to his needs, and to insert the entire cord that is softened over the natural cord; then adjust two edges with suturing.
And if you wish, cut the excess of the softened cord at the beginning with three or four stitches and secure it with a firm suture.
Then incise between the sutures; and afterward, treat for other injuries until he is healed and the wounds have closed.
Chapter lxix.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, yet for certain reasons it has been read to me and I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways: one is so that when a doctor is asked about it, he knows how to treat someone who undergoes it; the other way is that we have sometimes had need of castration for other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting.
In the case of what is done by incision, the way to proceed is that we should cut into the animal in warm water until its genitals are softened and lubricated and hang down. And then take those with your hand inside until they are relaxed and do not appear below the touch.
In the case of castration done by rupture and section, hold the animal and press the root of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side with two cuts.
And then cut those parts that you will have separated from the rest. And do not leave on those of the penis any excess skin, but rather make the circumcision subtle so that it is above the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by incision, because incision often leaves some part of the testicles which causes the animal to desire copulation.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two methods: one is when it appears in the space between the root of the testicles, where there is a figure resembling female genitalia, covered with hair.
And in some cases, that area between the root of the testicles passes urine.
In women there is a special thing: and it is that the knowledge of a woman's part above the pubis is thus like two testicles of a man somewhat round, in the inner part as the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: two of them for men and one kind for women. And it is that you should incise those tight muscles within which the infection spreads, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
And in the second kind of men, where urine is produced in the chain of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
About menstruation and flesh growth due to causes in women.
Menstruation is lightly held due to natural causes, but it is stressed and proper care must be given; sometimes in some women it is magnified to such an extent that it spreads as it does in men and persists during intercourse.
Then it is necessary for you to grasp the excess of menstruation with your hand or with cloth and incise it.
And do not hesitate to incise, especially at the root of the vein, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat it as you would other illnesses until it is healed.
Fleshy growth is flesh that appears in the armpit of the woman and slightly extends to the surrounding areas resembling a tail (and thus some call this "tail disease"); therefore, it must be incised as we would do with menstruation, and treated until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of a woman is not perforated or the passage is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that occurs either because the flesh is not properly fitted or due to a thin or thick phlegm.
And it occurs either in the main joint, or in the sides of it, or in the highest part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and it prohibits cooking and intercourse and childbirth, and often prevents menstruation.
And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then you should search for it with your fingers or with light.
But if the obstruction is due to thin phlegm and it is visible between the two lips, then you should clean and remove that.
And you should place poultices on both lips, and then use your fingers to gently probe from both sides.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread apart, and then gently stretch both lips to break the thin phlegm and open the obstruction.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on that area, and leave it there for a day to ensure that the incised area heals properly.
If the pus is thick and dense, then at that time you should scrape it out with a reed tube or with a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for an hour, and then scrape it out.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from biting, such as hachetia, dragon's blood, and enses, prepared with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry powder.
And then proceed with the other treatment for healing until it is healed.
And in some cases, other tissues become overly large, and then you should incise them according to this method. But if this is due to chronic abscesses, then do not treat the chronic abscess in the flesh in any way that is contrary to the method.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors that occur in the anus of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the outlets of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and with old hemorrhoids, thrombi are often formed.
And I have already mentioned in the division the types of these and the signs of them, and I will also say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
Therefore say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the region of the anus and do not appear to the senses, at those times do not be performed treatment with iron.
Those are the ones that are in the opening of the anus, on which one can feel with the sense of touch, those are the ones that can be treated.
And when you place the woman in the position of lying down, clean and approach the pile with scissors, or with a rough cloth, and incise those with a razor.
And then apply a powder to those to stop the flow of blood from one of the incising powders by mastication, such as acacia and similar ones.
And then bind the affected area with a compress for one hour, and then place it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then apply that area with a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and gallnuts and similar substances.
And then take flour of barley and compress that area with honey and sour wine and make a plaster on it with the following ingredients.
And if the blood is congealed, that is good; and if not, apply two ventose cups to it, and to the mammary glands with scarification.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of cilantro or in the juice of linden or in the juice of buckwheat in sour wine and apply it to the location; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
For the treatment of what is inside when it is diseased.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the Incision of the Bladder in Accidental Cases Affecting the Belly.
Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as inflammatory, stone-related, ulcerative, adherent, gangrenous, carbuncle-like, fistulae, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in detail.
And what I say in this treatise about abscesses refers to those that occur in the abdomen when they are of the type that require treatment, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness and sensitivity in that area, then do not proceed with incision, but treat it with what helps maturity until the acuteness of the condition subsides.
And now you should have the woman lie on a cushion that has two cushions; let her recline on her back and position her feet below the abdomen, slightly raised, and place her arms with her hands resting by her sides, and secure them with bandages as appropriate.
And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the abdomen will be made, the form of which will be described in the following cases.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it in the vagina at the entrance of the womb, and let what enters into the womb from the instrument not be more than the length of the vagina itself. If the instrument is longer than the length of the vagina, then you should place pillows against the texture of the vaginal opening so that it is prohibited for any instrument to enter the vagina.
And you should place the spiral that runs along the instrument on its side, so that the practitioner can hold the instrument and rotate the spiral until it is inserted into the opening of the vagina.
And when the area becomes swollen and is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then you should dry it using a piece of linen.
And when the discharge is evacuated, then you should place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and apply a bandage to the area around the vaginal opening.
And place clean wool over the womb and on the belly, submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated properly for about two days using the method that you deem appropriate until it is healed.
And in some cases, the womb and the wound should be washed with this water mixed with honey, and subsequently with water in which lily root or long-leaved arum has been boiled, and then return to the previously used method.
And if the wound is deep inside a damaged womb, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, and instead treat it as we have described in the section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat malformed fetuses in the manner described according to this non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs of light; and it is so when you see the woman strain at her lower parts and desire to smell the air, and she is deceived by what is above her in connection with parturition. When this happens, you will know that this birth follows a natural figure, and the expulsion will be over the head, while the second will either be suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the fetus descends gently, for when it expels the first one with its head, the second will follow, and both should be cleaned of those superfluities by proper cleansing.
However, if it is another type of birth, it is unnatural and not commendable, for when the fetus is expelled on its feet and the body of the fetus is delivered before the head and feet, or one hand or foot first, or the head and a hand or the belly, and frequently turns over its neck, resembling the figures of the unnatural births.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those cases, and which kind of birth is in them according to what they signify by that and are placed upon that.
When the fetus is placed upon the woman's head naturally, and it is strongly positioned on the woman and in a difficult place, and sometimes the strength of the woman is weakened, then act so that the woman has it, and evaporate with fenugreek juice and with oily unguents.
And then insert the instrument between those small ribs mentioned, and split it with the second part of the instrument, or dry it with its nail so that you can extract what is inside from moisture. And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then have the woman be treated with powder of feathers and powder of fenugreek with syrup.
And then command her, after the treatment, to be made to sneeze with certain conditions; and at her mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be expelled shortly.
And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce them to ease little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and have the woman held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the parts are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the dead fetus or tie the body together with your hand using cloth and extract it gently, as it will be expelled.
When the fetus is cut on its sides, you should then push those parts up, and immediately turn the fetus slightly, and then even it out, and then take a piece of it and stretch those parts little by little.
But when the incision enters into the things, then you command it to be pressed out, and make that person sneeze under certain conditions, for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you pause at its second natural position, for it will then come out easily with a slight incision.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hartshorn and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply it to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen. And then make the woman sit in warm water, until she reaches the hypochondria.
And when the parts below her are cleansed, then make the woman undergo smoke inhalation of myrtle and pause her for it. And when she has undergone smoke inhalation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and expel the contents of her mouth, and lift her, and press the part lowest in her abdomen gently, for the fetus will soon come out.
Proceed with the operation longitudinally by lifting one of its parts. Try to reduce the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and let it go.
And if it cannot be released, then make her lie on the bed, and strike the parts of it vigorously with percussion, and then administer liniments which are soothing and commended for mucilage.
And if labor has begun, then make her sit on the heels, and then study the reduction of the hand, and engage the operation according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command it to compress itself until it is completed.
Proceed with the operation on the buttocks by spreading its parts and ensure that the bandage is behind its main body. Let the midwife hold the fetus and turn that little one gradually, and let that process be facilitated.
And when it is time and the moment is equal, pause on the part covered with the oil and mucus that we have recommended.
And then command the one who is being treated to turn little by little, and when you have done this, place that thing over a cushion and command them to lean on the right side, and then command them to bend; and make them sneeze under certain conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When you begin the incision of the mother according to this method, consider carefully, and then proceed to make the second cut with your finger so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then you must incise that part of the abdomen so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus towards the interior parts until you pause at the place that is necessary, and tell the woman to bend several times, and if God wills, it will be quickly expelled.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins usually are born in separate births, but sometimes three or four are born at once, though this is rare and difficult to manage; however, these causes are beyond natural occurrence, and not common.
And among these cases, whether they are multiple, make a second incision, and separate them along the ligament at the umbilicus of each one. Sometimes they are born quickly as if it were one fetus naturally and easily, but other times they come out over several births as we have recommended.
And if some are difficult of their births and reach that which we have said about the non-natural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with both ease and subtlety, and with delay as well, and she acts according to every figure as it is prepared for the birth, aiming at health.
A remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should already be convinced that a woman miscarries at six months, and another carries to ten months fully formed, the cause of which is established by measurement according to the glorious wise ones.
And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is very easy to mistake one thing for another, and therefore it is necessary to know what is needed.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it is not yet removed, and you are forced to use surgical intervention, then it is necessary to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not affected by any of the accidents that lead to fear of loss.
Now it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head slightly lowered.
The minister should use a blade with two edges or soak it in oil so that the body does not swell due to the extraction of the stone.
And then moisten the mouth of the wound with olive oil and a paste made of flax, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and pastes, and then gently insert it into the wound, and then search with her hand for the location of the stones.
And here are the appropriate places for this: then consider whether the stone is prepared to descend over the head of the patient, and if so, place the hooks in the cheeks, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the chin, or at the clavicle, or in the regions near the ribs, or under the armpits.
But if the descent is towards the legs, then place them in the groin, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in the spot between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand with ease and place the hook in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the hard mass.
And then place and fix in position another hook, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not excessive according to its straightness alone.
And be careful at every part, so that the extraction of it is eased as if it were done like pulling a tooth.
So cover with water that which is between them so that the extension may be softened; and if any part of it is held back, then cover so that the midwife anoints some of her said ointment with oil and mixes these thoroughly and rolls in these that which is held back.
Then if the part of the fetus is protruding, now the hooks should be interchanged in the place which is more suitable; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is dislocated before the other one, and it is not possible to reduce it by manipulation, then cover with a cloth; and subsequently extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut either that or at the joint of the hand or elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is difficulty in delivery due to stiffness, or it is stuck by the tight fit of the water, then cover and place between the said spined instruments and cut the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly proceed if the fetus has a large head by nature: then it is necessary to cut that with something sharp, or use an instrument called “alundat” as we have said; and subsequently extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is stuck and is obstructed by the clavicle, then it should be cut so that the moisture which is in the joints may be effused.
If it is not complicated, nor does it lead to swelling, then cut open the head as soon as it is convenient for you.
And if the parts of the abdomen are pus-filled or are in a state of hydrops, then you should puncture that part through which flows the moisture that is within.
But if the feces are in the upper intestines, then the attraction of it is light and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is easy.
But if it is constricted in the abdomen and thighs, then you should remove that cloth with which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and thighs through which flows what is within them.
But if the other members remain stationary and only the head turns, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert your hand into the passage, and search for the head, and pull it together with the others into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull them out.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess that has occurred in her, then you should not apply anything heavy to it; instead, you should administer effusions of moist and fatty substances. And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be turned; and what we have said about the living fetus should be administered.
And if it cannot be done that way, then it is cut into pieces and extracted.
And do not leave any cause for the second one to occur.
And when you have completed the entire operation, now administer what we have said about the treatment for abscesses similar to those that occurred previously.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that a second pregnancy, and above the dead fetus another focus of infection. It happened to one who had an abscess in the navel area for a long time; it became internally swollen and filled with pus, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied to him some causes of strong attraction and extracted one bone from him, and after passing a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I examined the wound and extracted several bones from her, the woman being in her confinement period, and thus treated her for a long time, correcting her with a little pus.
And I did not find it strange, since in such cases there is knowledge and assistance for what the skilled physician administers for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of a spiral used in the major incision:
This is the form of a retractor in which it equalizes the leaves, to this equalization there are two spirals at the ends of two arms. However, this spiral should be finer than the string, and it should be made of copper or the wood of a tree.
And the width of each arm should be two fingers, and the margin of each side should be one finger, and the length of each is half a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two arms there are two adjustments of the same type of wood that are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a bit more, and the width of each is two fingers or a bit more.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the opening of the major incision so that they are opened when you revolve the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form, finer and lighter:
It should be made of copper or wood, similar to the form of forceps. However, at the end of each of these two attachments, as you see, the length of those attachments is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the major incision with these, then you lay the woman on her back with her legs hanging down, and insert what is between the thighs. Open your mouth and take the tool in such a way as you would with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want from the width of the larger opening until the measuring instrument does what you want.
The form of dizziness, which the ancients described:
Form of impulse in which the action is pushed forward:
Form of friendship in which the head is contented
And it is similar to forceps, at the end of which there are teeth, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you can see. At the end, it has teeth like those of a saw, with which incision and holding are performed. Form of friendship for few:
Form of a clamp having a spine:
Form of a clamp having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two ends at which the head is divided:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when their various types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is more convenient for their operation and more suitable for people according to their needs.
And do not neglect to prepare any of those instruments, wherever you may be, because the need for them is unavoidable.
Of the extraction of the second [molar]
When the second [molar] is retained after childbirth, you should order the patient to hold their breath, and then cause them to sneeze by tickling their nose, and press your hand over their mouth and nostrils; if it comes out this way, so much the better.
And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in it, and place it over the mouth of the mother along with herbs such as colchicum, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then cause her to sneeze as we have said, and the second [molar] will be quickly expelled.
But if this cure is delayed and it does not come out, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond oil, and then insert that into the womb and search for the second [molar] with it. When you have found it, take it out little by little. If it is stuck to the membrane of the mother, then proceed as we have recommended, and when she finds the second [molar], extract it slowly so that the mother does not fall due to strong traction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes that we have recommended, then you should guard against overworking on that which results from placing what has been extracted to the mouth of the mother into the woman's body; and subsequently treat that with cleansing and tetrapharmacum; for this will cause that thing to be reduced in size over a few days and it will dissolve and be expelled.
But when it is reduced, it should be raised from the lower abdomen to the head and to the stomach, which alleviates the illness; and then fumigations and appropriate treatments should be administered for this.
But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with natrtle and dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated after the retention of menstruation and during the second half of her menstrual cycle:
It should be made of wood or metal.
And the finer end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep it inside until the fumigation is consumed and then repeat it with another one.
Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Some children are born with their anuses not open, which is narrow and closed. Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully open the mentioned passage with her finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the rectum.
And then apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil; and afterwards, treat the area with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And if an obstruction of the anus occurs due to the hardening of a sore or abscess; then it is necessary to incise that hardening, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are usually hard and thick, which develop close to the anus or in the area between the buttocks.
And it is one fistula or multiple.
And as that hardness becomes old and discharges watery white pus or subtle purulence, sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
And these deep-seated fistulas are known by what is discharged from them through excretion and flatulence; sometimes the bad odor of excretion indicates that they are very severe.
Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the penis.
And in the one where a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is known, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently introduce a slender probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that area, now introduce a slender probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of this nor proceed with the treatment to find any cause of evacuation such as worms or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to its cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of that is the presence of urine from there and it should be prohibited to do anything that would hinder the healing process.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circumference, then the sign of that is that the probe passes here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and there is pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have weakness permanently; and that does not respond to treatment, nor does it heal easily.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is not a complete cure, and the treatment of these is laborious and futile for many physicians, which is well established.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for as I shall tell you, and this which I now say.
And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with his head down and raise his hips up, so that things are inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if it is in an ulcerated tortuosity, until you know where the probe passes.
And if that is around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already begun to penetrate on its own, or what you feel between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment by which help is hoped for in him, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues are constricted like a feather quill.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, that is good; and if not, then it will not heal at any time by another treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside; you say which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a membrane of flesh or of leather, sometimes the fistula is on that part where the surface of the intestine ends. Now the intestine dries up from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying both the probe, and it should be inside the fistula until the section reaches the place to which the end of the probe extends; and by means of the probe it is freed and treated.
And then cleanse those parts of the body that are affected by fistulas, which resemble an owl feather quill tube, and do not damage any part without cause.
But if blood flows when you are operating on those parts of the body affected by fistulas, then the thread and the sharp instrument should be cauterized with fire or with a strong medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: it tightens the adjusted flesh and stops the bleeding by removing excess moisture.
And then treat that with bandages soaked in cold water or in a thrice-prepared concoction until the area feels better, and afterwards treat the wound with hard flesh-producing remedies which generate and strengthen.
And medicines that have the properties of being styptic and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has penetrated inside the anal region and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And thus if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of leather or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, then no operation should be performed there except according to faith and hope.
The cause is to manage it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the drying inside so that it may be possible for you to introduce the proper treatment and cure, and do not proceed with drying if you do not injure the muscle containing the vein, and make sure to act according to the condition of the patient without their will; then treat it as we have said because it will heal quickly; or lengthen that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside towards the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then purify those ulcerated tissues which appear in the drying inside through incision; and then strive to restore the entire wound by drying, and if the upper opening of the pus does not consolidate, and remains an open fistula on the side of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is around the anus on the surface of the body near the spine and at the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, which resembles a needle used to prepare the cores according to this form:
and introduce it into that faithful wrapping of five layers or around them; then insert the probe with the medicine into the fistula until you achieve the drying inside.
But if it penetrates near the margin of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the medicine from that spot as if you were introducing your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the medicine and join both ends together, and secure each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when you incise the medicine in the flesh, firmly close it inside so that those tissues are incised between the two ends of the medicine and can heal.
Therefore, treat the wound internally so that it becomes consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, now make them penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, but do so in such a manner that there is motion within the preon, for it is not up to you to do this lest you injure the rectum; and then treat it internally until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with a spinous edge used to divide the fistula: one part of it is sharp and curved, while the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those areas.
Hemorrhoids exist in two types: either they appear around the anus like coal lumps, or they are soft and resemble grape bunches. And of these, there are small and large ones, and the pus flows from them constantly and is one type, and they are multiple, and some are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to less moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood mixed continuously flows, and their appearance depends on the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and to press inward so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you should clean yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your fingernail, and then incise them near their roots.
If the hooks do not hold because of their moisture and softness, then take some rough cloth or a piece of wool, and extract them with these instruments, and immediately powder certain powders around the incision to serve as cauterization; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterizing. And immediately treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the condition does not respond to evacuation, then cauterize the wound with a cautery in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the courtyard so that the condition evacuates quickly when the wound is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treatable, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and immediately treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for one who requires an incision, it is appropriate to administer sutures in this manner: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make the thread penetrate with the needle on the opposite side, and wrap both ends of the silk below the needle horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then tie the silk and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one unstitched so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or grease over the area; place it on the affected part and instruct the patient to rest. This is from within that part which enters the cavity; and when it is encased, treat those parts with other remedies until they are healed.
And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, you should then scrape those areas with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and pus is expressed from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they are healed.
Now you should scrape those areas more vigorously to remove the pus until fresh bleeding occurs and they are irritated; and then treat them until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is a key ingredient, and it appears as small round spots similar in color to the head of a nail, is found throughout the body but mainly below the waist and in those areas, and from these you should alleviate the pain.
Then you should incise what is around the hemorrhoid, and hold it with forceps or镊子，这里应该是“pincers”或“forceps”，中文里没有直接对应的词汇，但为了保持翻译的流畅性，我将继续翻译。“pincers”， and then remove it from its base; and then treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the area following the method described in its chapter.
A wart is a small, hard, rough bump on the surface of the skin, and they often appear in children.
Of the cure of the lung, that you should extend and incise it, or that you should remove what obstructs it whether hair or pelt within that lies. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, either with fire or with acute medicine.
A worm called "formica" is a small raised area or a thick fistula on the surface of the body that moves about, and when it is touched, it feels like an ant bite and spreads around the body.
The treatment for this is to take a needle tube of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the ant-wound so that it encompasses the circumference of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you incise what is in the circuit of the ant-wound, and insert it into the flesh around it, and remove the ant-worm from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a tube of horn or of iron according to this method:
Let the part above the tube be drawn out with subtlety, blunt (that is, not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger, it allows for easy rotation and manipulation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant-wound as was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the forms of instruments that you administer to patients.
Some spoons are made of silver or ivory or softened and hammered metal; and some spoons are made of those instruments small and large according to the ones with which they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children be small; and of those whose anus is raw or painful, let their spoons be small.
The form of the large and few spoon:
The top of the cannula above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is tied it should be so.
And the extremity of the pus below, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (that is, not open) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of its two flaps, and on the other side one flap, and the width of the flap should be according to the thickness of the rays and the thicker one slightly more.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or wool, and its length should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong wax from raw honey, which should be of this type of honey, or around it; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be tight at the head of the constriction between two distinct strong constrictions, and then seal each thread with sealing: But the quality of sealing accordingly is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and take care not to be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should lie on his back, raise his buttocks, and place under them a cushion or a chair; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or goose fat or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then gently insert it into the anus, and the assistant takes the bag and presses it vigorously until everything that is in the constriction is evacuated; and then remove the constriction and the patient lowers his buttocks to the wall.
And if medicine forces him to sweat, let him do so as much as he can; and if he sleeps through the entire night, it is better for his recovery.
If you treat him for illnesses involving the solution of the bowels and sweating from his body, now you should repeat the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, now the treatment should be gentle and mild, among those treatments that even children can tolerate.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment with both medicines according to their properties.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on what causes the plagues and according to the place where the plaques appear.
And the causes for which such wounds are made as stone throwing, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to these various causes.
But plagues that occur in different parts of the body such as a plague that affects the head, the neck, the feet, the abdomen, the groin, and similar parts of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of certain plagues by applying that reasoning and rule to other plagues as well.
And I will begin with simple plagues of the head, for the treatment of compound plagues will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Then say that when you encounter a simple wound on the head and it is not a fracture, at that moment consider: if it happened from throwing of a stone or similar object, and the skin has been broken only and there is a large bruise and you fear for that patient having a dangerous abscess, then immediately treat them by opening a vein to let blood, and do not delay this; and extract as much blood from them according to the quantity necessary based on the strength of the person unless some cause prohibits letting blood, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy in such a minor case, then reduce the amount of food and do not allow meat or heavy foods.
And place a poultice on the wound, if an abscess develops, apply it with rose oil alone or with a substance that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure of a dangerous abscess, then place a poultice on the wound, if it is recent and while the blood is fresh and the air has not changed, use the powder that I recommend in small amounts.
And if the air has already changed at that time, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by a sword or similar weapon, and the edges of the wound do not come together when pressed together, then approximate those edges with sutures as I recommend for suturing them.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and sinew, and it does not require extensive support but only a small suspensorium, then incise it appropriately and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the skin. Instruct the patient to eat foods that are light: fish and similar foods until they recover.
And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you cut away all that is purulent and remove it, and afterwards treat it.
And if in these wounds an artery or vein from which blood can flow is present, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that which has not been cut, then you cut that with a scalpel, or tie that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not suffice, then you cauterize so that the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore, you powder over those this powder, for it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil from henbane one part, blood of dragon two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix all thoroughly and sift it, and fill the wound with it, and bind it well with good compression so that it adheres to the dressing, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then bind that above the powders and leave it, and do not loosen it while it remains such that it is not inflamed, for the medicine will not be effective within it until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done solely with cautery, when henbane and dragon's blood are not available to you.
And this method of treatment is used for large wounds when it is necessary to lay them open and narrow them, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, do not apply the position of this powder then, but treat those with what we have said, namely placing on those some warm compresses of boiled wheat, or place on those flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they rot; and afterwards treat those with another treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with wheat.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of the ailments of the neck.
But if the ailment happens in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the ailment of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not use any compress except to avoid treatment with what has strong styptic properties, such as zinc ore and similar substances that harm the nerves and constrict them. And do not place on the ailment anything that causes excessive irritation, for the substance of the nerves is sensitive and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if it is treated with light medications, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil, either roasted or not roasted, and then wrapped when washed with warm water along with other mineral stones according to this method, and wet compresses.
If the wound is large, then stitch it up, or narrow its edges, and afterwards treat that with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or if there is danger of abscess at its lowest part, then pierce it in the place most depressed.
If an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it up, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the neck or entirely have been cut, and if the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should close the edges of the wound with sutures over the trachea without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and subsequently strengthen it with proper dressing, and leave it for several days; afterwards treat it with remedies that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
If the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from them; and what does not seem appropriate to you, leave it until the wound suppuses and separates on its own.
And if the wound is recent, then powder it with powder that is recommended for it. If a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what will be described in its appropriate chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and you feel the depth of it, then consider whether there is air in the wound when the patient inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in the wound and it is fresh with its own blood, then for the first hour you should apply powder to it, and do not tighten it so that the blood does not remain trapped within the depths of the wound and return to the heart and poison the patient, but rather apply an attractive poultice to it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not available to you, then apply a cloth over the wound opening so that it absorbs what remains of the moisture; and have the patient lie on the wound so that whatever is adhered to it can run out.
But if three days or more have already passed since the wound appeared and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of breath occur to the patient, and you see other good signs from it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of the wound is unnecessary and all the time it remains open, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a stab with a sword or knife and it is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then treat it according to what requires stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already affected the bone and pieces of it are embedded in the wound, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the swelling subsides, for their extraction is too difficult.
And for other swellings in the other members, the aid in treatment is the aid of what we have said.
Of the swellings of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
And a small disruption is difficult to perform by another method, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if not treated with an intervention to return them to their place immediately, as they become swollen and enlarged, making instruments difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the belly band is not difficult, whereas it is difficult in both of the previous types mentioned.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for suturing other swellings of the body.
And the two other specific sutures are also used for other swellings, but they are more specifically appropriate for the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each one with explanation and declaration.
Therefore, I say that when the swelling is small and caused by some reason related to the belly band, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly band becomes inflamed due to exposure to cold air.
Therefore, when it is thus, the time comes that you should scald that which is inflamed with a sponge or cloth moistened in pure water, or soaked in vinegar, and cyperum, and spica, and apply those to the bag so that the inflammation may be resolved.
And sometimes you will find this in one where there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, now you moisten the bag with water in which chamomile and mallows are steeped, for by this the instrument of healing is made pleasant with little cause.
But if the instrument of healing is excused near this treatment, now you should divide the abscess slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and it not be necessary to dry in proximity due to need and deficiency.
Regarding the instrument, this is its form:
One part of it is sharp-pointed, and the other part is blunt, with a delicate tip, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly rounded.
And when the swelling is enlarged and you remove the bag, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible in that manner, for it is better.
But when the abscess is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now it is necessary that you have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs further apart than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and feet higher than the lower parts.
And so if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your intention and your consideration entirely for this, so that the part in which the ailment is may be lower than the other.
And so you should administer this in major ailments and in minor ailments.
And in minor ailments, pause what is prepared by you, and then have it administered by one of your most trusted assistants, who should hold the rupture entirely with their hand and adjust the lips, and then uncover to proceed with suturing at some appropriate time.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or an equivalent to a needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then leave from the extremity of the rupture with your ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not insert pins at both ends of the thread, but rather at both ends of the tissue that is below the edges of the wound; until you make it penetrate into that part; and when you have already joined both ends of the thread and both ends of the tissue, thus making four knots.
And then tighten around the needle with double knots, and do this from both sides repeatedly, and then join the two lips of the wound together appropriately; and then use the thickness of your finger to guide another needle into it, and then tie that one off with a knot just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with additional needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly; and coarse ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, so they should be of medium fineness and thickness.
I must not say that the needle should be placed at both ends of the bone in question, so that the flesh is not cut too quickly and the wound has time to heal before consolidation.
And they should not be extended with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And when cutting the ends of the needles, do so in such a way that they do not protrude and cause discomfort to the patient lying down; and place cotton pads over the stitches, which should cover the ends of the needles; leave them like this until you know that the wound has already healed.
And in these cases of stitching, it is most convenient to use needles in such a way that for small wounds, only one needle or two may suffice.
But the second stitching is common: it involves applying stitches to the four ends of the wound, including both ends of the bone and two extremities of the sinew, at once, with a needle that is carefully wrapped in fineness and thickness.
And when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that part where you began, so that the thread is drawn back to the most prominent part of the wound, so that the stitching will be like a second layer of fabric, tightly securing it.
And place each stitch about the thickness of your smallest finger apart.
And this stitching method is known to surgeons.
And with such stitching, I closed a wound in the abdomen of a man who was stabbed with a knife, where the tear in the wound was larger than one palm, and it had penetrated the intestines about two palms from the small intestine, and the disruption was in the middle part; then I reduced it after the intestine had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and he covers it with bandages, and it is healed; and afterwards let him exercise the limb gently, and it will return to its proper condition.
And the other doctors judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, for I did not cover that wound with any bandage, since it was in a place where no one could reach or apply any medicine, but placed over the wound two pieces of cloth daily moistened with honeyed water until it was healed.
But I will describe two species of suture according to the narrative of Paulus.
And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus as the needle penetrates at the edge and in that place tie knots according to straightness and length of the whole body, and leave the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in the same end of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the end of the thread that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
And make that penetration such that when you penetrate with the thread at its end on the side where all of it will be inside, it penetrates properly.
Here begins the method for this technique, which starts at the extremity that is on one side of the suture and removes the needle that penetrates there. Then place it in that loop and attach the end of the suture that is on the other side to this extremity; then remove it from the loop that is nearby.
And do this one side and then the other, and do this alternately with each stitch as you sew all of what is outside according to that example.
The sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture needle as you would when sewing skins, thus you sew the suture one side from the loop end, and leave the other side until it is complete.
The second kind of suture which is called "Gualia" and which they recommend for it, is that you sew it similarly to how some physicians do it, thus adding each part to its corresponding part naturally; and they join the end of one to the end of the other opposite side, and this is done as I tell you.
Place the needle at the end of the suture on your right side of the outer part, and make it penetrate into the inner part in that spot, leaving two ends of the suture free; then rotate the needle and make it pass from outside to inside through the two ends of the suture.
Then rotate each one, and make them penetrate from the inner part into the outer part through two other ends of the suture on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture of which a prior mention is recalled.
This is the speech of Walia.
And if someone were to say that the suture of the abdomen is done with two needles, it is such that you insert a pin into each of them, and begin by inserting one needle according to what you need to do, and make that penetrate within the other side according to the suturing method of those who sew clothes in the same manner.
And you should know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is judgment regarding other wounds as well.
The reason is that when you manage to treat the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling, clean it properly, and prepare it appropriately, then apply powder for healing.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ointments that you prepare in such a way that they form hard scabs and draw out the pins, and let them be applied firmly and observed; and subsequently treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply something to it immediately, as it begins to get hot and becomes inflamed, and change that twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, since you will not need other medication for such simple wounds in most cases.
If you fear that the plague will communicate lesions to the principal members, then you should immerse a piece of linen in high-quality boiled oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and dress them.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the abdominal organs, since this is likely to happen, then you should apply styptic black tibetan medicine to it, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the organ and an incision must be made penetrating into its cavity.
And know that what is in the thick intestine heals more slowly than what is in the thin intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called “gegunu” does not receive healing from a plague that affects it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is pus, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your skill as you would with the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to the space and has already become green or black, then when you apply hot irons over the area that is discolored, so that blood flows, because in pus there are veins and arteries.
And immediately incise what is around that bandage, and place the two ends of the iron hanging from the area below the plague outside it, so that above you may be relieved of the attraction of it by stopping the flow of pus and emission of the disease.
Remembrance of the troubles that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because I saw one who had been wounded in the belly by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, with discharge and gas.
Then I bandaged the area without being confident in its healing, but tried to alleviate that part which was healing and where the tissue was consolidating.
And when I saw the area already consolidated, I feared the damage that could arise from this bad event in his belly; and no one suffered any harm from this accident by keeping to their usual food and drink habits, and soon they were bathing and exercising as usual.
And some experienced people say that when there is a small wound in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the edges of the wound and place one of those ants, with its mouth open, on the edges of the wound. When the ant bites down on them, cut off its head because it will stick and not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
It is possible that the purse [surgical ligature] be made of fine gut, which is made from the gut of an animal and is as thin as a needle; and it is that you take the end of this gut, and it should be bare, and join the end of it to the fine gut, wrapped around, and then thread that gut on needles and sew it to that purse, and reduce it at the division.
And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine guts, then at that time there can be only a partial healing, and not a complete healing of it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it is not healed properly and becomes old, and forms an ulcer, and does not heal completely over time and is not excised, then wherever in the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it that same abscess.
And a fistula, in truth, is a felted node, hard and white, at which there is no pain but rather itching, just as the itch of goose flesh is; and for this reason it is called that raised spot, that is, an irritation.
And it is in some people moist, which flows continuously; and the moisture is excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is fitting that I tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through an operation with my methods.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of them affect large veins and arteries, others nerves, or the brain, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and among these are those that occur near the main part of the limb and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are among the illnesses difficult to heal, and do not receive a cure, and occupy much labor and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of lead's nature makes it easy and flexible around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously to determine if there is bone or nerve here, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with such openings that are beyond your full strength, your complete investigation, and your understanding of the disease and pain beneath your compression on the area, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have stood firm on all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure with confidence: consider whether the fistula is an apparent one that is near or in a clean location, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places I have told you about.
Now you should treat the fistula as described in its narration beforehand, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the skin opening or similar places, and care for it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it is necessary to incise it as far forward as you can, and then remove all the corrupted flesh; then apply plasters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
And do this for several days until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, then you should explore it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any involvement with a vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should cut that away until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with what promotes flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not reached complete removal of the corruption; and then uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it with the utmost care, and then treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and then you must content yourself with treating that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is possible for you to remove that; then you should pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for this purpose.
And if small pieces of bone remain, then carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those ligaments or muscles if necessary, and free the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at this moment, then apply what can ease the swelling over the wound, and leave it open until such a time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and guard against the healing of the wound so that it does not become consolidated, and keep the section that you have incised during your operation constricted.
Having said that, if you fear to proceed, apply a cloth soaked in warm oil or Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, because when these muscles have relaxed, and the bones are separated from them, and their attachment is loosened.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or ox or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape off that corruption only from behind until the blackness and corruption are removed, and subsequently restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it where the corruption has spread, and subsequently treat it until it is consolidated.
Here is what is recommended to you concerning that which happens to a man in his condition so that you may use it as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man by age around xxx years, to whom it happens that he feels pain in his abdomen, and of the parts inside there is an injury concerning the matter inside the body through which the matter reaches the abdomen, and this matter forms into a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the time was extended due to the mistake of the physicians during which the abscess became hardened, and it accumulated pus inside, and his cure was delayed until the swelling formed fistulas, and they made holes through which all discharged putrid matter and the moisture of the body.
And then the care of many physicians lasted for two years, and none of them possessed knowledge in the art until I was called.
And I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was flowing from those holes in great quantity; and his body was already entirely weakened, and the color of his skin was yellow.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those holes, and the probe reached the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the holes and found that they reached from all parts of the swelling.
And then I decided to incise over one of the holes so that I could expose a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already turning to earth and was decayed and blackened. And a part of the swelling had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I used what had been shown to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I treated not the bone but that corruption which I had excised and prepared, and which I had already reduced.
And then I paused the healing of the wound with medicinal remedies for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I reopened and exposed the bone again above the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
And I treated what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it did not restore.
And then I exposed it on another occasion and did not cease to excise the bone little by little particularly and forced its restoration, and it did not heal until I had excised around one palm of it, and that extract along with the marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
And iteration is not necessary in the operation and cutting of it except for the disposition of its fever and the weakness of its tolerance and fear of death, because it was affected by this at all hours due to excess evacuation and fainting.
And thus it healed completely, and there is no flesh instead of the bone; and his condition in his body has improved and he regained his strength; and he returned to his normal disposition and did not experience contrary effects while walking or from any cause.
But if it is a prominent bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it; pause with this thicker thread after the first one; then wrap the thread around the skin near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus expose the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the knife does not injure the skin.
Place a cloth or towel under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use shears on corrupted flesh.
You should use the shears on the corrupted area little by little, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear to the senses, then apply the shears from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, and it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you must uncover the flesh from all sides entirely; and afterwards place a cloth underneath, and then cut that of the first part where there is the corruption until the cutting of the other part continues.
And let the shearing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in proportion but is uneven.
And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must inquire about how the corruption appears to you, and then open that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and adjust each unevenness to what is appropriate for you, without coming into conflict with veins or nerves.
And know which incision tools and shears are appropriate to cut these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare suitable instruments for every kind of operation.
And know that the operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long experience of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of diseases, then you have yourself what is appropriate to use those instruments for every disease.
And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simples among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment upon others. Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be in the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not appropriate unless you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with the curve at the top and the sharpness of the iron, and the handle of wood properly made. Shape of the liver:
Shape of razors with a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this resembles a reed, and its tip is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a reed that is suitable for the ratio of what is penetrated in bones:
And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it seems to fit all the causes that we have mentioned regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
Regarding the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Extremities may need to be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not help, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent reason; in such cases, it is necessary for you to cut off that limb at the point where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may escape from death or severe illness, which would be a greater harm to the body.
And the sign of that which befalls one is that the member becomes black until it is cauterized so that fire has consumed it, or else you may approach the blackness until that corruption there in that member kills it and takes hold of the entire body; and thus cautery should be applied to it.
And similarly, this is caused by the percussion of certain poisonous causes, such as from a scorpion, sea creature, viper, or Russell's viper and similar ones.
And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space for the corruption to advance into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should incise at the base of the joint and not give space for the corruption to advance into the elbow of the arm.
And if it spreads to that part, then you should incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption passes to another part and surrounds the shoulder, then that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause for this condition in treatment is a matter of proper dosage.
And similarly, do this for the foot when corruption spreads to the toe; then you should incise it between two of the joints.
And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it spreads to the toenail, then you should incise the toe at the joint of the toenail.
And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then at this point there is no remedy but dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
And the method of incising or tying off an extremity is that you bind a ligature below the part where you wish to cut, and place another ligature above the location; extend one ligature towards the lower parts, and extend another towards the upper; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then it may be incised or tied off.
And it is necessary to cover the area with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and treatment for abscesses.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the site immediately, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then bind the injured limb with bandages where appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his home, this very accident which I and you have recommended, the one that severely affected him due to burning that was similar to a fire combustion.
And that corruption spreads initially in his finger and then tends to affect the entire body.
And then that man prepared himself for the possibility that his condition would worsen beyond recovery due to the intensity of the pain and burning he endured, and he amputated that limb at the joint, and thus healed from it.
Soon corruption occurs in that joint of the hand indicated.
Then it comes to me, and I use what I have prepared with the medicines that I placed on it for the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not repelled but begins to move to the other joint until it reaches the hand.
And the patient asks me to cut off the hand, but I do not want to do that, hoping for the repulsion of that superfluity, and more so fearing that cutting off the hand might lead to death, as the power of the disease was very strong.
And after he left me, he returned to his own land and it was reported to me that the man prepared to cut off his entire hand, and he healed.
And I have included this narration only so that it may be assistance regarding the nature of this disease, and to indicate its significance and according to which it should be treated.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends so that there is a collection of pus, and then it ruptures and opens, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption, nor does it affect bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends so that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
And in the treatment of this, incise that wound entirely as it is revolved, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the wound will adhere and that such corruption has not yet reached its final consequence, and there is a passage in the wound, then now treat it with an enema.
And you must consider the smell, and now if it is strong, and the arm that you use has a fetid odor, then give an enema with Egyptian medicine, which consists of oil, vinegar, and saffron in equal parts, and mix them over fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and give an enema with that for the smell, and stretch the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
And then extract that medicine with care; and do this for several days until the smell is cleansed and the corruption is removed.
And sometimes an enema is given with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of wheat, put them over water; then strain it and give an enema with that until you are certain that the wound now is clean.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then give an enema with water and honey mixed equally three times, and give an enema with vinegar and honey mixed, for the property of honey cleanses and washes, and vinegar makes the wound adhere, especially when the vinegar has a surplus of styptic and drying properties.
And when you see that some wounds are swollen and you confirm that the sinus is already drained, then irrigate those with water that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take a decoction of white oak bark and dissolve it with rose oil and vine stiptic; or what you irrigate with some medicines and other decoctions which have the properties already written in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the cannula of the irrigation to pass through, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause while wrapping it in a decoction of Egyptian herbs or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should suture the edges of it and leave a quantity through which the irrigation can pass.
And if the orifice from which the pus flows is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where the pus can flow downward, for when the pus is obstructed in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus near the lower bone as you wish, then make sure to prepare the member in such a way that the pus flows easily according to your ability and that there is no obstruction preventing the flow of the pus.
May he who is above the opening of the sinus, which you should probe at all times so that what is lodged in it may come out. And so that you may know whether what flows from the wound is fresh blood or clotted, or digested, or undigested.
And for this reason you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that has been discharged over the opening of the sinus adheres or tends to adhere, then you should loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the crust, then change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
But if within the sinus there is space for subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing will be appropriate, because some people in whom flesh grows slowly on their wounds, and similarly with those in whom the opposite occurs.
And if for many days the wound remains undigested and full of pus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied, for there is an excess of moisture to be reduced.
And the most important thing for healing is to take a drying dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the wound along with an earlier ointment in its substance, and see how that works on it, and use it accordingly.
It appears in that action, when there is no bandage, they find a piece of cloth, honey when it has been cooked so that it becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and pound them, and sprinkle all over the honey which is on the fire, and then spread this over linen and stretch that over the wound; and spread that with the honey in which you have cooked until it was thickened, and sprinkle over cloth and stretch that.
And sometimes they administer with the linen long and roots of celestial lilies (and celestial lilies are) and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simple substances or adjust them, sprinkle those and sieve and powder over the honey which has been recommended; and wrap it up in that.
And if the wound is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, now you know that the corruption is in the core of it, and it makes an inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
On the treatment of blisters, cracked nails, and the cutting and division of a finger.
A blister is an abscess that arises from under the nail of a toe or finger, and it can also arise in other fingers. When it prolongs and its treatment is more difficult, it may be an abscess caused by cautery, or it may become corrupt. It secretes pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail, and quickly corrupts the entire area. Its corruption often reaches the bone causing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes blackened, and its color turns dark.
Therefore, when you have the instrument in water as we have said in the division and do not compress your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all the excess that is swollen from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound nearby, for cauterization is helpful in such cases.
But if the bone is exposed and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail withdraw and compress the flesh inward, and begin to press upon that spot, then it is necessary for you to apply a fine probe below the angle of the nail that presses on the flesh, and urge it up and incise that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and then cure that area with applications until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then it is necessary for you to incise the bone and extract it, for it is never healed when there is corruption in the bone.
And if you find the corrosion and corruption spreading to the joint, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to where the pain is felt, and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there is a contusion or inflammation at the nail, and there is severe pain there, then it is necessary that you bleed the patient at the beginning, and subsequently dry the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from above to below, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain, and it would result in the formation of excess tight tissue in that location; and then treat that area with something that alleviates pain.
This may be adjusted, which is natural in many people: it is soft and fleshy there, or it is soft there in the bones, or it is soft there in the nails.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birthplace of the thing is in some parts of the said joints. But that which is born in some parts of the finger does not cause harm, and that which is soft at the joints causes much harm.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easy, and it is such that you should incise it at its root with a large spatula.
But for that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, guard against its amputation.
But in that which is born at the end of the finger, it is necessary to incise the flesh of it with a round knife into the bone, and then use one of the appropriate saws, and afterward treat what is inside until it heals.
But for consolidation that occurs between the said bones due to habitual pressure or by birth of the person who was thus formed, or by disease or burning from fire, or similarly, then it is necessary to section that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
And then place between their membranes in oiled linen so that they do not heal too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are healed as necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of them on the palm, then you should section that consolidation as it is prepared and appropriate to the shape of the member.
On the incision of veins, so are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins, and they are thick-walled veins filled with excess melancholic humors that flow to the limbs of the body, and the greatest accumulation of these occurs in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then it is necessary that you administer purgatives from the black bile of the body several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently let blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
However, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is that they are incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and completely removed.
The sectioning is done in this manner: first, apply hot water to the leg so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is a sediment in the leg, and then tightly bind the leg with bandages at the part above the knee and below the calf, and then tie off the vein at one place or two, or three with wide ligatures, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards, until the amount of blood is removed that you want and that suffices for what the strength of the patient can tolerate.
And then bind it tightly, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full, and inform the patient about this.
However, the raising of them is according to this method: you should shave the leg of the patient if it has hair on it, and then put him in hot water so that his leg turns red and the veins become prominent; or exercise it vigorously with physical activity if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
From the side of the neck cut open the vein on the right by section either in front or at the back of it, or lower down sever the tendon.
Near the shoulder use hooks and strip the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and you should recognize its appearance when you see that part turning black.
And thus as you expose it and from the neck you see that white one which is the tendon.
And then place the ligature below where it is elevated and detached from the neck, and suspend it with hooks or threads.
And then make another incision near that incision at three points, and then strip the neck from above the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it at the rear section where the tendon is, and then extract that and elevate it until it passes through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision above that.
And do this until you extract it from the incision that is highest or farthest from all the incisions, until everything has passed through; and now cut it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate it, now insert a needle with a strong double thread and ligature it and extract it, or place the ligature below it and rotate your hand in all directions until it is dislodged. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and blame will come upon you for this harm.
And when all the air has been expelled, then place on the wound a cloth submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with twists for which there is an enveloping layer at its sides, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then you should cut along each twist of it and at the places where it is enveloped, and afterwards suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; use your prudence in this.
Shape of the incision with which the vessel is cut:
It is not as sharp as the hooks nor has a pointed end so that it does not injure the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, like lion's, because if it were delicate, it would cut the vein due to its delicacy; however, it should be unnecessarily thick as we have said.
About the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is found in the thighs in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India where no grass or crops grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its formation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin are born inside the body from serpents and between the skin and flesh.
Here is the translation:
Then when it appears at the opening, wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one drachma, up to two drachmas, and fix that and let the lead hang from the crutch.
And as many times as you expose any parts to the air, wrap that in lead and fix it. And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that too deeply until it has come out, for if you incise it while it is contracted, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in the place and a bad ulceration.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains no cause for harm in the body.
And this vein extends in some people to a length of five palms and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate it along the body until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days; and subsequently treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes branches off, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
On cutting into worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands as cattle disease because often seen among cows and it is a worm that has been born between the skin and flesh, which moves throughout the body up and down, and is revealed through sensation due to its movement from limb to limb until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms, serpents, and parasites in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then suddenly it becomes heavy and enters there, destroying the brain, which often leads to many deaths.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is done only according to its wandering movement and appearance to the senses. You must press on what is above it and what is below it with binding and constriction, and then dry over it and extract it.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire over the place where it resides. The main cause of fear is its corruption, by which it corrupts the location as we have said.
And if you see it reaching the head near the brain, then press strongly above the eyebrows and then dry over it, and extract it. It is important that the patient uses purification of their body with medicines to evacuate foul humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
On incision for the disease nafir.
This illness is called nafir in our homeland, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and it often changes from one limb to another.
And now I will describe that illness as I will recount it to you. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I found a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After it had been ruptured for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation was spreading as quickly as wax melts and spreads, though more rapidly than would be expected, like living silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain began in that area and spread into the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
And then it spread to the other parts of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that the illness was spreading throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another. And I had seen this before in my own practice in this manner, but I have never seen it change so quickly from one limb to another as I did in this case. But I have not seen it happen in my patients as it did in the woman.
And I thought that this was due to the fact that the woman was of delicate constitution, with weak limbs and exposed veins, in which this inflammation appeared as it changed.
It is necessary that this counter-measure not appear in those who are delicate and of weak corporeal vein blood.
And when you want to treat it, and the patient feels that pain, at that moment do not appear as we have said, but then strengthen around it and gently press on it until that trapped air is released, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat that by evacuating the body and expelling air, and use potions to dissolve foul pills and similar remedies.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are varied according to their types, and according to the parts of the body where they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, and others small, concave, blunt, or solid; and among them are those with three angles, and those with tongues; and there are also those which are barbed.
Of the signs of the head are when it falls onto the arrow, and it passes through the bone, and exits from the sphenoid which is above the brain, for it happens due to violent soda, and scotoma, and vertigo, and hardness in the eyes, and inflammation and hardness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and easily is severed speech and destroyed voice, and exits from the place of the wound humidity white like dust, and there appears on the face moisture of the flesh.
And so if you perceive these signs in me, then you should abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were lodged in a hard place, not a soft one; and easily the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse, and blood from the wound is black and thick, and coldness affects the extremities, and cold sweat appears; therefore you know that death will come very soon.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are that foam-like blood comes from the wound, and the veins near the neck become congested, and the patient's color changes, and he exhales a great breath, and seeks to draw in cold air.
And if the arrow falls on the membrane which is in the buttocks, then the pain at that moment is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and one cannot move any of the body's muscles.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then very soon there appears from the wound some undigested food.
And if the arrow is stuck in the belly, and it is embedded within, make some sort of incision into the wound, or the cloth, or gut which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure without the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder, and urine comes out with it, and the process causes some harm to the parts outside, and there is severe pain over the wound, then you know that it is fatal.
But the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the hip and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may signify to you about your own treatment.
The cause of this is that when an arrow struck a man in the lacrimal bone near the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side and left the cartilage of his ear untouched, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which struck him in the cartilage of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was deeply embedded such that only a small portion of it could be grasped, to which adhered part of its shaft; it was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with iron at the tip but no feathers.
And the Jew recovered, and no harm came to his eye.
Of extracting one arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the groin, and it was an Arab arrow, which has rings; then I cut between two grooves on that [arrow], and it was submerged in his flesh; then I carefully worked at that [arrow], and soon extracted it, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he was thought to die from that; and so, after passing xxx days without any change in his condition, I cut into the arrow and removed it, and he recovered, and no further incident occurred.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated both sides of him, and the wound had become consolidated on him, and after seven years, the arrow was exposed at the root of the swelling.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her abdomen, and the wound had become consolidated within her, and there was no change in her condition for some time, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face, and the wound had become consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not feeling any pain, and similar cases have been observed.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been shot in the middle part of his nose, and it had already deviated to the right slightly, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
Then I examined the wound of the finger with a narrow probe; then I felt it carefully, and did not feel anything there; but she felt pain just below her right ear, so I thought that this pain was at the tip of the finger.
And I applied a plaster to the place with an emollient that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the place would reveal itself to me so that I could see the location of the finger, as it had done before.
And no significant incident occurred at the site where the finger had reached; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident. As the wound healed, after some days, on one day, I felt the finger inside its socket and recognized this as a sign.
Then I applied acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and with a probe I tested that area, and discovered the tip of the finger delicately adhering to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the exposure of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the finger became visible to me, and it took me about four months to reach this point.
And after the wound had healed sufficiently, and it seemed possible to me to insert forceps into it and remove it, but I did not proceed with this method. Instead, I continued to carefully consider and devise ways to extract it, until one day I decided to use forceps made specifically for this purpose, as described at the end of the chapter, to extract it; and then I restored the wound.
And some surgeons judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was cured completely, and there was nothing wrong with it.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you may understand this rule and its significance regarding what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood by mere narration nor can they be grasped from this book.
And the skilled artisans compare a little with words; and with what is present about what is absent; and when you encounter new operations and new instruments, you should seek the descent of the causes from this art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in fleshly locations and is drawn out and extracted.
And if you do not observe the moment when you catch it, sometimes it is better that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes softer and lessens the attraction of it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not observe the proper moment, then leave it for several days and repeatedly work on its attraction and motion each day, and then it will be extracted.
And if you do not observe the proper moment even after several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is concealed from view, then you should examine that area carefully, and if you feel it, then try to extract it with instruments that are suitable for doing so.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you find that it is necessary to extract it using the ears through which it may be reached, then cut away the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as possible with all the skill you can muster; and proceed with this, if you cannot accomplish its extraction by avoiding cutting the flesh and causing fractures or twisting of them until you succeed.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it may be, then you use both your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; with delicacy according to its delicacy that the arrow is not broken and that it is made difficult to grasp of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less swollen and inflammation subsides, and then repeat what is now easier to manage. But if there is contrary bleeding, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its proper chapter.
And guard your virtue from incision of veins or nerves, or cord, and administer everything possible in every way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And when you make the arrow straight so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the arrow should be set in it, for this is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But arrows that are discharged from the opposite side or that you have already moved some part towards the outer parts, or cause gilbosis at the extremity of the arrow due to the feeling of the part below the shoulder and often elevate it; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then pull it, for it is made easy by this method.
If it is retained in the bone, then turn it [the arrow] the opposite way so that the shaft presses against the bone, and enlarge it thus until you extract it.
And if not, leave it like that for several days, and then try again when the swelling has subsided.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out with your hand.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer force, then insert something, if it is blunt, into the hollow so that it goes into the cavity of the bone along with the arrowhead, and then push it out with your hand.
But if the arrow is curved, then push it out with a strong tool inserted into it, for the arrow will be straightened by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you hollow out all the flesh in which the venom is present, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near so that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it, then cut above it and guard against injury to veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound as needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which are made like pincers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
Of those [materials], various types of patches are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the material, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
like a rod so that the instrument may be guided into the concave arrow and is pushed by it.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at certain times, such as xxx, from which at the head xvi are done; two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two tendons that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are called algelic veins; and there are also two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five. Of these, one is a cephalic vein, which is also called the wild leaf; and the people call it "the vein of the head," it is a thick vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and they name that the people "vein of the whole body," and basilic is a vein which is placed on the domestic leaf, and it is called "citillar," and they call that the commoners "vein of the belly"; and the biceps tendon, which is placed over the elbow, in which phlebotomy is performed, and appears above the wrist by manifest appearance; and salvatella, which is the vein between the thumb and the little finger, and it lies on both sides.
And on the back and in the hollow there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the wild boar's spine; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the hollow of the domestic animal's spine; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the hollow of the wild boar's spine; and in the hollow there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, migraines, and chronic diseases of the head.
And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done by shaving the patient's head, and rubbing the patient's head in the occipital area at the location of both veins with a large piece of cloth using good friction; then bind the patient's hair under a bandage so that the two veins appear near their ears in two lower parts of the head; and feel those veins with your finger, and if you can sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where you should proceed.
Then take the lancet, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon to the upper parts and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that amount; and let as much blood out as you wish.
And then bind it with poultices and leave it as such until it is healed.
And here follows at the beginning of the book the inscription of those and their cautery.
But the two arteries, for the soldiers the benefit of phlebotomy is to remove chronic and ancient evil and frequent ophthalmia and acute effusions of superfluities to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: have the patient sit with their arm bent so that the two veins appear clearly by manifest appearance and feel the pulse below your finger; then at this time attempt it.
And then raise the tourniquet above the vein to the upper part with your finger, and introduce the phlebotomy incision below, and raise the vein up; and cut it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient's tourniquet, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place it on the cut and poultices and tighten that above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And here is the reminder of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is also the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and headache and stiffness and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is as I recommend to you; so that the patient tightens their arm with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a fossor, which has this form:
Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the furrow above that vein and strike it from either side or for some other reason in this manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then untie the patient's binding and apply that [treatment] until he is healed.
And in some cases, a femoral vein incision is made, but it does not need to be acute like other incisions; rather, it should be blunt. Incise that [vein] transversely because the bone is close and strong, and you might break it if the incision is too fine.
May the benefit of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes be used for treating eye itchiness, hardness, and grease in the eyes, as well as diseases of the face.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient should hold his arm with a bandage, and then you make the incision there while you are standing over his head.
And the venesection should be made transversely along a bit towards the vein a bit, because in that place there is little flesh; and if the incision is fine, the tip of it might break easily.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those [veins], and bind them for one night, and then untie them.
And the venesection of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent sweating, and for diseases of the face and migraine and hardness that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and brings it near to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet sharp long and place it in the middle part of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear by feeling here, and for the blood begins to flow so soon.
Push your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
The harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction of breath and the beginning of leprosy and many other diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
The quality of the phlebotomy of these is that the patient strains each one in his neck with a cloth; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet sharp little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the cloth and strain both veins with gentle pressure so that the patient is not overstrained, and let them rest in the evening for the illness to be healed.
And the harm of phlebotomy of the thick veins leads to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are inside the nose and around it.
Of the quality of phlebotomy is that you should place the patient before you and tighten his neck with a bandage, then roll back his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because around those same veins there are small black veins; and then incise each one with an incision according to the procedure.
If doubt is before you and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of them and in the most apparent of them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is preferable to those precautions that are in the throat, to inflammation of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you should place the patient between your legs facing the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side for a vein and on the other side for another vein, and the color of each one inclines to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to exceed with your hand in phlebotomizing those veins, for below them are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend are those that usually run throughout all people, and phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either place on the phlebotomy site a small cut or incision with subtlety inclining; or use scissors for phlebotomy, and test if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
Let the ligatures be applied as usual, and it is suitable to open the concave full veins with prominent origins, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
And this venesection is of lesser width and has a more delicate tip, and it is suitable for the venesection of fine veins that contain thin blood.
But the benefit of the venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that affect below the armpit and the neck, and from what dries the legs and the abdomen.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, when performing venesection on that vein, to be very careful with it and to act with great caution, because there is an artery nearby. If he errs and punctures the artery instead of the vein, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to perform venesection on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather section it carefully with ligature.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another, or search for some branch of it; or perform venesection at the end of the arm, where it is more visible; and section that with a phlebotomy ligature as we have said.
If you want the phlebotomy of the middle vein, then place your hand in front of the constriction of the arm until you reach the area between where you know the pulse to be, and just above it on the inner part; then press the arm there and make an incision along the concave line for phlebotomy as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in that space.
And when you see it, as you tighten the ligature, if there is swelling in the area that you marked on the inside, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; then you should tie and leave your hand there for some time; and afterward remove your hand, and if the bleeding has stopped after a few moments, then tighten the arm there.
And warn the patient about the dangers of this, and instill fear in them not to do that for several days until they are healed.
And if the blood does not stop and you are without medical help, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity of the arm is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a piece of cloth, fold it, and tie that tightly around the vein just above the constriction with pins on the other side.
And if the blood has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what has been described for stopping the flow of blood.
The removal of the bone in many positions is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is a remedy that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; this is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be extremely cautious during the phlebotomy of this area because below that lies a nerve; therefore, if there is an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and the nerve is injured, it will cause numbness, and healing from this will be difficult, and rarely does one recover completely. This nerve often appears to sensation; sometimes it is hidden from some people as it is subtle and not shown. Therefore, when you perform phlebotomy at a section of weakness, avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And it is proper that if you want to perform phlebotomy, you should do so at the olive vein or the myrtle vein; because this is the safest of all veins, as it is neither near an artery nor a nerve.
However, sometimes an abscess is found in some people, when it is not detected as a hemorrhoid in the first examination, but we do not notice that abscess.
The first is about which you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with the hope of benefit and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins located in the groove, namely: cephalic, fusca (forearm vein), and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first moment when three hours of the day have passed.
However, phlebotomy that is administered, when it becomes necessary and convenient for that purpose, may be done either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it should be that a child not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized by any means, it should be that they cleanse their bowels before phlebotomy with an oily enema if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous fluids into the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels and do not affect the principal limbs.
Let not the patient be treated with phlebotomy if they suffer from sea sickness or drunkenness, nor while they are recovering from illness or intoxication until such time as they have expelled what was within them, nor in cases of dropsy. And more so, let phlebotomy be avoided near colic pain and after vomiting, and when there is flatulence, and during the multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise after fasting or vigil, and from all causes that dissolve strength, whether bodily or animal.
And in the case of subtle disposition of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible for it.
And let the patient take a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way so that the blood may be made thinner.
And avoid phlebotomy at the midpoint of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And take care that the time of that day be protected from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical exertions, such as labor, unnecessary hardship, sexual activity, and similar things.
And at the appropriate time, have the causes present for which people commonly use aromatics and odors and balms and similar substances according to their quantity and possibility.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the one who needs to be bled.
And then extend his arm, and wipe it with his own hand twice or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around twice.
And let the ligature be timely placed, for if the ligature is not even or there is superfluous tissue, then prevent the flow of blood; or if it needs softening, then also prevent the blood from clotting too quickly.
And concerning the ligature, it is necessary that he who is to be bled rub his hands thoroughly with something smooth before entering so that the veins are clearly visible and apparent to the sense.
And concerning the phlebotomist, he anoints his lancet with a little old oil properly. And then places his finger of the left hand on that vein where the phlebotomy is to be performed so that the vein moves slightly and becomes fixed as when veins are like cords fleeing from phlebotomy; and those are full of air, and when he presses the lancet onto it, if it does not yield, then that one is narrow.
And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
And then press the lancet, but if the vein is exposed in one spot, that is good. And if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or with more haste, if the location is not abscessed.
And if the location is abscessed, or if there is pus present, then you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage too much, as it will draw out the abscess sufficiently, nor should one enter into a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will exit in the quantity you desire, then reapply the lancet along the same track and adjust slightly at the aperture, and do this quickly before the area becomes abscessed, for the area tends to become abscessed within a few days of having little aperture.
And if you find that it is already abscessed, then do not reapply to it, for there is no need for such action; and place upon it some part of the incision filled with oil, for it disperses the blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer oil to the incision in every venesection where you are directed not to let blood from the body, and do this with theriac alfadum and sage when placed upon one of those areas, for the blood becomes refined and is agitated when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the venesection, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or who had only a small aperture in the vein, then you should treat it by applying a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, to the area for about an hour, as this will dissolve it.
And it is necessary to do this near the time when blood will flow from that vein or from another vein.
And if a black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply something made from aloes and powdered myrrh, or something made from mint juice or camphor or similar substances.
From such swellings, abscesses and elevations, phlebotomy should be performed at the base.
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you feel softness, apply pressure there, then that elevation is bad and harmful; so be careful not to do any of what has been mentioned, for the blood will flow strongly from an artery.
And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the location becomes hardened, and treat it along with other treatments until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the color appearing on the surface of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is reduced.
And for one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it should be done in small amounts over several sessions, and the procedure should be quick.
And the best method for venous phlebotomy is to use a cross-section cut, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more beneficial and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
For such cases where fainting tends to occur due to phlebotomy, it is advisable that you treat this beforehand by giving a small amount of bread infused in grape juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood from the arm in three or four stages.
And if the temperament is dry and cold, then beforehand take bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic syrup with a pleasant scent.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of vital blood, then it is advisable to drink water and a pleasantly scented syrup; and use aromatics with rose petals, and let them be placed on their pulse points.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And whoever wants to relieve their arm and dissolve their blood a second time should do so for the purpose of vital evacuation, and the effect of which is gradual, allowing the blood to be evacuated little by little, as is according to the quantity of its strength over continuous days.
But whoever wants to relieve their arm and reduce their blood a second time, and if their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine days after the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it inclines, should have this done on the second or third day.
May that body in which the blood has become heated and excited and causes a fever be bled at once, and let much blood be taken so as to prevent fainting, provided you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while he bleeds from the body, lest death ensue instead of fainting, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, for this is harmful.
Apply a plaster so that phlebotomy can be performed again; or remove this due to the coagulation of blood in the vein's orifice; or place your hand over it with turpentine or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is completely out.
And if the vein is inflamed, now apply a plaster and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the rope of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fossa or basilic vein when they are not available or are hidden, for it consists of them.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until it reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
About this ligature that causes stricture in the middle; and about phlebotomy across the small transverse part, not laterally nor longitudinally.
Let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy on that which you phlebotomize at the joint of the hand be small.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are during the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in hot water, and the same applies to stopping the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves near it.
And the phlebotomy of the right hand little finger is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
The quality of this phlebotomy is that you should press the hand firmly or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you cut it completely do not proceed further than necessary.
And be careful not to overuse your hand during phlebotomy, for the nerves of the aforementioned areas deprived of flesh are sensitive.
And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the venous opening, and the flow will be prohibited.
And when you have extracted the blood in the required amount, pause over the vein for a moment with oil and salt, so that it does not close up immediately; and similarly, you should do this in every case.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left hand is that it is effective for ailments of the spleen.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy on this side as you have done on the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for ailments located in the lower part of the body, such as those affecting the legs, and for retention of menstruation, and for ailments of the joints and ulcers of old injuries, and similar conditions.
And the procedure for this phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in hot water and massage it until the veins become visible; then place a ligature above the joint of the foot where the vein is prominent, and from there its branches extend over the surface of the foot.
And therefore, phlebotomize the larger branch below the joint behind the heel, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform the phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy when you reach a point where you need to cut across.
And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
If bleeding is prohibited, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow there until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then place the phlebotomy again slightly higher, for the location is bony; and do not fear misstep, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do for the vein on the other foot in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the heel below the bone near the arch.
And the best time for phlebotomy is in the afternoon when the blood is thick.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient enter a bath, and hasten to tighten the arm from the side of the flank above the heel with four fingers on a fine bandage, for it should appear only in this way.
And when it appears, then perform phlebotomy on that vein as much as is possible for you and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that vein by incision or cut it by cutting, for the location is bony.
And it is in many men a hidden thing; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger on the foot.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
Then loosen the ligature and apply pressure over the site of the phlebotomy cut and strengthen the area, for it heals quickly.
Of suction and of the qualities of using those.
Suction cups made of horns, or of earthenware, or of wood.
And suction is performed in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves suction without incision.
And this suction that is without incision is done in two ways, either with heat or without heat.
And for the suction cups that are administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen locations on the body. The first is where a single cup is placed at the back of the head; the next two are located on either side of the neck; suction cups under the chin below the lower jaw near the mouth; suction cups on both cheeks; suction cups above the temples, which are at the end of the hairline; suction cups on both armpits; and suction cups on both thighs.
And suction does not extract blood from the larger veins but rather from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and through this, it does not capture the virtue as it would with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for suction to be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by internal repletion, unless the entire body needs to be evacuated.
But if necessity prompts suction for illness or as a regular treatment, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at certain times as needed.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third or middle part of the month, I command that hemorrhoids be treated after two or three more hours have passed since noon.
And the benefit of treating hemorrhoids in the neck is that when it addresses gravity in the head and also what causes sinking in the eyes; but it should be done when there is evacuation throughout the entire body.
And this hemorrhoid treatment is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not appropriate to use it on one who has a complete cold or who has a catarrh, for it causes great harm to them.
And because of this, it is not appropriate to use it on the elderly, and those whose heads are frequently afflicted with illness.
But for one who continues to be treated with it, forgetfulness may occur; and because of this, you should command the person performing the treatment to pause their hand briefly after removing the cup, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Here is the translation:
And when it is slightly compressed the windy flatus, because if it is left below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the windy flatus from the left side causes pain in the head, accidental eye diseases, migraines, nosebleeds, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the site for phlebotomy at the basilica.
And you should command the wind-flatus releaser not to press on its side for incision so that it does not injure the artery and cause blood flow issues.
And the flatus below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and gum corruption, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is the site for phlebotomy at alheric which is between the two lips.
But the flatus that is made over the two molar teeth causes cephalalgia, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the flatus of both sides inside the fingers causes an appropriate phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those veins that are closer to the skin as well as from the smaller veins of other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three mentioned veins.
And command the wind-flatus releaser not to proceed too much with incision, because that area is bare of flesh and below it lie nerves and arteries.
And it is a flatus on which flatus release occurs over the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
And you command the surgeon that it be a strong cauterization, and let it be of iron, for the place requires a strong drying; and let weak suction cups with subtle scraping be used after cauterization.
Small suction cups from the calves should be applied with great care, for they draw blood from all parts of the body, and they alleviate old pains in the kidneys and uterus, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and relieve boils and abscesses; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy from both temples, and at the nape of the neck, and from two small veins.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in some people.
And the use of suction cups at the nape of the neck is appropriate for the same purpose as using suction cups from both calves.
And the quality of the placement of the suction cups is that you place the cup at the beginning and suck it with proper suction, and do not prolong the placement of the suction cups, but rather pause them briefly, and remove them carefully, so that the humors come to the site by equal distribution. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the rigor of the blood appears.
Now you should scarify and gradually repeat the suction, and appropriately consider the disposition of the body.
For a person with tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And he commands the surgeon to enlarge the incision slightly and to ensure that the suction is gentle but effective.
And if the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify twice, because on the first occasion the way of subtlety in the blood and its watery quality is opened. But on the second occasion, use the acquired inspection for extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is muddy, now the third scarification should be performed so that the last one achieves the desired result.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract thick blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, now it is necessary to scarify extensively.
And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
And if the skin of the person from which the veins are thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the areas for cupping with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, then oil such as aloe oil, violet oil, rose oil, or chamomile oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomilla oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and rough, then the oil should be marigold oil, balsam oil, aloe oil, anise oil, or similar.
If the wound is of wide pores and tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and it should have applied to it places of wounds near the inflammation warm water or fresh water of solatrum, or water of chicory, or water of borage, and similar things.
And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with vinegar that is somewhat diluted, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things.
And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it should be guarded against bathing; after which it should be administered immediately following the bath for an hour or two, and it is good for it to rest near the wound.
What is needed to be done to regulate the patient before wound treatment or bloodletting.
At the beginning, consider this: if the wound patient or the one who needs bloodletting is choleric and has sharp and inflamed wounds, then it should be that they take cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar and lettuce, dried fenugreek, julep, and similar things.
And pause their foods such as poultry, and meats of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
And for the one whose condition is fresh, it should be that they drink syrup of honey, or syrup of fenugreek seeds, and sumac, and water mixed with a moderate amount of fragrant herbs between dawn and noon; and that it is recommended to them to use less drinking and eating, and to pause foods such as poultry and beans and peas and small birds and pigeon.
On the day of bloodletting and venting, drinking should be more than eating.
It should be given to drink at certain hours to some men hydromel or musk medicine, or cinnamon before bloodletting or venting, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is refined; but they should not take that hot mixture.
The bloodlettings that are done without scraping should be performed gently on the abdomen, over the gout and podagra, and over the navel, in the areas of the groin, and at the hollow of the flank, because these members cannot endure scraping on them.
It is not intended for anything other than the attraction of blood from a member, just as we apply a gentle cupping on the breast in illness due to excessive bleeding from the nose; and we use it so that coagulated blood is dissolved, just as we apply it on the abdomen and navel; because this thins the member, heats it, alleviates pain, and resolves accumulated blood.
And it is applied to the sinuses when they are blocked or inflamed, because by the power of attraction it lifts out the obstruction and eradicates the inflammation from its place.
And similarly, it does the same when applied to the abdomen and gout due to bloodletting in those areas.
And these bloodlettings are performed only after suction; some are applied using heat as well.
And some applications are performed with jars filled with hot water in diseases of the gout.
With this you are to fill the abscess and make it larger, which is either warm water alone or water in which certain herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The form of the abscess administered at the site: let the width of its opening be as we have formed it, about two fingers wide; and let the quantity of pus be half a palm; and let it be placed in the middle part of it, at the location that is in the circuit, halfway through it, the passage should be small enough for a needle to enter.
It should be made of raw leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion (likely referring to a pattern or type), smooth and polished so that it does not irritate the limb when placed upon it.
And there should be a horizontal bar of iron or wood above it, on which a candle is placed for lighting.
And this abscess should be larger than the one we have recommended; and its size should be smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the cups for children and those who are weak should be smaller than those for young people and those with larger frames.
And the quality of placing this cup on fire over the limb is to extend the flesh towards the fire properly in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the horizontal bar at the right location of the cup, so that the fire is lit around the lower part without burning the patient's body.
And when it is placed upon the patient's limb, and the finger is on the point we have described, then when we have the cups and do not want to keep the finger there so that the vapor can rise over that point, the cup will dissolve quickly.
Thus for fire burns the flesh according to its manner, and again that if you should need of that.
Make a ventouse that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is not applied unless it is full of water, and is placed upon the limb merely for a moment.
And this is the form of it: And this ventouse the larger it is, the better, so that it may receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Lancets are not administered in all limbs but only in those limbs where the application of ventouses is not possible, due to their small size, such as the thumb and gums and similar areas; or on parts of the body lacking flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found is to use them in the waters drawn from clean, pure sources.
And then leave them in running water day and night until they are hungry, so that no cause remains in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and with ventouses; and then rub the affected limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and applied.
And if suction from the area with a ventouse is possible, it is better for relief.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and subsequently with cold water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood is prolonged near the attachment of the leeches and it oozes out, then you put a cloth in cold water, and place that on top so that the oozing is stopped.
And if the blood multiplies, then powder over it vitriol trisected, or gallnuts and similar astringents until the blood is constricted; or place on the area matted vetches that have been parched, and leave them until the vetches adhere to the area, and thus the blood is constricted.
And if it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the areas until blood appears; and afterward they should be placed there, because those when feeling any blood will immediately adhere.
And when you want them to drop off, powder a little aloeswood powder, or salt, or ash over them, and they will fall off immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is particularly necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Or, my son, be aware that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the unlearned, as well as those who have not for any length of time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it at any time or altogether; and I did not adopt what follows, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, until I extracted the science from them.
And for this reason I directed myself to experiments and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and upon which I have conducted my experiments; so as to abbreviate it for you others and free it from the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of clarification; and form in it various forms of the instruments used therein, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections from the treatment of fractures of bones, from those whose preliminary steps are necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of fractures and their various types. Therefore, when we speak in the prologue of this chapter about the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which understanding is necessary at the beginning for the practitioner and to stand on the truth of those; it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or fall, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether to perform venesection or to treat that person immediately, along with other measures, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to an infant, or an elderly person in debility, or during times of extreme heat or cold.
Here is the translation:
And then return the patient to his usual regimen at which he is accustomed to live.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of meat and thick and heavy substances in which there is viscosity, as well as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, fish, ox bellies, hens, fresh cheese, strong wine, and similar drinks, and with this regimen the coagulation of the fracture takes place more easily and better.
And know that bones broken whether in men or in the first phase and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and applies to the broken bone from all parts a cause similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined and joined together, until they come to the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, and from no cause does it prevent it from performing its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to suspend the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone in the hand is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly all other members have differences among them.
Here is the translation:
Of various kinds is the diversity in fractures themselves. And the species of fractures in bones are diverse; for one type of arch-shaped fracture differs from that which occurs in the stars; and some appear according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the skull, splinters, and addictions, whether they proceed or not, just as when paper is prepared for writing, there is a fracture by plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure.
And to each species is given its own torment proper in the restoration of the second, which will come as a reminder of the distinct ones in their respective places.
Of the signs of a bone fracture. And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press upon it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no twisting apparent in the place nor any change, and it does not become evident by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There may still be twisting or a small fissure, therefore it is not advisable to press upon it with your hand and by compression of all means; instead, apply one of the medicines of which there will be mention shortly at the moment when you deem it appropriate for the location; and it might be narrow due to subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split into two or more as occurs in the skull, as described in its entirety in its comparison, then you should begin from your time to the correction of what befalls it with an abscess being cauterized.
And if an abscess occurs on it, do not delay for any days until the abscess ceases; and then bind that according to every method which you can by lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the adjustment of it is quicker than that of the bone in which a fracture occurs.
And then strengthen that according to what will come to your memory of it.
But if you break the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it be the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a proper position according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then force yourself to return those adductions with ingenuity and by every method which you can back into their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient due to your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is fitting that at that opportune moment you use your hand on it, and if you see any differing cause, correct it and adjust it according to the measure of your skill.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some foolish surgeons often cause an abscess due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their careless actions.
And the quality of the immobilization of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of those.
And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that their wrapping be leather and hard, because the leather binding connects the large limb and strengthens it evenly in all directions, thus preventing any defect.
And when you begin, after the proper alignment of the fracture, pause conveniently for that, over the site of the fracture with three bandages or four depending on the limb; and tighten your hand a little as you apply the bandage.
And then apply it to the upper part of the most prominent area of the fracture site, and tighten less so as not to interfere with your immobilization of the place where you have secured the fracture. From around the fracture, extend the bandage a little, and gradually loosen the tightness, until you take from it a great part.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again around the fractured area with the dressing, and then place the dressings below the fracture; and let your procedure be in the tightening of the dressing and in the loosening of that one as we have said about the first dressing above.
Then place between the dressings a piece of linen or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is shaped, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything there for this reason.
Then place another bandage over it, and then apply properly made splints over these dressings immediately if there is no swelling or abscess in the area; but where the abscess or swelling is located, place something that will draw out the abscess or reduce the swelling; and leave this for several days; and afterwards, you will strengthen it with splints.
And the splints should be half the length of the limb, and well made wisely; or they can be made of willow wood; or from strips of palm; and the width of each splint should be according to this form and figure:
However, the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size; then wrap another bandage around the splints as per your initial tightness; and secure it above with fine stitches as we have said about tightening, and ensure that your wrapping is tighter near the fracture site, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the wrapping should be.
And let the sutures be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of soft material; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use cords from ropes for their sutures, it is a great error, when you see the tension uneven.
And likewise, fine threads are not appropriate, for you will not achieve proper tension with them, and it is necessary that there be no less than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient complains of pain at the ends of the stitches near the wound in those places, then apply bandages of linen or checked wool until such time as it does not cause injury to them.
Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and a disruption happens in the collarbone, and I will recall this case in the chapter dedicated specifically to it.
And know that not all broken limbs should be set with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed in bandages until about five or seven days have passed, or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients used to treat, which were applied over fractures, dislocations, and contortions.
Method of a plaster used for the rapid healing of fractures, suitable for various conditions and particularly for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the residue that sticks to the walls of the mill during grinding.
And confine it as it is, but sieve it through white cloth, and stop the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lead丹丹此处应改为： Another method for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of litharge, of acacia, of eryngo root, and millet chaff, each one drachma; of mastic and aloes each five drachmas; of colophony two drachmas; all are to be powdered and sieved together and mixed with aqueous colophony or with white cloth if the consistency is too thick; then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confidently apply it to men.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of millet chaff and honey of wild thyme one drachma; of mastic and aloes each five drachmas; of acacia six drachmas; of Armenian bole two drachmas.
All should be powdered in a mortar with a crushing tool, and then sieved, and compounded with water or white cloth if the consistency is suitable; it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the affected area.
Note that this plaster is not useful for restoration, for abscesses, and does not properly alleviate pain.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh mulberry leaves and wild poppy leaves; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of preparing a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant of an abscess: take rhizomes of elder, chamomile flowers, and violets, and flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all finely and cook with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, now prepare that with coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method of preparing a stronger plaster for resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rhizomes of elder and seeds of linseed, and pomegranate rind, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all finely and cook with sage water or with sweet water or with wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and its color.
However, Hippocrates does not describe in his book that it should be paused over the broken limb during its restoration except for cerott made of wax and oil, and he recommends that it be midway between coarseness and fineness.
However, it is observed in Gaul that they are applied to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is slight drying with heat, such as myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Method of preparing a plaster to apply for injury and pain: take meal, linseed, human hair cut or bird's feathers, elder rhizomes, and salt, in equal parts; mix all finely and sieve them and cook, and make into a plaster.
The quantity according to which it is necessary that the dressing remain and should then be removed is such that you consider whether there is no pain or swelling or if the bone is not displaced from its place; otherwise, do not remove it for several more days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should be cautious or remove that dressing at once, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen cloth and a sponge soaked in vinegar, and immerse it in cold water; with this wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then allow the limb to rest for one hour; afterwards apply a poultice made of fine wool soaked in sour wine and oil or oiled rose oil, and bind it on for one night until you are sure there is no abscess forming, and until the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain from it is relieved.
And then apply that gentle bandaging and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first compression, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then repeat this as you did at the beginning equally.
And if nothing happens to the limb from any of the causes we have mentioned, then do not remove it but leave it for three or four or up to ten days; and in some cases all of this is left for twenty days, as you see fit for the removal of the dressing, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the tissue begins to heal over it.
At this time adjust the tightening more than in your first stricture entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by the recollection of it.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is appropriate, then you will know that nutrition cannot reach it; and therefore apply a poultice to it with warm water every day for three days; and slightly loosen the bandage, so that through this operation nourishment reaches the limb, and it heals quickly.
But what foolish restorers of a limb fracture do otherwise when it is not restored at the proper time and is distorted according to its twistiness, is an error in their procedure and great fear, and if this were true, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and warned about it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it seems more reasonable that they should not do so.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, which removes all the bone within its circumference, leaving only what is outside this area, just as it would in wood; thus, this type is called a crush. Or an object may cut some part of the bone but does not go through to the other side and cuts into the flesh without penetrating further; this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures can be either great or slight, and there is also a fracture that is comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact with something weak or falling on a stone, among similar circumstances.
And this fracture is either penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is below the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the harm of these two fractures is great or small.
And of the fracture which is inflicted on the bone, in the subtlety of the thin strands, and by this it is named this particular type of fracture capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some plate of bone to enter into its parts, and it is made in the place of concavity just as happens with the bones of the arm when they occur due to their impact and are broken upon entering the inner parts.
And this is mostly made in the bones of human bodies, just as it happens with the heads of children.
And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are pieces just like small plates separated. And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
And you should know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the remnants of corrupted flesh that are upon them.
And the capillary type of fracture is known by this: it is revealed on the bone, and it is wiped clean, and lined upon it with a probe, because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by these symptoms that it signifies by clear indication extreme fear, such as vomiting like bile, stretching out, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar conditions with their rigor, and similar to them among the major dispositions, then suspect that they will not be healed.
And if for uncommon accidents you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is four when it comes to you the plague at the beginning as it is plague and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the condition of the bone before the day xiiii according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, because what is left behind of the bone may be corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and crushed, then it is necessary that you excise the crushed and triturated piece, as I will recount to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the sick person, and expose the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, and let it be clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you must detect the bone, bleeding or abscess cautery, then you proceed with what is necessary, and this is that you apply the area with cloths infused in vinegar and rose oil, and let the injury rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure of stopping the bleeding; and subsequently begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you excise the bone with sharp scissors, and this is the form of it: And subsequently administer another excisor slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
Then apply the knife to cut out the pus that is there.
And it is necessary for you to have various knives, some of which are used to cut out pus deeper than others; and some are sharper at their tips than the others, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in tapping on the knives so that you do not blunt the tip and edge of them.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the knives, using the instruments called non-penetrating chisels.
And they are not called this only because these do not reach the end of the bone from where they start, for the chisel has a rounded tip or margin above which is the sharp point resembling a border or small circle, which prevents it from penetrating beyond the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient for you to have many of these chisels, each of which should match the thickness of each bone, so that at your disposal for the entire skull, the tip of which is sharp, and the length and width are proportionate to the thickness of this part.
This is the method for three types of chisels: The quality of drilling around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the chisel to another location, and continue this process throughout the entire thickness of the bone or as much as needed.
And then pour in the instrument with water that is between each fragment of bone, and apply the poultice as finely as you can on top of it for levity, as we have said, so that you remove the bone, or with your hand, or by some other means through which you will have prepared for this, such as a sponge and fine forceps.
And make sure that you guard with all caution that the instrument does not touch any part of the wound.
And so when you have circumscribed the bone to be perforated, and it will be separated from the wound if it is continuous there, and you will extract it, make sure that you scrape and smooth its roughness with something like an instrument but which is finer and sharper than other instruments.
And if any small and fragmented parts of the bones remain and you are having difficulty with them, now take something with ease from what is available to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and the medicines that we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Gualia says and praises greatly; and this is what he says: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and have paused just below it with this slow and cheerful instrument of which this is the form:
And the lens-shaped part is solid and does not require cutting any part of it, while the sharp-pointed part should be divided into two along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part fits the wound with its acute face towards the bone.
And then strike with the chisels of a part with a small hammer inside so that you cut all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and you are sure of the membrane that no accident happens in any way, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Now if there is any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some places of the bone, cut that which has the end of the chisel shaped like a lens, and deliver that which has ease, for it is delivered without injury and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is abscissed or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains rough with small irregularities, now you should scrape that roughness and eradicate those irregularities with subtle razors for which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them appropriately at every place where they are most suitable, and the most correct ones according to how your operation on that broken bone and its shape leads you.
And you should administer in your proportion with which you scrape the bone at the beginning with those razors that are the widest, and then use successively those that are more subtle, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all of them.
But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer care according to what leads you towards the correction of it.
And it is a cause that one does not fear among all those who have studied in that art. Stand on what we have written about large fractures.
And if the abdominal wall is rectangular when you remove the bone, now cover it with a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in warm oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as quickly as possible without pressing hard, so as not to damage the tissue; then apply a linen bandage over that, but do not tighten it beyond what is necessary for covering the wound.
Leave that in this treatment for one day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply medicines that have a surplus of dryness, such as linseed paste and flour poultices, and powders of onions and aristolochia, and similar things.
And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is finely ground and applied to the wound, as they are dry; generally, apply any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment remains clean; and it should not be in the negligence of handling or any other carelessness; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is properly set on the abdominal wall, it corrupts that area and weakens it, and thus leads to severe illness due to this malpractice.
And it affects the tissue of the head, as when the bone is cleaned and especially when the treatment of it is delayed, there appears a black discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider now whether these accidents lead to illness, and know that it is harmful with all certainty.
And if the darkness does not come from the medicine that is applied above it but rather from the virtue of that medicine which causes that darkness, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and mix these together; then place a cloth soaked in this mixture over the wound; and afterwards treat it with the spices used for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is broken in only two parts above mostly, or one of those sometimes, because there are two bones there, since the part below is cartilaginous and does not break; what happens to it is bruising, swelling, and distortion.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture with your fingertips inside and outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the handle end of a probe with some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And when it comes to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should wait until the seventh or tenth day for the abscess to be cauterized.
Insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one piece, or two pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the piece of cloth be large enough to fill the trough of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be dipped in boiled honey and changed every day, but I have not seen this myself; however, it is good to dip the cloth in albumen from egg combined with powdered sugar; then leave the cloth inside until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a piece of wax is inserted into the nose instead of cloth, wrapped in lion's skin cloth; and this should be done when the fracture of the nose is more severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing through it.
And this method is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it this way, and if you want, use cloths.
And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose made of wax or cloth dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or with frankincense.
But if it does not require cauterization, now you should apply a plaster outside made of sesame flour and powdered coriander mixed with egg white; then place this on a piece of lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with anything else.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should dissect around them, and extract them with instruments suitable for that; then close the gap, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
And if it happens that a swelling occurs inside the nose, now you must treat it with cold applications and administer lead tubes within to ensure complete healing.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling around the fracture, check now if the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts and curved inward; in this case, its diagnosis is easy.
And you should, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert your right thumb; and push the bone fragments inward with ease using your other hand from the outside of the bone; do this gently.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
And if you encounter a comminuted fracture of the teeth and dislocation, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a wire of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply cold to the fractured jaw, and then apply a doubled cloth, and place over it a properly made bandage or a piece of soft material equal in length to the jaw; and immediately bind it above as you have prepared for the binding and as is convenient for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And he commands the patient to use rest and calmness, and to pause from liquid food.
And if you find that the shape has been altered in any way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; and afterward correct what has already been altered with moist flour, egg white, or chickpea flour, after you have removed the cerate from it, and place wool soaked in it over the plaster.
And then when you have attached and adjusted that plaster to it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for in many cases this fracture becomes strong in three weeks.
And if in other cases an abscess occurs, then administer what has been said many times about the treatment of it until it is healed, and drain that abscess.
And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or a splinter, and carefully extract those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them using the instruments.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity necessary for your needs.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and if any cannot be drained, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; and if not, place one of the plasters that are appropriate for it on it to promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the fork when it is fractured.
Most often the fork is broken in the part before the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts such that no displacement occurs; and it is easy for its restoration. Or it is such that this happens with displacement, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture involves an injury.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture involves an injury, is that you make two assistants present, so that one holds the assistant instrument and supports the broken fork, and the other extends the collar around that part.
And then mold the fracture with the tools mentioned so that its shape is made as needed, and there should be neither a small prominence nor a depression.
And if you need more extension, then place underneath the tillicum of a malaute sheet or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; and extend and elevate the fork and compress the pad with your hand so that you mold the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot draw the extremity of the fork to the outer parts, so that it reaches the preon, then the patient should be reclined on their neck, and place something underneath the muscle about half as large in size.
And the assistant presses the muscle at the sides so that the bone of the fork is elevated to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and mold it with the tools mentioned.
If you feel pain from the forked part and its knobs, now you must cut into that area and extract those splinters easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had paused below the forked part with the tool that serves as the key; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
And it is similar to the hollow part of a bowl, whose width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the space available.
But the length of it should be as much as is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, now you should bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess, now you should cover the wound with patches and powders according to the quantity of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess does occur, now apply a patch made of soft cloth and rose oil mixed with vinegar, and place it over the area.
And do not let the splint be loose above the broken bone; and so it is necessary that you see the patient every day, and when the bandage has softened or you see the splint already loosened, then you must correct this and tighten the bandaging.
And place the patient's pillow on his neck, and put down below him a small cushion beneath his neck so that during sleep his neck is slightly raised; thus raise the support from his back, and therefore elevate the fracture of the collarbone to the elevation of the muscle; or bind his arm to his neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess in the area, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see his face has changed due to this, and adjust it in the constriction and restore it until it is set and the fracture of the collarbone is healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people this is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken in the middle and not broken into pieces but only at the edges.
And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
And then apply powdered alum mixed with honey and stop the lion; and then apply powdered wool doubled over; and then sprinkle on the table a fine layer of powder according to the quantity of the spoon, either all or just a little.
And if you leave the layer concave in some places of the spoon, then you fill those concavities with lint, and then level the layer according to equality.
And then press from above with a humid cloth of appropriate length and with firmness on the layer so that it is not moved from its place.
And examine the dressing each day; and every time it is softened, change it on another day and press it, and level the layer if it has moved from its place.
And place the dressing over the wound as appropriate.
And the spoon is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
And when this number of days is completed, then you remove the dressing, and be sure that these are bones for which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the broken bone and place a bandage there, then you should cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the shoulder blade or in case of suppuration or cauterization if such occurs.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains close together; however, its extremities move apart as cicatrization and comminution occur.
Of the accidents which occur when the bone is broken are that it inclines towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting of blood; and it is apparent in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on their back, and a bolster placed between the shoulders; and then press the muscles, and adjust the ribs with both hands, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
And then place on the plaster and cotton, and place below thin strips of wood or reeds or similar lightweight materials, as you wrap them; and then carefully bind that over the broken bone without pressing too hard; and proceed with bandaging around the back in several layers, and tighten that binding appropriately; and then check the bandage at all times, and when it has softened, tighten that again.
And if necessity requires the removal of that bandage due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or an abscess that has occurred in the area, then you should remove it and loosen the plaster and correct what has happened according to the method of treatment; and then reapply the plaster, if needed for this purpose; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick areas where they meet at the sides; and from their extremities in front, those do not suffer contusion but rather because they are cartilaginous. And concerning the nerve, there is no deception as to its sensation; you must investigate it carefully as mentioned.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture as mentioned by the possible method, within which it should be aligned as necessary, and then apply a plaster to strengthen the broken bone if you find it necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then it causes severe and piercing pain, like the piercing that occurs when one is weeping, and because of this, the bone places a membrane over itself; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients were skilled in that with living things.
And what they say is: it is appropriate to give food to the patient that generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
But we should do this with the condition that it does not lightly cause a dangerous abscess if one does not occur; and if it does occur, then it helps to address that.
And some of them say that it should be applied above the flatulent area and then sucked out with force; this reasoning seems reasonable, but it is feared that the flatulence might draw the superfluities to the site due to weakness.
And some of them say: it is appropriate to cover the area with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is full, making the bandage equal when wrapping it according to its roundness; then treat the patient as you would for pleurisy with food and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly compelled by reason of illness which he cannot endure, and the bone has penetrated through the dressing with a puncture wound, we fear for the patient; at that time it is necessary to cut above the location, expose the broken part, and immediately use the instrument mentioned previously to preserve the joint, and then cut away the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should incise it and apply powder in ointment and place it on the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let him lie supine on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
In some cases, there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it takes time for their healing, similarly with the spine of the back. And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if you see their fingers already softened and numb and dead, and they cannot move those nor extend them nor strain them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and no pain is felt in them, then you know that it has not healed, and in such conditions it is mortal.
And if they move those and feel constriction with the fingers and pain from the piercing, then you know that the bone of the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck appear and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look at the condition of them.
Now if you see that someone has become weak, and they experience what often happens to those who are ill, and soon when they lie on their back, they vomit and have diarrhea without their will, and sometimes they are forced onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, now you know that it is fatal, and then do not labor in the cure of them.
But if none of those causes occur, the condition is better and more hopeful.
And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to the abscess until you place over the protruding vertebra olive oil mixed with rose water, or two eggs beaten; apply this several times during the day until the abscess is subdued.
And now apply one of the comforting and restorative plasters, and bandage it over that area; and instruct the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until it is healed.
And if there is an avulsion of the bone or some cause that has separated it, now you should expose the wound and remove that bone; and then approximate the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then treat it with one of the healing ointments until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken at the joint, and it is the end of the cortex, now you should insert your fingers into the buttocks with the left hand, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and then apply a plaster and splint to it, if you need those, and then bandage it.
And if you feel splinters broken in it, then lay your hand upon that one, remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment which is mentioned beforehand until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad area (This could be a reference to a specific part of the body or a particular context in the text; "ancla" might be a misspelling of "anca," which means "flank" or "hip" in some contexts). For clarity, it's often best to provide more context around medical terms.
The bones of the flanks when they are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is nothing but communication at the extremities of those and they are split along their length and incline to the sides; and it happens that the injured person feels pain in that place and puncture, and the limb is stunned when there is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand upon that until it is set in the figure of the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it alone, then you bandage that according to what suits you by equal binding until it is aligned with its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that has already inclined to the sides, then you make the injured person lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have bandaged that one, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane upon it, and bind it tightly so that there is no fear of puncture of the fracture or movement of the splint.
And bandage the cavity with what fills it until it takes the binding equally, and command the injured person to sleep on their back or side.
If an inflamed abscess is cauterized, at that moment you must stop its extension and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and pause on it with what precedes; then return to its restoration, and strengthen it as needed.
And if you encounter them in the bone or they are crushed, then treat them at that moment.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist.
The adjutori is what is between the forearm and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness in this form:
And let them be held at both ends with two bandages, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
And have the patient lie on a mattress; then place the fractured arm over the splint until it reaches its midpoint, where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then place something heavy on it, or have the patient extend that arm downward; and then the physician should keep the fracture in its original position until the fracture returns as needed.
And the other way is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspends the arm at the neck with bandages; then command two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture by its sides; and the other holds what is below it; each extending in their own direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie one strip of cloth around the fracture and another around it, and each of the two assistants should pull on their respective ends.
And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then you should place half of the cloth strip over the tendon and the other half below the fracture, pulling it taut.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then you should place the cloth strip over that location and around the joint.
And similarly, tie it with ease and comfort, and as soon as it is adjusted properly and applied well, then tighten it if no abscess occurs.
But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the binding within seven days, and place over it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it again.
And the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a bandage made of cloth around the plaster; then adjust the arm with the aid of this setup, and place your hand on their muscle.
And place the cloth and bind around the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause related to the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the others; place between each splint a width equal to the width of a finger, and make the length of the splints according to the break, adding three finger widths from both ends.
And place strips over the stitches which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture be made tighter. And the farther the fracture is apart, the bandaging should be less tight.
And thus, when you find the position of the splints and the bandaging as we have said during the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the bandaging and splints by the seventh day as we have said.
And therefore, consider the bandaging in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site; or it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to excess tightness of the bandaging; and thus correct all of this as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandaging until after three days or longer.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms be positioned over their stomach.
And place a pad filled with wool over the assistant, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandaging is too slack; therefore, correct this as needed with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at first until bandaging begins; and then gradually increase the richness of the diet.
As to the usual course of treatment and the care of the wound, it is that they be kept clean for forty days; and at this time it must be loosened, bathed, and treated with medicines which correct it.
And if the fracture is comminuted, then you do not loosen it from that bandage and the splints for one day or even two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna and radius; of which one is small, and it is that which lies next to the wrist, and the other is larger and is situated below the small one, towards the lower part.
And if the ulna is broken alone, or the smaller one, and often both together.
And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the ulna is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a small extension with ease until it is bandaged.
But if the larger ulna is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
And if you have cut both falces together, then it is necessary that you press the incision more strongly.
And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand for the restoration of its function and the extension of it lying on a cushion, with the wrist above all parts, so that all the other fingers are spread out, and the thumb be lower than the others, and the patient lie reclining on a tilted bed.
And let there be a cushion in front of him at an appropriate height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And let one assistant extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extend it similarly from above.
And let the physician then place the bone inside so that it reduces it into the best position possible.
And if in the process of setting the bone you encounter difficulty, then it is necessary to reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if an obstacle appears separately that prevents the reduction and is not within your hope for restoration, then you must act on it and remove that according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to inflammation, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerot made of olive oil and white wax, which is midway between thickness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over it with gentle pressure so that the abscess can subside; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg whites, and afterwards place bandages; let the bandage placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or in two bones.
And apply pressure firmly and vigorously at the site of the fracture, and when you begin to loosen it either above or below the fracture, apply a little less force according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of a thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging after some days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until the inflammation subsides.
And allow the limb to rest without constraint until it is at ease, and then reapply the bandaging.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already displaced as described, then you should correct all of this with your skill.
And carefully consider if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and allow it to rest for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandaging for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And so the hand of the patient is suspended by its upper part for active movement, and make the patient lie on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or it may be restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Know that to the thumb and to the joints of the said fingers, when they are fractured, and it does not happen to them except with multiple injuries.
And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, it is necessary that the patient lie in bed and be placed according to equality, and the hand should be laid out extended.
And then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should align them so that they are set properly.
And now it is necessary to apply plaster and wool, unless an abscess or burn occurs; then place a piece of wood above according to the size of the area, and you should have wrapped that in linen.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, then make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then secure it with cloth.
And the wooden splint should be attached to cloth in such a way that it is raised, so that the splint can be applied to the palm; and secure it as needed.
If the fracture is in the bones above, place splints on top of it and another splint below the part, so that the hand may be open and straight; and then bind it, as if the hand were held between the fingers with a bandage.
And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if the finger is small, shape it as necessary and bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the little finger, or in the ring finger, then it should be shaped and bound to that finger; or they should all be bound together in continuity, which is better; or a small splint should be placed over it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and also regarding that, the disposition of abscesses and opposing conditions — during your operation — according to what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the collarbone.
The collarbone, which is often fractured, reveals itself by sensation according to how it has shifted in front and above.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is wrapped above the fracture and another below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and face.
Let the attendant extend the bandage according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it extends towards the ribs of the chest, now the bandage should be applied to the back at the part of the armpit, so that its extension reaches across them, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture extends towards the back, now the bandage should be applied to the back, and its extension should reach the parts below.
And then the physician should align the bone on both sides and ensure it is reduced according to its natural appearance, and the bone is joined by proper conjunction; now it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs, now you should leave it for several days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: you need to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and press out any excess; then wrap the chest so that it reaches the wrist and the ribs of the chest.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the chest and the bandage near the back at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth come from the most prominent part of both sides, and then roll over the chest and the bandage whatever excess there is of the bandage.
And then apply plasters over the chest at the location of the fracture, and place one strip directly over the bone of the rib.
And fill up the empty space between the bowl and the container with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be congealed.
And then begin the binding tightly from above at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you move away from the bandage from the site of the fracture, your binding should be looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage downward to the parts below until it reaches the nail of the foot, and tie both ends of the bandages from the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
And then place the bandage over it in such a way that corrosion, pus formation, swelling, or similar issues do not occur to the limb; and if any of these causes occur, cut through the bandaging at that point and immediately correct what has happened, as we have said previously.
But if there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed in the bone, then you should try to align it as best as possible; and if not, fix it over it and move it, and treat it according to what precedes recovery until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the bone is tied with another bandage as we have said regarding the straps and the arm.
But in the restoration of the limb done in such a manner, a bad limp should not occur; and if it is restored alone or with another bandage applied, then it is necessary that the person limps for the rest of their life.
And know that the cord is torn after forty days or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the lower jawbone.
Know that a fracture of the lower jawbone often occurs, but it rarely happens in the front part.
But if such a fracture does occur, it is usually just a crack or bruise in those parts, and this affects one or several areas, and all of this depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that what is broken in those parts is aligned with the adjacent areas so that it can be joined and united as much as possible by adjustment, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if needed; and bind tightly with a bandage as is appropriate.
And then consider all the conditions we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar treatments that oppose any accident in such a way that it is suitable for healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture of the chin.
Know that in the chin there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the chin bone; the other is thin and is called the finial bone.
And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to the two bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made of it just as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation on it is one.
And if you break two bones together, the swelling is converted to all parts.
And if the more delicate bone is broken, the swelling is converted to the parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, swelling appears below it, and it is from those causes that you are not aware of.
And immediately administer extension and alignment and binding of the splints accordingly.
But it is necessary, if the fracture of the bone is hard with many fragments, that the extension be lesser and more gradual, and rely on your skill.
And when there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the splints and complete all the rest of the work, then you will take pieces of wood that are soaked in remedies placed below causes which need soaking, and made similarly from palm branches; attach those to which a slight roughness has been applied, and not too thick, and their length according to the length of the bone, and at the end toward the most distal part.
And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one at the end of the bone on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be from the end to the lower part of the body.
Between the two bones it is necessary to act in three places at both extremities and at the middle place, for in this structure tilting towards the right or left side is forbidden, and it remains in good position.
And now a piece of wood has been applied according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed under the leg in such a way that it preserves its ability to move.
And especially you should do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a bruise.
And every day you should examine the leg and study it based on previous observations, and you must guard against abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and whenever any such cause occurs, then you should act according to what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
About the fracture of the shinbone and the bones of the foot and the aforementioned bones.
A complete fracture does not usually occur in the shinbone; but it can happen to some extent with the bones of the foot. And for those bones of the foot, fractures are rare, and they do not typically suffer such issues except for minor injuries due to improper positioning.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones are elevated above their normal position, then the patient should place their foot on prepared ground as follows.
And then place one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then step on them, press, and bind them until they return to their proper places.
After the pause, apply a plaster and tie it above, and below the abdomen of the patient place a small table with two flat tops.
Then strengthen that part of the body with a proper structure, after you have wrapped it in cloths and for other reasons as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones either aligned, broken, or dislocated, and the treatment in such cases is as you know.
But if anyone says they are broken, then you should restore them and align them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger on a splint according to the length of the finger, and it should be slightly longer; and below the patient place the table as recommended to you, and strengthen that part with proper structure.
But if what is broken are two or three or more bones, then you place on each finger a splint of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the table at the bottom part of the body so that it stands on one of the flat tops of the table under the abdomen to ensure good stability.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the jaw of a woman and of the bone of the penis and of the shaft of the penis in a man.
When the membrane of the woman is cut, then make that incision on the saddle-shaped area, and immediately incline it towards the side by a little, and let it be held back.
And immediately the midwife fills the membrane with gauze, and it is done in the membrane just as one hopes; and immediately the woman is restrained, and raises the back of the child little by little, for all this is to prevent it from coming out before it reaches the opening of the membrane just as one hopes and the cut bone returns.
And immediately place poultices on its back, and when it wants to urinate, remove the gauze with ease and then let it urinate, and reduce it and return that according to the method by which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return it to its original poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is then restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and sew onto it a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the membrane, and then blow air through the tube vigorously until the bladder is inflated inside the membrane, for the fracture will return.
And then fill it with gauze and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis in a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few encounter, especially for one who has studied and used this book of mine; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions through direct means in its restoration and alignment, and thus you understand well.
When handling the penis of a man when it is grasped, take a piece of leather and place the penis in it; then press upon its wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and afterwards let it lie undisturbed for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when they are out of place.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture out of place, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or the arm, or similar to these, that you should cauterize him at once if the conditions for cauterization indicate it to you as we have said above.
And if the wound is bleeding, then you should proceed to stop the bleeding in this way: powder finely triturated substances over it, unless some other cause is present that prevents this.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must delay the restoration until the ninth day, waiting for the abscess to subside, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day thereafter, for you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and equalize it with your hands as easily and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four of these, according to what may be needed for this in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round, and in little wrinkles because it should not be folded; place the compression upon that at the time of the operation.
And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in the veins' extremities; and let its upper part be thicker tending, and from the middle of it to the sides.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntas atelarem," which means a small palette.
So that the end of it may be placed with the tip raised above the highest point of the bone.
And press it in one turn so that the bone returns to its place, and let it be even with some adjustment.
And thus strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is slender, and does not accept that instrument well, then it is necessary that you insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has access to it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then insert it in such a way that is appropriate for one of the saws which we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient still experiences severe pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do what will greatly benefit the patient.
When you have completed the restoration of the bone that you are performing, and it is now time to soak a cloth in black styptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not apply cerote or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And immediately administer splints at the time of completing the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can incise any protruding fragments with forceps and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to stain the wound with the fracture, for many times this has been done by careless surgeons, and it caused death or chronic illness in their patients, which is called sepsis. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not use splints at that time, but make a bandage with thick cloths instead of splints and apply it to the area.
And after one day or two, when the wound begins to generate pus, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and immediately administer medications, such as those commonly used to treat wounds, including tetramericon and similar remedies.
And it is necessary for you to untie the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and sealed, and it should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can flow away from it downward with ease.
If several days pass since the wound and it is not healed nor has it become detached from the flesh, then you should know that here you are dealing with small issues for which you must inquire about the condition of the wound by attempting to examine it. And of those issues, those that are separated by manual removal and extraction, those that cannot be separated and are left in the member causing pain, perforate them as you incise according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound becomes infected with gangrene or erysipelas, which are severe forms of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary for you to pause and choose one of those methods according to what is appropriate for the treatment, as previously described in its chapter.
And concerning that in which it is necessary for me to speak and you should present your hand: when the bone is broken, treat the limb as you would treat the shell of an egg or those similar to large bones, and do not assume traction on it nor its extraction because more than two or three times this might lead to death; leave that inside so that it can heal, for within about twenty days or thirty, it will likely fall out by itself. And then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knots that occur in the healing of some fracture.
This knot often occurs in the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; and it significantly hinders the natural function of the limb.
Then consider whether the swelling is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloes, oak bark, iris root, myrrh, acacia gum, and similar substances; take some or all of these. Mix them with white vinegar or apple cider vinegar or any agreeable vinegar, and apply this over the swelling on lint, and bind it securely over it with good compression.
And let there be strict bandaging so that it is not loosened for several days; then loosen it and reapply another one, until the swelling subsides; or place a lead plate over it gently, since lead has the property of reducing whatever is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard lump and it is necessary to remove it immediately due to its severity, then cut it at its most dominant part, and excise the excess or reduce it with some remedies until it subsides; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are set and subsequently the limb is moved gently, not contrary to its natural motion.
When a bone fracture is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently, it is done for various reasons: among which one reason is excessive soaking of the limb and bandaging not according to what is needed; or by excess tightness in the bindings that prohibit proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or by excessive embrocation; or by unnecessary movement outside its proper time; or due to insufficient blood in the patient's body and weakness.
For the treatment of this condition, give food to the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may be multiplied within them; administer baths; and apply wax and myrrh to it.
And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster draws out the nourishment, or continue rubbing with cold water lotion, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed improperly and prohibit further operation on them as is necessary.
When it happens that a limb which has already been restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence in the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb, but since the limb is not prohibited from its natural movement, you do not need to accept the word of one who believes that member is newly broken.
But now such false physicians and restorers exist who have done this in our land; and this operation is a disgraceful one leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with cold water lotion in which you soak softening herbs such as chamomile, rosemary, and melilot, and similarly prepared plasters for softening should be applied; or take mucilage of rosemary and mix it with linseed meal or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or take fat figs and grind them with dove's milk, and similar medicines that are called consolidating remedies.
And in some cases it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most humid parts and movement of the member is administered to all parts at all times.
If tortuosity has already advanced and become hard and has been converted into stone and has caused the need for treatment with iron, then one must let the pus be discharged and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and cut away what is superfluous from the nodes of that tissue with sharp instruments, and facilitate this by careful attention and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the topic of speech regarding dislocation.
Dislocation is the misalignment of any of the joints from its proper place, by which movement is prohibited, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing severe pain and great injury.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to attempt its reduction as soon as possible and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not advisable to move or keep the patient standing during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasms and severe pain.
However, when this occurs, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and allow time for the inflammation to subside; then the limb should be bathed with hot water and oil, and afterward reduction should be attempted with care.
And all treatment of the member should be done with what will help it to return to its proper place.
Here are the bones set in order as they were described for fractures; I now enter into the part concerning lesser wounds.
Chapter XXIIIV.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated and if they do not reduce by themselves; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are partially out of place and somewhat relaxed; or they are completely dislocated and fully displaced, such that they are relaxed at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped within the mouth.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns on its own with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, it must be reduced promptly and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister hold the head of the patient, and the physician insert the thumb of one hand into the joint of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts the thumbs of both hands together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move apart from each side; and the physician then guides the jaw and presses it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be made gently for both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And thus when returning to the bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed but not softened, then powder from linen soaked in wax and rose oil should be applied, and it should be laid on with ease using soft cloths.
And let the patient sleep on their side, and their head between their two ears, so that they do not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food cut up finely until such time as when the pains are diminished and their jaws well healed, then allow them to eat what they wish.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until such time as the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some point and not returned to their proper places, then fevers often occur along with persistent sweat, and very easily the patient's belly becomes swollen, and frequently vomiting occurs with pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is lost; and very often the one to whom this happens dies within x days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inward towards the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is apparent by feeling.
And for the restoration of the hand the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then compress the place with your palm firmly compressed, for it will return.
And then apply the plaster and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which joins the spine is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and immobilized as we have said and according to how you have prepared it.
And then apply the plaster, powder, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the lower parts below the elbow, and more easily in those whose muscles are thin; but in those with thick muscles, it comes out with difficulty.
If it happens that some person is struck or falls, and the muscle of the limb becomes inflamed with inflammation, and is cut due to what has already been dislocated.
Then you should apply what is inside to the area that is swollen over it, and now proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is in the lower parts of the joint; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for you notice obvious differences among them; you find a depression at the head of the muscle, and below the joint, the touch of the muscle's head feels like that of a finger, and the injured person cannot return their hand to its usual position, nor can they move it easily.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, then you will immediately notice a clear touch, and it is not concealed.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the arm above the level; then he places his hands below the joint and raises the joint firmly to its place, and the practitioner raises the limb, and extends it as needed; then he holds it still until it returns easily.
But if it does not return as we have said, and after the initial days since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary to bathe the injured person in warm water and administer a lotion that softens and relaxes it as if for rheumatism, using ingredients such as rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
Let the patient lie supine on their back and place under them the little cushion of wool that is equal in thickness to the elevation and tightness needed. Then the surgeon places his hand on the ball, raises the muscle upwards towards him, and holds the patient's arm so it is not injured behind, and another assistant should hold the patient’s head so it is not injured behind, for it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second muscle in this manner: which is to have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand at the side of that flank, and insert his hand under the patient's muscle behind the affected area and lift the affected area upwards into the air so the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant should hold the patient’s arm from behind the patient’s belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have something else that can be used to suspend them, so attach that which will support them, because the dislocation quickly returns.
And it is reduced in another manner: which is to fix a long pole into the ground with its top being round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it under the patient; then place on top of the pole's head strong cloths, and have the patient standing according to the length of the pole, and extend one arm behind the other side; and extend the body from the other side with strength, because the joint quickly returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is to take a pole whose length is two armspans, and its width is four fingers, and the thickness of it should be adjusted according to the size of the muscle in this manner:
And above the round head place linen cloths so that the patient's flesh is not exposed to the evil.
And let there be a pause below the navel of the patient, and let the hand or arm be extended over the body into the parts below, and let the body be wrapped around the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And let the arm be paused on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and let the hand be extended into the parts below, and let the other side be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon follow.
And when the instrument of wool is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, and now cover below the navel with a layer of wool of equal quantity; then pause by placing plaster prepared from powdered mallow and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then apply bandages below the navel with proper tightness; let the bandaging be wrapped around the plaster, and attach the hand to the neck, and leave it so, and do not disturb the hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's food moderately until the limb is strengthened, for it is more conducive to their recovery.
And then food should be given more freely after seven or five days, and exercise one movement; and when it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to repeated exposure to moisture that occurs to it or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery in three stages, as was said before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all of this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not healed, and the plaster and the stricture have been reduced several times, and it has not healed and the hand cannot be raised to the upper parts, then you know that the nerves of it, which are attached at the end of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never heal in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that is caused by the feet and the mamilla or the rear parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
And let the other stricture be administered, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur near recovery, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation is not concealed from you as when it lies below the vision or touch according to some figure it has taken, and when you adjust the dislocated neck, this is clearly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach with it its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscess due to heat, because if it reaches a hot abscess, reducing it will be difficult, and even if healed completely, recovery will be very slow; especially when it affects the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing greater pain, and many times death results from it.
And the restoration of it is that which can be reduced, is that the hand should be extended across two boards, and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the physician should be on his shoulder and below it, and he presses the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus that he bends the hand with his hand, until he strikes the shoulder with the tips of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it thus with two ministers below so that it is not raised due to the extension.
And subsequently the arm should be rotated from all sides, since it is wrapped in folded cloth long over his hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this be those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then press the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And then the reduction should be such that he rests on a plaster which is styptic and supportive on a pillow of wool, and is bandaged with moderate tightness, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and he is left for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage of him and leave it.
And if you see that the joint should not be stitched together, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; then later untie it.
And if it happens that there is swelling around the joint reduction and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it subsides; or place on the joint something that restrains movement, which is a matter of heavy oil; and then bind it, and leave it like that day and night. And then remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it is warm, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply something that restrains movement, which is a salve for heavy oil, once, and the second time, and the third time, [and so on]. in the bath instrument, until it is healed.
And if you wish, place on it pieces of boiled cowhide that have been softened in water and attach them to it; and do this several times, as it is moist and helps to reduce its disposition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of such a dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it happens, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
Here is the translation:
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand. If this is the case, then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred previously with the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be that intrinsically upon the table so that the doctor's hand lies upon the imminent joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; but if not, then strengthen that area with a bandage over the abscess and leave it like that; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, it will neither be endured nor can you proceed with the reduction of the pus on subsequent days.
However, the joint moves according to its tortuousness; and if you notice nothing in the patient except that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened for any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or severed, and therefore do not proceed but apply cauterization near the affected area and strengthen it with something else that confers a cause.
When it has been returned properly, then place the bandage we have recommended on it, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterwards, it should be loosened and left, with the hand being exercised.
However, if the movement of it is restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then moisten that with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the aforementioned dislocation.
Sometimes these are dislocated completely.
When a finger is dislocated at the joint near the palm or at the base, hold the finger steady and push back the dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend that and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap that according to the narration, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movements, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
And do the same for this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and wrap it in that part and perform the first operation like this until it is healed.
And do the same for this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and they move from their places, then there is no treatment for this, as death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; and often some parts of them become weak or two sides of them or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, as sometimes it is displaced and sometimes removed to four directions.
Thus it is described for the parts behind and is called jellyfish-like.
The treatment for this is to consider whether the condition arose from childbirth, because if it did, there is no cure and no healing from that.
But for the case that arises from falling or being struck or similar circumstances, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length in their speeches, much of which I cannot avoid repeating; but I have abbreviated what I can, to excuse myself from excesses, because of my proximity to understanding and my exposition, with which I have made this clear and formed it from various instruments different from those by which I show this and demonstrate that.
And none of those is cured except the one that occurs specifically as I mention.
And it is that the patient lie on his face near a wall, and be placed beneath a canopy moistened so that his feet are not exposed.
And near by a straight post should be placed, planted in the ground at the end near his head, and another post around his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold one post, and it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And nearby, wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders a firm linen band; extend the end of the band to the post that is behind his head, and tie it there; then stretch the other band over the hips near the armpits and behind the thighs; then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other post that is behind his feet.
Then the minister shall extend the bandage from the end of the stump, and let not the two stumps and their respective bandages be moved from the places in which they are fixed, but rather let them not be made too tight as we have said.
Then the physician shall place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or he should place it on that table, and then adjust it on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician shall stand with his weight on the other end of the table, and carefully do so until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the ring which is revolved around the hand; and it is that you place behind the patient's head at the end of two pieces, the length of each being one arm, and behind the other part of the body similarly two pieces; and let the distance between each piece be a palm, and attach them firmly to the ground so they do not move.
And there should be one round piece in which the ring is placed, and it should be revolved around the two ends of the two pieces.
And at the end of it there is an end piece in which the round piece is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is revolved; and on the two other pieces there is something similar to that.
Take the bandages that you have tightly on the patient's feet in the place where you are to cut off the head of them, and the bandages that you have tightly on the calves of them in the turn where you are to cut off the feet.
And immediately each turn should have a minister who holds the turn with his hand, and the surgeon likewise twists the spine as we have said.
And after the spine has been returned and the place is adjusted, now it is necessary to apply an excrescent plaster on a piece of cloth, and then cover with cotton; and afterwards place over the plaster strips of wood whose width should be three fingers or about that, and the length should take up the area affected by the inflammation, and around the part of the spine.
And then wrap with the bandage that we have mentioned, and let the patient use delicate nutrition until he is healed.
And if any inflammation remains in the area at the end of the healing process, now it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and alleviate over a long period as we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead has been applied to that place.
And sometimes inflammation occurs in the back of the vertebrae of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone is one for which no precaution should be taken with this medicine, because it could easily lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the attachment of the muscle suffer only from dislocation alone, and do not suffer what affects other joints with slight displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of a dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the affected side compared to the healthy side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their leg towards their chin, and this area is where an abscess would be cauterized, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs outwardly is that the symptoms are contrary to those mentioned for an inward dislocation.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs forward is that when they try to straighten their leg, it does not bend without pain in the heel, and if they attempt to move, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained and their breathing is constricted, and they walk on their toes.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs backward is that they cannot extend their heel, nor can they bend it forward without pain in breathing, and their leg is shorter than the other, and their breathing is relaxed, and the head of the bone is located there.
The final reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has become accustomed to being in that place, you administer reduction gently according to its disposition; now it is not entirely in that cure; and then it does not need to be made a matter of precaution.
In the case of one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you should attempt to return the joint and extend it in its internal and external parts, and move it from side to side, for it easily returns without needing further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong assistant and extend the limb from that part below, or with its muscles, or with a bandage which is placed over the limb above the joint; and another assistant extends the hand of that one from above so that he places his hands below the ribs; and then tightly bind a lion's skin over the affected area, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And this extension of the limb or of the part internally towards the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the rear part towards the side.
And perform the extension of all of these at once while the patient is raised up on his back and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all types to proceed with what I will describe regarding its specific treatment.
In the reduction of the shoulder, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, the patient must lie supine on his back; then place the bandages along the ridge of the shoulder at the location between the top of the shoulder and the area below the collarbone; then extend the bandage from the armpit to the farthest part of the clavicle.
And then another strong minister should take hold of his arms and forcefully press the thick part of the dislocated shoulder outward with great extension, for that returns it to its place.
And this particular case is easier to cure than the other cases once this member is reduced.
But if it is excused upon you and you do not obey the regimen for this type of treatment completely, then the patient's two sides should be bandaged together tightly with a strong, light bandage on both thighs and both arms.
And the length of each band should be four fingers wide, and the affected side should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended above the head of the post, and he should be hanging; and the distance from him to the ground should be two arm lengths.
And then command a strong youth to press the top of the shoulder, and have another youth hold the patient, while this other youth presses the shoulder forcefully, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the reduction of the shoulder, when the dislocation is towards the outer part, the patient should lie on his side as we have recommended for the golden position; and a strong bandage should be applied to the affected side properly and over his feet.
By the poles should you place the sticks, one at the feet and the other at the head; and near them should you place sticks adjusted to the side of the hill placed upon which wet cloths should wrap around, so that the patient not be harmed by the stick being among the things of him, so that from the extension to the parts below it not be pulled.
And near each minister should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand applies the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the bench be extended quickly, and according to this method described on the hill; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's side, and nearby grasps with the other hand, and with that grasp extends the one stretched out to the lower part towards the front.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be stretched out to the lower part and raised above the ground; rather, it should be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be done if the hip joint is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about lying on two planks; and it is on his back and the limbs are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location where the joint is.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as required — and the sign of the reduction being successful is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's limb in two directions, and when you see those angles and the patient extends their joint and expands it for the sake of comfort, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper position as needed — and then you adjust two things and pause before applying bandages such that the width is not compromised in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one limb to the other.
Now, if you see those angles properly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of swelling, then you return and bandage that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
And then loosen that area, and have the patient delay in walking on it for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and downward toward the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you instruct the patient to apply their hand to the head, then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all manners of the thing that you should do to the patient straightaway, namely that you extend his leg if possible; adhere your hand to his face; place his foot between your thighs; and then adhere your fingers around the handle, and hold those firmly around the handle with strength, and another minister extends his leg so that the bone returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery for the patient is that his leg adheres to the body without laborious effort.
And then apply a plaster to that and make the leg adhere to the body, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it by you is unnecessary, now administer strong extension with bandages, as described in the preceding narration about the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh in some cases is displaced slightly by minor movement, and in other cases it is dislocated according to the degree, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inner parts or towards the outer parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease while massaging until it returns to its place.
In the treatment of the thigh when it is dislocated for the second time, make sure to lay the patient straight, and let him have a strong and capable attendant behind each of his two thighs in their proper place.
And place yourself near the patient with your right hand above the upper part of the thigh, and your left hand below the thigh at the location of the joint.
And draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and hold it with your left hand for two moments, then extend your left hand; and press the soles of the feet with your right hand vigorously.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then press the soles of the foot with your hand for the third time, and you will be at the joint.
Therefore, if it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if the foot becomes straightened, it is good; and otherwise, immediately repeat the operation, as it will return.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and roll a sheet into a firm roller, which should fit between the thighs, and you should wrap the patient in a cloth so that they do not move.
And then the attendant holding the patient's thighs should do so firmly, and another attendant should extend the foot with his hands or with a bandage placed around the ankle; and then each attendant should pull against the extension on their side, and the rolled sheet should be extended between the patient’s thighs, restraining them, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts below during the extension.
Here is the English translation:
And when the dislocation returns and the condition of its reduction is clear to you, apply a plaster and bandage it tightly with a strong cloth, and bind the limb to the splint.
And be careful to protect the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, redress it.
And then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and thus it will not receive proper treatment.
And if an abscess requires cauterization, then you should proceed according to the instructions given in our narrative regarding the treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Said Ankle.
Make sure that the one who is dislocated rests with little extension without labor; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the two feet, then make the patient lie on his back on a flat surface or table, and have him positioned as if he were sitting.
And then stand on your foot, and place what you intend to realign over the joints, and step on it firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position, and see that it is now aligned and does not appear in a prominent location.
After the pause, place the foot on a board that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends, and tightly bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days; then loosen that binding and allow it to rest from walking for fourteen days, until it is strong and its healing is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
About the kinds of dislocation that are made due to injury, fracture, or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you fail in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death follows.
And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are a wise practitioner with long experience, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and in the beginning, use medicines that only reduce swelling, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, but seek out the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, or relief from illness, where there appears any hope. Then strive to reduce it as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes swollen and severe.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among dry applications.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in bones that are separated, then you must manage its treatment as we have described for simple injuries, dealing with it in the locations where such conditions arise.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and most healthful for your true body you will see these in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
