O, my sons, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the sciences of medicine, by completing its purpose at the end and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I have made clear to you the treatise which concerns what I do myself, namely surgery.
For surgery is completely neglected in our region and in our time, to the point that the practice of it has almost disappeared and its knowledge remains scarce; we only find small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much of it, leading people into error and hesitation because they do not understand its principles and thus weaken its power and art.
And it seems to me that I should revive this treatise according to the order of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work as mentioned by adding explanations and preparation, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why a good practitioner is not readily found in our profession at this time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be well exercised in the science of anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; understanding the bones, nerves, and muscles, their numbers and distributions; and the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, along with their origins.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there may be many, but few in actual practice, especially in the art of hands.
This may we have said about that at the introduction of this book; for who is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from falling into error through which men are made to die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from that lack of science and lack of experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, so much blood flowed that the woman died shortly thereafter.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who was ill, and the stone was large, and he came to him and pulled out that stone along with a piece of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
And I had already called out to avoid removing that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with splints and sticks in a strong structure, but did not leave the wound breathing.
And he loosened it according to his desires, and then bandaged it, and after a few days commanded us to loosen the bandage. And thus between the time of loosening and rebandaging, the thigh and leg became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
And he calls out to him, and he prepares to untie the ligature, and when calm is achieved he begins to alleviate his pains.
But when corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated within a few days, to the extent that it greatly revealed the skill of his lord.
The reason the malignant cancer is clear of melancholic humor is that it does not need to reach the heart entirely, but rather remains in the member which can tolerate being completely affected by it.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work involving great risks.
And I have already stated this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave aside this, so that the pages do not find a way to speak falsely and dishonor you.
And so take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and may your patients be with you in fortune and steadfastness.
And use the best path by the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not evade you: for it remains more for your glory, and less in this world and later in regard to your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head and neck, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about lancing and puncturing, and about cupping, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar items, all chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head and neck, and the forms of the instruments.
I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its ingredients, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
I say that the discourse on the quality of the movement of cautery and its ingredients is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves. It suffices for me to mention a little of their discourses, fearing lengthiness.
Therefore, I say that cauteries conform to all complete configurations universally, whether they are made of matter or without matter, except for two configurations, which are tail-like configurations without matter.
In the tail-like and dry configuration made of matter, one should become cautious; for some say that cautery is helpful in such cases, while others argue the opposite, stating that cautery is not appropriate for diseases caused by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it would be inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry disease with something hot and dry.
And let us say that those who argue the opposite are mistaken, because cautery is beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies. For when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body tends to be more fragile.
And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But it does not befit one who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cauteries through previous practice, and who knows the diversity of human configuration and the disposition of diseases in their contexts, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span of these matters.
But in other configurations, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all physicians are already in agreement about those, and they do not disagree regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
And you know, my students, that the secret of healing with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the part being cauterized without harming other parts of the body nearby, causing only minor discomfort.
Here is the translation:
Take the fire, by its sublimity and by the goodness of its substance, it does nothing but superfluify [evaporate]. And it is known to us through experiment and through length of service in studying the art about the truth of the causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book in this pausero [pause] to you secrets hidden with the fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your possessions.
And know, children, that they err who do cauteries at times which are not appropriate, and they miss the best time of spring.
And I say that cauteries are appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit drawn from what the cauterization attracts, and even more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pain, strength and boils, which do not tolerate delay due to the fear of malice coming from those that enter through improper timing.
And this does not concern your possessions, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the disease which is healed by cauteries, it is not always timely, and they miss that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think, for cauteries are nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains.
But still, cauteries are superior in medicine due to the speed of their effectiveness and the virtue of their operation and the greatness of their power.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what is prepared in him from the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has reached him through his acquisition in food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery was administered is a subtle one involving few superfluities and humidities, such as the cautery of a tooth for pain and the like, it may not return that pain, but this happens rarely.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of craftsmen, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cautery, but because they believe that once cautery is necessary, it is the most effective treatment.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not suffice, and then at the end of the process, cautery is administered, and it proves effective. And here at this point it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I grasp of the common and excessive practices of foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its superior quality in substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not matter, which is absolutely not true, because I have seen it proven and corrected that this works only on certain bodies and not others. Cautery with gold can be better than with iron, as they say; however, when you use fire with gold, it is not clearly defined, since the hardness of the gold affects how much heat it can withstand, and it prepares to receive friction. If you adjust the heat, the gold will melt due to the fire, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can work on them during this process.
And thus it is done with cautery made of iron, you should remove the pus gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the priorities, so that I may relieve the seeker of what they ask for.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness of an accidental ailment caused by these two causes, which are the cause of rheumatism and various types of flu, called corissa, affecting the head and parts of the ears with fluid discharge, excessive sleep, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: First, command the patient to evacuate with laxative medicine for the head purification, for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a padded bench and have him rest his head on his hands.
And then place the palm of your hand near the nose on the shaved area between his eyes. But when the temperature of your hand has reached it, mark that spot with a needle, and then ignite the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
And after that pause, place it on the marked spot, in such a way that it descends, with which the skin may be gradually stretched, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any quantity of bone already exposed, like the amount of wheat grains, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool or another of those, if it is chilled, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it be for three days.
And then place it on the wound enclosed in leather and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the spot with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
And they say that when the plague has opened up, the arm recovers better and more quickly.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be kept until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others say that with the cautery reach to the deepest part, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of treating small wounds. And they consider that vapors from the head expire from that place.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery in all cases, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that one, if you please, for it is better to preserve health when possible; for the head becomes inflamed by the solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, and especially when the constitution of the patient is cold.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one you can preserve health and well-being.
Chapter Second.
On Cautery of the Head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, even after using herbs, cloths, compresses, plasters, poultices, cats, hens, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which we have described but without any benefit from those causes, then consider whether the constitution of the patient’s head is strong in nature; and if it is not cold and shows no great sensitivity, then proceed to cauterize with another type of cautery below that one slightly. And then cauterize that area on the crown of their head with a cautery until the pain is alleviated. Cut open the affected area and expose the bone in the quantity that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," — which is the location where the windpipe is situated. And be careful here and do not expose the bone, for the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And here I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is appropriate that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Non-Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When severe pain occurs in the head region or persistent pain inside the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that purify the head, and other treatment should be administered as I have described for various diseases; and if this does not improve the condition, cauterization is then performed in two ways: either cauterization with an acute combustible medicine, or with iron.
But if you perform cauterization with a combustible medicine, then take a piece of cotton wool, soak it in the medication, and tie off both ends. And then incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet, cutting just deep enough to reach beneath the skin, so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with a bandage in a moderate compression, and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen it and remove the cotton wool, and let the wound be treated for two or three days, after which press upon it with a piece of cloth soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
Therefore, take care of that wound with dressing so that it may heal.
And if you wish, apply some medicines that burn, of which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
But when you use cauterization with this method, here is the fire for cauterizing, of which this is the form:
and it is called a nail clamp, because its head is in the shape of a nail, which has some curvature, and at the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
And then press on the location of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery below is not adhered—and move the tool gently little by little with speed.
And if the amount of it that adheres due to the specificity of the condition is such that half of it is adhered, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered, so that there is no bleeding.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply dry cotton with borders, and afterward take care of the wound with dressing so that it may heal.
And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and guard against cutting the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cauterization of an ancient ulcer.
When you treat an ulcer as we have described in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease, what we have mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the location of the pain along a line as long as half your finger or slightly more; and then move your hand once and press firmly so that it does not adhere to the artery but penetrates into the bone.
However, you must be careful about the continuity of the mandible, which is necessary for chewing, and ensure that the muscle is not adhered to and the nerves which move it are not affected, and that a spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is being tied off, because there is fear in doing so, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not diligent and experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recall of the regimen for controlling blood flow in cases involving arteries according to the usual method, in its proper place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a cautery having two edges, this is a better and more effective cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to inflammation and is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, now use cautery. This is one called puncta, which has the following form:
And apply the puncta near the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel revolves, or around each part where the pain is located. Take the cautery of the hair removal from the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery of these points throughout the ear, and which ones accordingly, and promptly treat the areas until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of torticollis.
Torticollis, which is cured by cautery, is not caused by any specific type of phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Cautery is avoided for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of torticollis with jars and capipurgi and guargarisms, and if your treatment does not confere (succeed), then it is necessary for you to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first should be at the root of the ear, and the second a little away from the temple, and the third should be at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the side of the uppermost part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the middle finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burned.
This is the form of cautery, and it is specific to the scissor-like instrument, the form of which is laid out above. However, it is even more subtle that there is a small amount as you see; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness in this small amount.
And properly care for the area with water that has been previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery treatment for chronic apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with water as we have said and do not induce fever through your medication, then cauterize the area using four cauteries: on top of all parts of the head; and at the point where we have mentioned, in the middle of the head; and one cautery on the nape of the neck. And the method of the cautery is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and now it should be treated with water that you have prepared.
Chapter VIII.
On the cautery treatment for forgetfulness performed with flame.
It is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify and cleanse them.
And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the back of the neck, as described in the chapter on plasters.
In some cases, cautery should be used, for that is the method of treatment. Do this according to the order which I have already mentioned.
And if this heals the wound well, it is good; but if not, then apply three cauterizations to the rear part of his head, which should descend from the most superior part of the head down to the part nearest the neck. And after each cauterization, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the next cauterization.
But if you prefer and the condition allows it, then apply the cautery in a moderate manner; and if you wish for a stronger effect, then apply it over both sides.
Then proceed with the care to ensure it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as described above.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the purification of the head using shears and as we have discussed; then shave the patient's head, and afterward apply cautery in a moderate location on the head, over all parts of the head, over the rear part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then apply four cauterizations over the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply one cautery deep into the area below the armpit, and raise the skin slightly. For the treatment of that which should be healed, use this; and for that which should be cauterized, use olive.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And so it is necessary to modify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and follow the other treatment that we have described in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle treatments and food that purifies the brain, for several days before this, along with the improvement of diet.
And then shave the patient's head, and afterwards cauterize one area in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterization at the occiput, and on each side of the head as well. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize as I have described, with paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And use olive cauterization as was previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, then use gentle cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cautery for melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that part with the cauteries which we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is excess leaning towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain as was mentioned earlier according to the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a poultice properly prepared over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more suitable to use before sheep's wool. And warm that on the fire with moderate heating as needed, which the patient can tolerate when it is applied. And then place that in the middle part of the head in the circle, and let it be rubbed there.
And do this for the patient once a week, following another regimen until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points as needed, but have your hand guided by a properly ordered cautery: this is a special type of cautery which moistens the brain with equilibrium.
And then place that paste in cloth or in linens of chicken feathers.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water descending in the belly.
When you have identified the beginning of water in the urine by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then start giving the sick person to drink water that cleanses the head, and guard him from all humidity.
And make him sweat in baths for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with one cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water appearing in two urines, or on one side if it is the beginning of water appearing in one urine.
Inciase with one cautery all the veins and arteries that you see near the temples; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when he is cauterized; and if you see him bleeding, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come to the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the ligation of them and the caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck near two bones with two cauteries placed backward, producing a result.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and constant, passing through veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is verified that this is cold phlegmatic excess, then cauterize in one place as we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulating in the urine, and with one cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck near two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck near two bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize that at the full length of the nail of the finger on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter xiiii.
On Cauterization for Nasal Discharge.
When you treat him with what we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person cochineal to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave his head and cauterize the affected area with a medium-sized olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a carnation-sized cautery, using two cauteries above the two eyebrows, just over the hair, a little bit.
And be careful with the cauterization so that you do not burn it excessively.
And this is the form of the carnation-sized cautery.
Chapter .xv.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you do so, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in total, and let them be longer toward the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
Do not press too hard with your instrument when using cautery, but rather to the extent that one third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On using cautery on the eyelid when the hairs have turned inward and are piercing the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and pierce the eye, cautery is applied in two ways: either by using an instrument or by applying a combustible medicine.
If cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to trim their eyelashes as those of people in general, making them longer and even; and if they are piercing due to their growth from the root, then bandage the eyes so that nothing enters until the new lashes grow.
When they have grown and become even, then instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and gently apply a bandage over the eyelids, shaped like a maple leaf, with the beginning of the bandage near the lashes.
And gently place a piece of boiled hen's feather or mucilage of silk over the eye.
And then perform the cautery according to this method.
And then cauterize over the shape you have marked, little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the area shaped like a myrtle leaf is burned thoroughly and clearly.
A sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs raised around the piercing of the eye.
And thus raise your hand and wash it for three days, and then place it on the wound edge until the scar is healed. And then take care of that until it is healed.
But if the hair returns due to some cause and the eyelid is relaxed, now perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
But if the hair remains on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and healed so that the hair does not touch the eye.
But the cautery and medicinal burning are such that you command the patient to pluck the hair until it is lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take known soap and one ounce of live caus (likely a typo or archaic term), and mix these causes well, and apply it quickly so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and place a cloth-covered bandage under the eye, and the patient's head should be in your lap.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, for this sensation is like being burned by fire.
And thus, when the swelling and biting ceases, leave off the medicine and wash with the water you mentioned; then once the biting stops, resume washing the wound with water. Then consider whether the eyelid has already risen as it was washed; if so, bind it with heat or incision because that is better. And if not, go back to applying the medicine in the place where no medicine has been applied and do not let it darken until your operation is well done and the wound contracted.
And then pause on the wound at the edge until the trace of the adjustment is eradicated, and then treat that with definite definition or another method until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard with diligent vigilance that no part of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after some days the eyelid becomes softened and any cause for hair grows in the wound, then reapply your medicine to the place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that the wounds of people vary in size and magnitude, and therefore according to this, you adjust your treatment.
And the way of rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the sections on diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head or thigh in your hand, and hold the head of a cautery between your hands but in such a way that it is neither too much nor agitated near the head.
And place some cotton in an eggshell or in a powder of petals on the wound.
And then heat the cautery which has this form:
which is hollow, as it has the shape of a reed or eagle's feather, with one end through which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
But the one that is hollow is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and let some of the pus come out and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the cautery, which should be well heated, on it, and hold it there for a moment but not too long, so that you do not burn the wound or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edges of the wound and cauterize it.
And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place some cotton on it and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
If after ten days it has not healed, then at that time apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which the ancients first described: enter into the location of the fistula and make an incision in it; then apply to that fissure finely powdered material made from its form. And pour into it one ounce of molten lead; hold your hand gently but firmly so that the pus does not come out where the molten lead reaches; and you must place over the wound cotton soaked in egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer traction through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the cleft of the buttocks.
Fissures often occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use small knife cauterization according to this form that will be described:
And let the sharpness of it be according to the fineness of the blade.
Then apply that hot instrument carefully to those fissures until the cauterization reaches the base of the fissures.
Let the treatment of that which is inside with wax be carried out so that it may be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
When there is an abscess in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth below, and it causes pain, and then it breaks, and becomes old, and pus flows and a fistula is formed, and when you treat that one and it does not improve with treatment, now you must ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place that heated part into the track of the fistula, and do this so that the fire reaches the beginning of it; and at last do this once or twice. And afterwards treat it as we have said for internal treatment until it is healed.
And if the fistula is severed and heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cautery treatment of teeth and on softening the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are unhealthy, and you treat them with medicines but without success, now place the tip of the malatue (a tool) in your mouth, and then ignite the cautery whose form will be described shortly. Place the quill (a thin rod or tube) over the tooth and insert the ignited cautery into it quickly, and hold it with your hand for a short time until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then take your hand away, and then repeat the cauteries as often as you wish.
Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the bad tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and if you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then the cautery should be applied in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then immerse that heated horn in the hot horn until it is warm, and place it quickly on the painful tooth before it cools.
Then repeat that several times until the effect of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn and place it on the painful tooth, and then apply heated iron to it until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should attend to the length of the tube made of lead or iron, and it should be of such a size that the intensity of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
From the heating of the cautery, the form of which will be described, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is rubbed enough; and do this several times so that the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
And it happens that by pressing that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good saliva and holds this for an hour, then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion despite medication and you wish to aid their digestion gently, then you heat the cautery according to the form of which is described below. It has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end, and place the heated part on the hemorrhoid once, or another time if needed, until it reaches the root of the hemorrhoid.
And if the hemorrhoid is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the hemorrhoid, and after that leave it for three days, then place it on the wound in saliva until what the fire has burned is healed.
And then take care of it with applications, bandages, and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cautery for sore throats and on the constriction of veins.
When the humors from the veins flow into the channel of the lungs, and especially when this is due to cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area near the root of the throat.
And be careful not to apply the cautery to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize that area with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And let the cautery be made of iron according to the previous method.
And then treat that area with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cautery for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold and humid humors, and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the clavicle in the places mentioned; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be made of iron according to the previous method.
And if you wish, your cautery can be of the punctate type, which is called a puncta, the form of which precedes in the treatment of earache.
Let there be punctures into cavities for those; and immediately treat that with the method that is mentioned so that it may heal.
And there should be three applications of cautery for that cauterization which is done on it: in one session, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization of the tonsils, which is at the top of the throat.
When the top of the throat is displaced due to humid and lubricating fluids and does not return to its proper position after being displaced until it reaches the usual place where it should be, and then by a slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have witnessed, at such times you must first reduce the displacement, and then make the patient lie on his back or on his side; and then lift the chin, which is in the inner part of the tonsil, towards the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the chin until it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come out when four cauteries are performed.
And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus the cauteries are eight.
And then pause after the cautery and apply something salty to it, and then make the patient rest quietly, and do not move the limb much for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize above the muscle with a nail or with pointed cautery, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dissipated and the injury is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is blood in the stomach, rub and apply moist substances that match its composition and multiply them inside until it reaches a sufficient amount. If you continue with the methods of treatment without confirming their effectiveness, then it should be assumed that the injury involves two sides being sucked inward, causing contraction of the muscles and other parts. At this point, cauterize using three cauteries: place one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and use two cauteries on either side of the first cauterization to form a triangular shape; ensure there is enough space between them so they do not cause rotting.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
And let the shape of the cauterization be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized with points for one who is frightened by this cauterization: you should mark points on the stomach according to the quantity you wish with a needle, and then cauterize those points; afterward, treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cautery of an inflamed testicle.
When pain arises in the testicle due to coldness or moisture or excessive flatulence, and if it deviates from its normal position by excessive prolapse, and is treated with water as we have mentioned and does not respond to that, then the patient should lie on his back, and apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity above the testicle below the hypochondriac region, while in the lying posture of a person.
And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the length of the cauteries should be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not compress the area around the cauteries.
And if the amount of water used is equal to half the length of the forearm and it is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then he should sit, having extended his legs, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cautery when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to press too hard during the cautery, and let it be immersed in the length of the entire forearm so that the whole body is immersed up to the armpits, since the arm here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Cauterization.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will show heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain will be sharp and often exhausts the physician's ability to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then approach to feel the location of the abscess; and then apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it causes scabbing.
And then treat that as you would for the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except for those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who have known many diseases; but even then, one should only attempt this experiment a few times before relying on it, and it is better to be cautious.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
The ancients said that cauterization of hemorrhoids with the root of artemisia should be done according to this method: take a dry and long stalk of artemisia, about as long as your finger, and as thick as the breadth of your finger.
Here is the translation:
And do not think that you should apply your hand to the cautery unless it is in the open part of the wound.
And just as some ancient authors say that some men use a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, then place it in the location between the shoulder blades, so that we may reach the abscess with it and excise the pus, as we have said regarding the testicular abscess.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where the fistula was made, and there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the ulcer.
When you treat the disease of the ulcer as we have said about treatment in division and do not combine your cure, then there are three ways to apply the cautery, all of which are effective. The first is that you make three or four lines of cautery according to the length of the ulcer, following the figure of the cauterization of the testicle, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be a space between each cautery of the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the testicle.
And do not apply your hand to the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery with two vertical lines, as we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the side where the ulcer is located, so that it receives the weight of the patient's left side.
And so raise it as high as you do when you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cautery may be done according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two ends, which have been ignited, into the opening where the chain penetrates from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been performed.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery that has three ends.
And then take care of the cautery so that it does not shake or move for too many days, for it is more convenient than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cautery is not applied to hydrops except in a certain proper manner.
When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cauterization over the stomach, another over the liver, another over the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cauterization on the right foot, and another over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
And then leave the cautery undisturbed so that it remains still for a long time.
If you do not remove the corrupt substance from the wound before applying heat with water which is appropriate for joining the two edges of the wound, it should be done quickly with the help of healing agents.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a nail as described above, and it should be oval-shaped for cauterizing the two sides as previously described according to its form.
Chapter XXXII.
On Cauterization of the Belly and Other Things.
When the belly is swollen with apostemes and filled with watery phlegm, it is appropriate to cauterize the belly on both sides with hot water that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand but do not return it completely, as the watery phlegm will be expelled.
The cautery should be in this form: And then place two cauteries on both sides of the area, and at each side, a cautery should be made with the tip of the cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the area: place one below and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each side, two cauteries.
And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that any fluid can drain from it.
And then treat it with the causes we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization of abdominal wounds.
When abdominal wounds are to be treated and humidity within weakens the vital forces, which are digestive and retentive in nature and exist in the stomach and bowels, it is treated with these methods of treatment without hesitation. Sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization that exhibits a weakened vitality; at such times, cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach according to what has been previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four small cauteries around the navel, or a small nail-shaped cautery; or place one large cautery on either side of the navel.
And if at times there is an excess of moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area over the pubis and around the bowels, and gently place two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect method from which you will not deviate in error.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When such is the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have described in the division without hesitation regarding the proper treatment, then cauterize with three small triangular cauteries below the spine near the two sites mentioned, and place a cautery above the navel, each on either side.
And if you find that the patient's stomach is weak and their food undigested, and their face appears inflamed or congested, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; place one cautery on the spleen and another on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery, let the effects of the cauteries work for some time, and subsequently treat them so they may heal.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery of the artery near the removal of the tooth.
When you extract a tooth, immediately use fire to apply the cautery that resembles a nail. Near the place where you have extracted the tooth, introduce the cautery into it and move it gently until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
Do this once or twice, for if the tooth continues to bleed excessively, then cauterize each one as we have described, and afterward treat them with remedies until they are healed.
And if you use a large cautery on the gum, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cautery of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the flesh in various parts of the body.
When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
When someone has a fistula in the flesh that is old and filled with corrupted pus and moisture, then what should be done first is to probe it gently, and then determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a nail with fire. Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula according to the extent to which the probe entered.
And then apply the cautery to those corrupt parts until they are consumed completely in one application or two or three, as your need requires.
And guard against burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the bowel, then you must be cautious about all these areas; and do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it does not penetrate.
And then take care of the place so that it may heal.
And if the area is sealed, and the substances are removed from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances do not come out from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of corrupted bone, or falls under those causes which will be recalled in their place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On Cauterization of Ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to friction or excessive swelling, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each ulcer using a nail-shaped cautery about which there will be mention.
And apply the cautery again after a short while, so that there will be three cauterizations in total, and thus they will be more effective in aiding recovery.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens that the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, at this time cauterize in the area near the pubic region, where the hair begins. Cauterize once on the right side and once on the left side as well.
And let the length of each cauterization be according to the amount of urine retained; and cauterize once in the lowest part of either side, or twice if necessary.
And let it be a cautery shaped like a nail as is described.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When there is friction and moisture in the stomach, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to the occurrence of it, at this time it is necessary that the area be cauterized three times around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and once in the lowest part on either side, or twice, and let the cautery be shaped like a nail.
Chapter XL.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the joint.
When there is moisture deeply effused in the area of the joint, and due to causes that make it leave its proper place, the sign of this is that one part is extended beyond the other when compared. The place for reduction is found where the bone lies.
Then when you cauterize the malady over the part of the bone, cauterize it in a similar circular manner, after you have marked with a tent on the circumference of the part as it is revolved, so that the part may fall at the middle point of the circle.
And this is the cautery whose form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize the area with three cauterizations using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the spiculation of the entire wound; and then take care of that inner part so that it may be healed.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the bone, and it is caused by friction and humidity, the malady is treated as we have said and does not require further treatment if it is old. However, if there is an excess of thick humors, then you should purge them with fetid pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; and afterwards cauterize that area.
And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either use a cautery with combustible medicines, or use fire.
It is done according to two known methods. One of which is that you cauterize the area over the part of the bone with three triangular cauteries as follows; and make them with good depth. And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or grain.
And sometimes in some cases the cauteries should be on the top of the head, where there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize the circle from which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, so that it is a continuous circle and burn the length of the entire tendon.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
But if it extends into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you would direct the malady that is the pain; and one cauterization on the bone, four fingers away from the wild part.
And if the cautery is circular, let the depth of the cautery be according to the length of the tendon.
And if the malady directs that the pain extends into the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there with two cauteries at three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
And if the malady directs that the pain is below the elbow on the tissue, then cauterize there with one circular cautery.
And be careful in every cautery that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the nail and ended in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reached the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And as a result of a severe abdominal condition, and as a consequence thereof death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of any cauterization which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date stone or somewhat less.
And within that circle be another one a third smaller; and let the space between them be the quantity of a mustard seed; and let those circles be placed from two parts; and let the length of those bars be one or two mustard seeds, and make on those edges an iron margin properly fitted to the circles; and this is the form of it:
And then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the body, with the malady located over the skin. And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
And then leave that area for three days; then plaster the area around it and leave the wound covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little out of fear of its severity, and for that few have found those who are cautious about it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you measure the spaces which are between each finger according to the size of the width of a finger; and let them be uneven below and above, and let them contain each other in this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the wound where the patient is sitting, and apply pressure with your hand; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that amount be heated little by little over a small fire for about one hour, until the patient's biting sensation and buzzing in the area—like being bitten by fire—ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the wound with cool water.
And then treat him for three days and place a dressing on it until the blackness of the inflammation subsides, and continue treating this for several more days until pus forms; this is part of proper treatment.
And then treat him with herbs until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or the armpit, treat it as you would for a wound equally, according to how it is treated when water is involved.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and another substance not yet extinguished from both parts, mix them and pour into a new container of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that will enter into the preparation.
After leaving the fundus of the wound, pour another wave of cleansing liquid over it and sprinkle with alkaline substance, then cover it with living wet cloth dipped in cold water which grasps those parts tightly. And when you understand that they are well moistened with it, leave the poultice to descend from sharp water at the place below the returning wave.
And then gather all that water and pour it over another living cloth and another renewed alkaline substance, because at this time it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other limbs, which operation involves fire.
And among the medicines with which it is cauterized broadly are items such as vinegar and honey diluted with water and cloth soaked in soap, mixed together.
And Galen recounts the operation and the treatment by which pain in the sciatic nerve and vein is cured, and magnifies greatly its effectiveness, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that it heals permanently as described, for he found this method effective in baths and treatments.
And let it be prepared from some green herbs, and if green is not available, use fresh figs; mix them with a little flour and apply it to the affected area where the pain is, either on the thigh, buttock, or hip, and bind it.
And let it remain for three hours or for the duration that the patient estimates as necessary for the adjustment.
And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is relaxed, have them move to dry land, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that one should not apply cautery with these medicines except immediately after evacuation of the body.
And Celsus says that when using the skin of a goat as a patch for the narrow vein, it benefits greatly; and let the cautery be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the stones.
And take dry goat skin and burn it over fire until it turns to charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it spread over it. And continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Toothache.
Sometimes pain in the teeth occurs due to various causes, such as from decay or impact or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
And cautery is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of corrosive matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter with pills and similar remedies, one should apply them over the tooth where the pain is, three lines according to its latitude. Then place on each line up to five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the remedy.
And let cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four pointed cauteries in this manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
This disease often affects small children; the sign of its beginning in children is that it appears on their structure, especially around the navel with elevation and movement.
And you will notice that the last vertebra of the back and the bones around it are beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a round cautery in this manner: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines away. And let the points be close to each other.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have described.
But be careful not to administer cautery on chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When pain in the joints is caused by the friction of humors which are infused into each member of the body, at times when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to apply a poultice properly.
And thus, how it is treated when gout is caused by friction is done in a way of treatment and not just removing the pain, at times the removal is done with cauterization.
And it is when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with caustic substances.
And this is an olive cauterization, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a puncture cauterization. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you wish to treat this, then cauterize each toe with three cauterizations or four from all sides with this olive cauterization.
And if you wish to use these cauterizations and find them necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization before, but only around the specificity of the joint.
And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauterizations which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the sole of the foot and it is called podagra, then puncture around the toes as they curve, puncturing those two lines.
And if there remain pains in the said areas, prick around the follicles on each and on the web of the hand.
And if the pains persist for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around the affected areas.
And if you do not expel the harmful substances through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and these cauterizations are performed, healing will occur, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you suspect a fracture in the thighs and intestines are exposed before the wound, and this happens nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to fast on that day and use laxatives so that the opening from the abdomen closes.
And have the patient lie close to you on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath held or to cough so that the wound or the intestines appear.
And then return to what you have said and mark the fracture on the bone of the thigh, identifying the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
until it becomes red and emits sparks. And then reduce the intestine or wound to its normal position, and then place a bandage over it so that it does not dry out.
And you have put between the things of the invalid a cushion, and place it under his back, and another under his feet, which he may hold with his hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and enter it where you can reach the bone of the patient within the muscle; and repeat it on another occasion if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
And observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, that you do not burn it, so that upon the invalid there does not come death or another great harm.
And know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be delicate according to their age and size.
And then take care of the place of the cautery for three days until the burn scar begins to heal.
And then take care of him with other remedies until he is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place is sealed and the plague is contained.
And it is appropriate to restrict the patient's nutrition according to the length of time required for his recovery, so that the bowel does not protrude due to excessive strain.
And then when you want to lift him after forty days, administer it carefully and have him remain for another forty days.
And let it be reduced by work and from filling the belly with food and drink, and from raising the voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of complete healing he will be healed.
And I will speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, you should not delay, but cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and take what is excised from the wound as we have said, one-third of it; and then treat that part as we have described, and there is no adjustment necessary.
And some earlier authors said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
and draw a line that you follow along the latitude above the navel, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is faster and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cautery treatment for torsion.
When you find in some members due to falling or impact that there is pain and this pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery for each member be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the torsion and pain.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member near where they occur, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On Cauterization for Leprosy.
In some cases, leprosy can be treated effectively with cauterization, but it is less effective for the type of leprosy that arises from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it can be treated with what we have discussed in the division and does not exist elsewhere. If you fear that the corruption may spread throughout their body and entire composition, then cauterize them on the head with a hot iron: place one at the middle of the head, and another further down near the forehead; two on both temples; and one at the back, on the nape or neck.
Finally, place the cauterization a little deeper so that it slightly presses into the bone, causing the affected layers of skin to be displaced, thus easing the expulsion of thick vapors; and cauterize over the area as needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize those areas with the irons we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize one spot at the end of the nose, two spots on each cheek, two on both sides of the neck vertebrae, six on the back vertebrae, a large one near the hip bones, one on each hip bone, two on each thigh, one on each leg, two on each elbow and one on each wrist, two on each knee, two on each muscle, and two on each tendon of the feet; cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, as well as each heel, and the armpits.
And guard against the nerves which are above the heel so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes cautery is applied with one cautery on the bone of the pubis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the others do, because the body of the patient is already numb.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the properties of the tools.
And apply the cautery with flour of barley mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On Cauterization for Inducing Stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let the heat of the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little. And then treat that area with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes numbness in some part of the body, whether it affects the limbs or the spine, and the condition of the nerves that control that member, is cauterized to alleviate the numbness.
Let no one undertake this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and of the emergence of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that become indurated.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the applications of medicine, then you should cauterize upon that part which you cauterized previously, for a short period according to the quantity needed until its whiteness and color change, and its color is altered.
And then apply to that part flour mixed with peas and olive oil, and leaves of arnica, and pigeon blood or swallow blood, a portion of each, and all are blended together. Then place a cloth upon it until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On cauterization of cancer.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize around it with a round cautery as it is surrounded.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the deepest cautery in the middle part; but I have not seen this done, for I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have observed this several times.
And it is safer to cauterize around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cautery applications.
Chapter LI.
Of cauterization for hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess moisture in that area or because of the patient's condition, being old and decrepit with little blood, or because of the time; if you wish to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids, then cauterize around them with small punctures; and afterwards apply something that will cause them to mature more quickly.
But if you want to perforate with the cautery, then use fire to heat the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied at a location that is farther away, so that the arm remains safe; and then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of cauterization for corrosive conditions.
Corrodent is a mobile corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see the corrodent in a place where it can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat the cautery and make small, large punctures as is appropriate in the location where the corrodent is present.
And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then dress it for three days, and apply olive oil mixed with other substances to the cauterized areas three times a day until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is eliminated.
For the treatment of that part where flesh grows.
If after three days the flesh that has grown is healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then immediately apply cauterization to what is rotten in the corrupted places.
And corrosive is the medicine for some parts with acute conditions, for that is the method instead of cauterization. But cauterization with fire works quickly and effectively.
And thus I have described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore choose that when it seems appropriate to you.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Joints and Other Similar Areas.
Often in the lower parts below the foot there is a malady called a joint, which is caused by swelling and inflammation that affects the foot; and cauterization for this condition can be done in two ways: with fire or with hot water.
But cauterization with fire is done by heating the concave cautery, resembling a ring, which is made of iron according to the size of the joint in all parts, and it should be finely polished.
And then place the heated cautery on the joint, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave it for three days until it begins to form scabs. Take a plaster with wild mallows torn apart with salt and let the plaster be placed upon it for one night, for thereby its roots will be eradicated.
And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if you do not convert it, and spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly in the flesh and the bones, then when you administer cauterization with water, take a tube made of earthenware or iron or copper, and place it over the wound; then pour some hot water into the tube, and hold it tightly, and rotate it by pressing your hand all around, so that the edge of the tube is applied to the root of the wound; and as the hot water runs along the edges of the wound's root, wait for a short time until the hot water bites slightly after an hour, then remove it, for the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this with each one alternately until you come over all those spots on the body.
And then treat the pus once the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with the water from the ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When you find a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever causing friction, or for some other similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one caustic; and at the ankles, and above the stomach, apply an olive-shaped caustic.
And when the shaking subsides, hasten the health of the patient.
Chapter .lv.
On the cautery of white spots on the body.
When on the body white spots and pus-filled blisters appear, which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning of their appearance, it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of laurel wood, the end of which is extended over fire; or with long eagle's claws; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is applied immediately at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not considered effective unless the excess is disrupted, after which they heal from those.
But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cautery of accidental blood flow due to cutting an artery.
Often there is a flow of blood from an artery that has been cut due to the plague which is inside, or near the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and in similar cases, it is difficult to control that.
When such a thing happens to anyone, immediately apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with your thumb until the bleeding stops, keeping pressure so that no more blood escapes.
And then place in the fire some olive cauters, small and large, by number many, and blow upon them until they are well ignited.
And then take from them one small or one large, depending on the location and the condition where the artery is ruptured, upon that vein hastening before you have drawn breath, and hold the cauterium until it is heated and constricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move your hand and remove the cauterium, then take another cauterium quickly from those which in the fire are prepared, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood then in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or bind it with honey or a strong bandage, or apply medicines that have the virtue of restricting blood; and strengthen them with a cushion and proper constriction.
But he who administers proper constriction with bandages and by wrapping in cloths or by positioning burning substances and similar methods, should do so cautiously and slowly.
But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present or medicine available, then gently press with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that a great constriction is needed within so that the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle above the artery with cold water until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On incision and piercing and about phlebotomy and plasters and their kinds.
In the first chapter we have already said everything about every illness in which it is convenient to use cautery with fire and combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for the forms of the cauterizations; and I have arranged the chapters on subincision under the head.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the reader may be grateful for it, dealing with what has been asked about.
And before I begin this, listen, son, and learn that in this chapter it is the same as what was in the first chapter about cautery.
And for this reason it is necessary to be very cautious, because in the operation which is in this chapter many things can lead to excessive bleeding, whether from blood or from other vital fluids due to the aspersion of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening for drainage or purging a plaster or extraction of gravel or starting a stone and their like. And with all of those, fear and trembling accompany them, and in the worst cases of their kind, death.
And I warn you that such a thing does not fall upon you, for some cases depend on your methods, as many diseases require different approaches. And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and the illness itself is a sign that means death.
And among those is he who gives you his possessions and says, hoping for that from him health, and the woman's illness is fatal.
And therefore it does not become you to consent to him who comes to you in accordance with this method; and let your caution be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not assume any cause over that without proper certain knowledge which verifies what is yours, and to whom by succession praise is due.
And use in the cure of all your patients prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have helpers towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, my children, may God inspire your mind and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterization, concerning the cure of the head among other things, so that you may be pleased with what you ask about this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often affects children after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too forcefully.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have seen this illness only in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it seemed to me to be a deadly work in them.
I saw that a child had his head filled with water, and the head was always so swollen inside that even Caesar could not have surpassed it in size, and more than that, the moisture increased inside to the point of death by fire.
And this moisture is either aggregated between the membrane and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone on the skull.
For if the moisture is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is small, now it is necessary for you to cut in the middle part of the head a fissure horizontally, and let the length of the fissure be about two fingers so that the moisture can flow, and this is the shape of the incision:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, now there are two incisions made in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams of the head covered all around and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the surface but not inside, and it does not return immediately. It is necessary for you to cut in the middle part of the head with three incisions made in this manner:
and immediately the incision extracts all the moisture; and then close the incisions with bandages and plasters; and then cover it with oil and vinegar for five days, and then loosen the bindings and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and bind the head with equality; and eat the illness away with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it may be better on the occiput, or in front, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore pay attention where the abscess appears and the accumulation of fluid, and do this as best suits your ability.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and let blood flow, lest the illness worsen due to that loss of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Chapter II.
When treating certain catarrhs or rheums in the feet or legs, and this is an old practice, and if you do not seek to cure them with medicines, then the last resort in this case is to cut these two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you wish to incise those arteries that the patient shakes their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and then feel where the pulse is taken; and the locations of each near the places below the ears, which are hidden in some people.
And then place your thumb on the artery, and then incise each one with a sharp scalpel, making an incision gradually penetrating into the bone, and do this according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatum before the artery and cut it where it divides into parts above.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which comes out by frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not appear in the incision, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then feel with your finger, and make an entry into the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let is a quantity of one vi (a unit of measurement), and it should be more or less according to what appears, depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the condition, and if there remains on the bone any cause of swelling, now cut this so that it does not lead to an abscess from cauterization.
And then apply the dressing with poultices and bandages of cloth, and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from severe headache or acute migraine due to excessive humidity in the brain and the condition of the arteries in the temples, or a similar severe pain, and if treatment with medicine does not provide relief, then we resort to these illnesses to the extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
Here is the translation:
And if it is hidden, then tie the part of the patient tightly with some cloth; and immediately rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until it becomes clear to you the artery distinctly. And now take the probe which has this shape: And then carefully peel the skin with ease until you reach the artery; and there place it and extract it to the appropriate parts until you have extracted it from the skin and revealed that of the tunics which lie beneath it, from all sides.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with something, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not cut, the blood would not rise at all.
And then remove about one ounce of blood up to three ounces.
And if the artery is large, then ensure that you tie it in two places with very strong silk thread or cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and thus cause a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the extremities are cut, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
And it is better to do this work unless the patient has a fever or is of overheated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that help to finish off humors, and therefore it is better at such times.
And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries that they place in an antiseptic location, and let them lie upon decently prepared lint, and nearby there should be applied dry medicines that make flesh grow and warm applications until it is healed.
And if during the operation blood should flow from the artery, then you should immediately work to constrict that blood, either by cauterization, or by filling the location with lint, and press firmly until the blood is restrained. And if none of those means is available to you at the moment, then place your thumb upon the location until the blood is constricted, and apply the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as needed.
And what is more effective in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two probes, after which you mark both locations with a tenta, and then place some ignited material within until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that it stretches what is between its extremities, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two probes should be exemplary. However, if you make them slightly less sharp than two probes, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two probes, they tend to tear the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is a swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is quickly excised.
And this work is better than all other works and quicker.
And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears from the eyes.
When such acidic tears occur, and if it is the condition of those veins which are over the head of the person, and you do not find any cause for the cure through medicine in this matter, often the face of the sick person turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were moving there, and their eyes from this become weakened, so much so that even their eyelashes can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters used to perform this operation for such cases, and did not postpone such a cure.
And you command the sick person to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced across the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal passage, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision be the quantity of three of those mentioned.
And if you have a piece of prepared lint or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is used for this form of incision. which is from the part where the plates come together at the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions with the scalpel that is over the bone, and then perform this mid incision between the second incision. And then spread this spatula and insert into the first incision another time with another instrument called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And with the sharp edge cut through the flesh attached to the tissue, and with its blunt side within the bone, insert it until you reach the mid fissure, and dissect all the vessels that run from the head to the heels.
But the incision should be continued to where the tissue appears, and then do this at the mid fissure into the other fissure.
And when the amount of blood that flows is equal, press the places where clotted blood has collected.
And then cut into each fissure with dry old wood shavings, and apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil and sweet wine, and dressings that will not cause a suppurative sore.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or dew, and then treat it with an ointment of basil, rose oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
When you see acute and continuous bleeding through catharsis, and often the fluids of the patient are exhausted and small, and the care for them is debilitated, with the eyelids ulcerated and in their place hair loss, and at the temples there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then from these accidents you know that the substances and catharsis do not come but from veins within the inner parts.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (and start from the temple on the left side towards the right temple; and this cut should go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples which are close to the chewing muscles), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two edges of the incision with wool or pieces of cloth. And then apply powdered herbs mixed with oil on top to ensure that no abscess forms.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, now it is necessary to scrape the bone starting where new flesh begins, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of new flesh; just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of gum arabic and mix them, and from these make a poultice which should be applied to these wounds at the site of new flesh formation.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or lead, or it is from a plant such as thorns or beans, or it is a fluid substance such as water and sour wine and things like them, or some animal.
And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those mentioned that does not adhere to or congeal in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some cause of violet oil or cumin extract at that time, and afterwards induce sneezing with certain conditions, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing. And afterwards place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the upper parts, as movement several times is helpful with these causes.
And if it does not come out, then administer the extract with an instrument called a gentle epistome, which has the following form:
And if it comes out with the epistome, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine piece of linen folded several times.
And if it does not come out by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube. From a nearby extract of the text about the vein with strong attraction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, then take a little lamp or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught a small quantity, and place that at the end of a thread, and nearby wrap around that little piece properly placed. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And so if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should consider cutting before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you at the beginning puncture the malady of the vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards the upper parts, and do a small fissure in the ridge of the ear where it is most pressed. And let the fissure be of a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that time quickly, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the grists that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction; but if you do not obey this method, then take a fine spatula according to this form: and administer the excision of that grain which is lodged in the ear.
If you do not wish to wash it with water as you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, place it in several pieces, and apply extracts there among the incisions or with subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
In the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with certain conditions at the beginning, and fill his other ear with some cotton, and place on the ear where the water is. If it comes out this way, it is good; if not, now take a few smooth stones according to the length of one's finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of those into his ear canal and jump with one side of that part, hitting the stone inside the ear with another stone. Do not stop using the stone until all the water is expelled.
Do not stop using the stone until all the water is expelled. And the water will be expelled in such a way that you take paper or cotton, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over fire until most of it is burned.
And then place another piece of cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and use a cannula as mentioned above with the stone method.
In the extraction of an animal entering the ear, if it is a small object, handle it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction by gestures and incisions, and this cause is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confer your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
And if here any cause of the worms appears, then extract that with fingers or small spoons, but if no cause appears, then take a tube narrow below and wide above, which has this shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that you can bear; and then suck with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are forced out.
But if you do not obey this advice, then you should plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these described in the chapter on distillations.
And use your application with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape: And make it of silver or ivory, narrow below, with a small channel, and flat above.
And it should be like pressing against the curvature of the tube where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap one end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with cloth above and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And let that which is to be inserted into the ear be already heated over the fire a little. And be careful that the liquid you will distill into the ear is not too strong, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is obstructed by pus or flesh growing there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal where it cannot be seen, and sometimes it is located in parts further out.
And the one that occurs at the entrance of the ear, which cannot be seen, is in the most difficult conditions to treat.
And in the one where you can see it, make sure to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
If the end of it where the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two smooth sides so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the canal, then use fine scissors and carefully cut away all the excess flesh.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, now take a thin reed and heat it over fire for a little while, and then insert that into the ear.
And so if you have detected an obstruction with what the patient finds difficult to hear due to hearing difficulty, exert pressure on it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth of the second size according to the width of the plug which you have wrapped in Egyptian cloth; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the injury; or take something else and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see that the ear has become inflamed, now you should remove what you put in and replace it with another wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil until the inflammation subsides; and then continue to treat it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, now soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of styes that occur on the eyelids.
Styes that occur on the eyelids sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have those ready in small containers or in ounces, and then scatter them over the sites finely ground, and then place something finely powdered on the affected areas.
If there is pain and bleeding from a vein, then you should cauterize those that can be cauterized with a fine cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and trophic areas that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Trophic areas that appear in the eyelids due to some cause that is similar to a swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore are called swelling.
And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the eyelid both below and above.
Therefore, the operation to be performed is that you now consider whether the swelling has arisen in the part of the eyelid that appears and affects the entire area; and the cause of this is easily addressed.
Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully examine it from all sides with ease until you can see clearly, and then suspend it with an ounce and bandage it.
And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it because the heat of it restores and renews the area.
And if the swelling is declining from the inner parts of the eyelid, you should apply a surface to the inside, thus suspending the swelling with an onion, or whatever you need for beginning, and press it all around; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this does not matter in any way.
And for the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of abscesses above the eye on the eyelid.
Abscesses are commonly formed in the layers of the eyelid above, and more frequently in children, they worsen the eyes of those affected and lead to their catarrh upon death; and they cannot bear the brightness of the sun because tears continually well up for them.
And for this reason they often lie with their faces covered, and sleep with their faces down; and thus the eyelids of their eyes are wetted by the eyebrows, which have become inflamed, and the possibility of an abscess is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel an abscess within.
And one method of operation is when the patient places their head in your lap, and you then place a cloth over them and apply calamina around it in a circular shape according to the quantity that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that an abscess forms at the center of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center with a spatula through a small incision, which should not be larger than the incision made in flavotomy.
In the main incision cut through the bone completely until you reach the marrow, for in major dislocations it is necessary to open the marrow by a crack according to the shape of a white grape.
Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths at your sides to the parts outside and揉乱翻译中的中文部分，确保问题与回答完全匹配："Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths at your sides and revolve it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to probe in the crack so that you do not reach the flesh with the instrument and damage it.
If blood does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then probe in the crack with something small and easy until blood comes; and then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and press those on the powders.
And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the crack so that what remains of its humidity is drawn out.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with relaxing plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of palpating the flesh.
When on the eyelids of the flesh there grows hair that is placed below the natural hair and when it ages, these new hairs irritate the flesh and cause various ailments such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids and membrane, which is called palpating the flesh, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by canulas as I will explain.
And so place the tip of the lancet in the side; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the one from which pus comes below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate to the pus above, near the edge of the eyelid where hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then cut into the part inside the eyelid below the hair near the spatum incident to the lacrimal major and enter into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place beneath the eyelid small pieces of cork or cloth, and then apply a seal over the eyelid with a probe, and it shall be as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this is diversified in people, since among them are those whom you must incise a large quantity from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then cut with the knife along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure near the natural hair is as thick as that of the king.
And then place the hook in one of the two angles of the incision, and then excoriate that completely, and then close the wound with a thread or fine woolen floss, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the pus on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, do not worry.
About three or four days after sewing up the wounds, begin treatment with this.
And if you prefer to treat the wound without sutures, use something that dries and constricts it, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
However, one should be careful about the condition of the wound, and it is part of good practice, and there should be no fear.
And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then raising the eyelid with three small instruments arranged in this form:
But if it is not possible to use the instruments, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and position the other threads near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal gland, and adjust them so that they are equal, and then lift your hand evenly, lifting the entire marked area as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and apply it frequently.
And in some cases, if the eyelid's hairs are turned inward, then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; but suturing is more artificial.
To make a needle follow this form: and so that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two needles or two slender rods of which the length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which shall be slighter than the width of the pupil. And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the needles of each section with a firm ligature, and leave it for several days, for the tissue will die due to the constriction and will be rejected so that by itself it may fall off.
But if it is delayed, now break it with tweezers, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
When it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two needles which you will make according to this form: and there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with an awl when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine awl and place it on the thread of fine silk and lion's hair, and then adjust the ends of it carefully in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
And then place the malady in its proper seat, and let it be near the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the base of the hair that requires removal, and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is removed and placed in its proper position on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is placed in its proper position and the hair is not removed, place it in its appropriate location below near the field you have prepared for it, so that it can be properly positioned from the excess.
And look at it with the eye, for now you will place it properly and the eye, and wrap each part with bandages for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its proper place and grows over good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it so that it grows longer over some space, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When an abscess appears in the eye and causes contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or incision or cautery, it is called leporine. This abscess can be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds or incisions or cauteries, or similar conditions that are poorly treated.
The method of the operation is that you should cut open that consolidation and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry or constrict, because if you do this, the abscess will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek; boil the seeds and leaves in water or myrobalan, which should be liquefied with some oil, then soak a piece of cloth in it and apply it for treatment.
The essence of your treatment is that you should pierce any part that has not healed in its proper form from the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is merely a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
This ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly named ectropion; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
The accidental one is caused by inflammation or by a tear or by cauterization or by other similar reasons.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct into the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and hold it there with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a rod and place it in the cut, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two slits be of two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let it be their shape that when they come together forms a figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there in the amount that is the width of the lower eyelid, which tightens the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if through excision, incision, or cautery a wound has been made, then you must now make a flat incision above the eyelashes as was previously described. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of excisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as was prepared according to the form of the excision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the best positions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above the albuginea of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you must introduce a probe below the eyelid, and elevate or extend it as needed.
And then you should cut the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp to avoid cutting during the incision, handling it gently so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula carefully to prevent injury to the eye.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that all of the adherence is healed.
And then put in the bowl salted water with which you wash; or distill in it of rose dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cloth of it, and place on the eye linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the swelling of the flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelid is of two kinds, for it is either nervous, and resembles a hard but fine cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched with an iron, if it does not adhere to it, is severed and the iron is not inserted into it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the greater tear duct little by little covering the sight and preventing the light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then opens the eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the eyelid with an iron by slightly doubling it back and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong glue, and slightly double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and abrade with the hair the side of the eyelid which is opposite the pupil. And thus you should leave the hair inside at the rear end.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine probe or small forceps, and leave the conjunctiva of the tear duct intact so that by this incision there does not result a continuous discharge of tears.
And sometimes the membrane is spread out in the sun or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be removed with a lion's claw probe, of which this is the shape:
And be careful that with the probe you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, put a little powdered salt or cerement made of silk in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the membrane is not fit for needle work and you cannot place the needle in it, nor is it left open for that purpose, then this kind of membrane is treated with medications, and it heals thus as mentioned and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the patient and take a fine probe with sharp acuteness according to this form: with fineness. And if it happens that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your eye in the wound of silk cerement or soft cloth or powdered salt, and dress the wound on the following day.
Then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, unless the opposite abscess is in the thigh, because then you should leave that one and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
Then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason that it should be healed.
If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh becomes painful in the cheek due to great harm, suspend it at that point; and incise a part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to allow the flow of tears.
Then apply a drop of rose oil mixed with ambergris into it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of an abscess and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the cheek.
In some cases on the cheeks of some people, flesh that is raised and swollen covers the pupil, or approaches it, or extends over the eyelids, forcing them apart in certain areas and is assembled like a balustrade's edge.
But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head between your knees; then open the cheeks of that person and collect all that flesh at appropriate points, and with forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the cheek during your operation.
And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is collected, depending on the form it will take as described in this chapter.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is thoroughly cleansed, now fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle red powder similar to corrosive medicines on it, and cover it with a white cloth so that it is protected from abscesses.
And if any cause arises for caution and there is a risk of the wound becoming inflamed, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what will cure it, and afterward proceed with the operation once again when it has healed, and similarly handle the adjusted flesh which occurs in this type of wound.
However, you must be careful that the healing of the wound proceeds naturally or accidentally, using tools, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge about wounds.
Know the red veins that are situated over the wound and prohibit their operation, and let the wound heal over a period of days.
At the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which the abscess is located is strong and if there is no other illness besides the abscess, then you should collect that abscess.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two, according to your discretion; and let that pressing be of subtle repetition according to this form:
or two ounces gradually in one motion according to this form:
Here are those veins then bind with fine ligatures, and cleanse the blood from time to time until those veins appear empty and have been reversed.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the skull; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then pour into the wound vinegar or red wine because of its acidity to dissolve what is left of the clot.
But if it is not possible for you to remove everything at that hour, then apply a dressing with something that relieves the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and there is assurance of no abscess formation.
And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal applications according to the narrative of the case and it has not healed, then do not allow new growth but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is within it until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form:
He is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian material, and its head is rounded just like this one which is made punctate by punctation with lime or arsenic by subtle punctation (as in the following form).
Place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said threads, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed and does not form an abscess and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, now there is no other way to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a scalpel or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you proceed as follows:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it be slightly tapered to fit into the end as you see here.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a bit to the side, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the pain as it finds its way through.
Now you should treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as mentioned before.
Therefore, when the flesh and place become hardened, at that time the matter which was dispersed to the parts returns to the nose, thus it is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Nose.
When the nose protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs due to it, then you should leave the patient alone, and subsequently follow with windy poultices on the head without scarification and use good suction; and afterwards apply an ointment made of atractylis, aloes, iris, and sarcocolla over the nose, and then strengthen the plaster on the protruding nose using powdered materials.
And the method for the powdered materials is that you take linen cloth and powder it; each piece of cloth should be folded into four parts, and then make powder from these pieces.
And subsequently apply those one over the other according to the quantity that the nose requires. And then strengthen over them with a hard cloth tightly wrapped; and repeatedly apply the windy poultices with suction without scarification; and then remove the poultices and leave the nose tight both day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligature becomes loose, then it should be made tight again.
And then remove the ligature both day and night as we have said.
And if you see the nose already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powdered materials, tight wrapping, and windy poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tissue.
When you detect disruption in the uveal tissue, and it protrudes prominently outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person, and you wish to incise this, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the edge of the uvea from below and above. Then place another needle where the double thread is, near the lacrimal part, and let it penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and move it strongly.
Then withdraw the needle and place it on the woolen cloth infused with egg white, and leave it there until the thread is attached to the uvea.
Then treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound is healed.
And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the eye to cover a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine probe that reaches beneath the eye, allowing the albuneal moisture to drain, and the eye will subside quickly.
Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of contusions.
This illness, called alconati, is not simply a wound but one that affects the eye as if water were descending and it is not that.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
And if it has not been prepared for the discharge as we have said, now make the patient sit and take a fine spatula and apply it over the conjunctiva near the edge, slightly under the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea at the border (entering the area gently), until the pus is evacuated.
Once it is evacuated, now you should apply warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable for puncturing, as explained earlier, now proceed according to the health condition.
Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and lift their affected eye with gentle pressure.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the instrument, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the instrument near the border at the thickest part of the white of the eye towards the inner corner, and then gently press the instrument with your hand.
And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see at that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And so place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down one way or another, and thus if the fluid descends immediately, you will see the defect on which his vision depends immediately, and in his eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you should pull it in the other direction before the almond is displaced.
And when it is still and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and revolve it little by little with your finger; and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from rock crystal in the fluid and wash the eye with this solution. And then cover the eye with a piece of cotton or a stopper or flax infused in rose oil and egg white mixed together.
But we and those of our time rest the eye with a dressing made of egg white.
And if the almond does not obey and enters the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard by nature—you should take the instrument known as an alberid, which has this form:
And so perforate with that the conjunctiva, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, and only proceed until you have made a way for the almond to move.
And here he enters the mango according to what we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for a malady by placing them in a suitable dormitory that has been properly prepared, in which they lie on their back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to its disposition by the third day.
And then remove it in that dark room and show the patient the reason for it, and explain some causes to them, and then re-bandage it by the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of healing or shortly before infusion. Handle it in such a way that you isolate this so that the water can flow freely due to great and strong caution.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to alleviate the abscess.
Now you should cover the eye and place a pad over it through which vision is prevented for several days, while keeping it in a dark room.
And then gradually move them from that room and converse with them about their condition.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from occasional vision, and now you should be confident about the operation.
And I have come to us from some of those among whom it was customary, and some said that they made fire in the Uylac [or Urac] which is perforated through which water flows.
But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of perforation for those who are unaware of them:
And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are shaped with this subtlety into a triangle, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths, some of which have causes similar to a scorpion made of soft flesh, or to a sea polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that sea creature. And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and it is not the lion's flesh that is of a dark color.
Therefore, in the case where there is flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous among these conditions, have the patient sit between your hands and place it in the sun, and starve the nose of it, and apply cold to those areas of flesh. And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then carefully incise what you have grasped of these with a sharp, fine probe until you know that all the flesh is detached; if it remains for any reason by which separation is possible, then cut it off with one of the fine instruments easily so that it does not remain for any reason. If the master controls bleeding or an abscess with cautery, then pause at that which is appropriate; but if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that part where the artery must be ligated and all cavities are to be opened.
And there should be applied near the nose, above the insertion of the wing, either oil or wine. If the nose is moist and from its process moisture enters into the palate, then you shall know that it has been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you shall know that within there is flesh growing on the superfluous bones of the nose to which division has not reached.
Then it is appropriate to insert faithfully into the one who has some swelling small pieces of cloth, and place between each piece the quantity of a finger or less, and form the defect and insert one end of the cloth in the nose either with a reed or for another reason that is possible.
And after this has been done, draw the patient's attention to smell so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be practiced over his palate, for those who carefully observe this action will find it similar to how children are taught in schools, and it is an easy cause for one who wishes to perform it.
And then leave the two ends of the cloth, one end that extends over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp to the cloths placed in the nose, and do this until you know that the flesh has grown around the cloths.
From the root extract the essence, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a tube, and do this for three days or more until it consumes all that remains of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used to perform nasal irrigation, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or gold, which should resemble a small spoon with a rounded end, like a small cone, and the tube similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the nasal irrigation instrument should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, by which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from liquids and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the natural openings in the nasal extremities.
Movable wings are formed at the extremities of the nose, and they are strengthened and fattened in some days within which it is laid down how one should observe them.
And for this reason, you should insert it at the beginning of its appearance, and hold it entirely. And then pause over the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine in its place.
But if its insertion is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider whether it is hardened, tough, dark in color, and with little sensation. At this point, do not touch it with a hot iron because those wings appear to the one who incises this abscess due to great malice upon him.
And if the abscess is soft to touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible at all times, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or similar cause.
Know that when the dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will be capable of performing such an operation except for some skilled individuals.
Therefore, when dealing with any cause of these conditions, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to the natural course of the blood. Then, adjust the two sides of the wound with sutures and subsequently treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated, and each one is made whole, now you must scrape each part of its visible edge until it becomes clean. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle on top of them powder of dragon's blood and thrice repeat this, and place over the powder a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that wound for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and leave it until the pus is completely abscessed, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you should join the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suturing of the abdomen, or join the wound of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their internal parts.
Often in some men in the internal parts of their lips appear hard abscesses similar to the flesh of birds, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and cut each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you abscess it, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is congealed, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On incising the flesh attached to the gums.
In cases involving the flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called albulus, then you should suspend that part for a while or hold it with forceps and incise that part of its root, and allow the pus to flow or the blood.
And then apply to the wound dry sargings or other styptic powders or excrescences.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On extracting teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in both the inner and outer parts and between the gums attached, there are rough, sharp edges, tartar, and some areas are blackened and appear yellow or green, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth decayed.
And therefore it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands and hold his head in your lap, and rasp the teeth on which these rough edges appear until no such cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowness and other issues so that they are cleansed.
Therefore, if this is done at the beginning of the extraction, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth on another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final stage as you desire.
And know that teeth require various tools of different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore there are razors of the kind used when a tooth is being extracted from inside the mouth, and others for scraping between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care of the tooth from its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace its place once it is extracted, as its substance is superior to any substitute.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but shortly after the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen this through the experience of practitioners.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatulum having some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely, and then remove it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
And then use strong forceps for good leverage or a firm grip, and place the patient's head between your hands so that you hold it well without causing discomfort, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not perforated, then take one of those instruments and place it all around with ease and endeavor the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is loose or decayed, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it tightly at the tip with a fine thread so that it does not break during your compression on that part while holding it.
And it is necessary that you act extremely carefully during the incision around all parts of the gum and guard against using too much strength so that you do not break or damage it, and return to the main area due to the malice that it be better than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity during the extraction of teeth; for they often do not administer what we have recommended. Many times this brings about great evils to sick people, which are much harder to cure, and the roots of these problems remain entirely, or partially, or you may extract it along with some bones of the mandible as many times we have witnessed.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with cold water or warm water mixed with salt.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and subtle handles with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you need to operate with them.
And so that when you insert your fingers into them, the intestines are not folded, let them be short extremities.
And let them be made of Indian iron, seamlessly made from straight extremities, and on the extremities of those let there be teeth, some of which enter into others and twist by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is a heron, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from the jaw.
When you must perform the removal of a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, it is necessary for you to apply pressure around the area for one day or two until the area becomes softened; and then introduce instruments whose extremities are similar in shape to the beak of a bird called ciconia or heron, which resemble the form of forceps:
The extremities of these should be made like a file or rasp from the inside.
And if it does not obey you when using these forceps or tweezers, then you should apply pressure to the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce an instrument called atali, which is a small lever, whose form is as follows:
And let it have a short thick end, and do not bury it entirely so that it is not impacted.
Then if by this the root is exposed, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
And here is how you use this instrument, which has two sides of the following form: and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because it is useful to use this instrument, which resembles a small ring, and this is its form:
with the triangular tip bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not be hidden so that it does not rattle.
And another wisdom is that the instruments for the teeth should be made similarly to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if you need to remove something, then carefully place it back in its proper position using the instruments and forceps that we have described for extracting tooth roots, and assist with the procedure which has this form:
And it should have some thickness, gradually increasing, and be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is drilled out; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small hole in the bone, then treat that hole and its blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and especially when the form is lagging, particularly for women and more so for those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it with medicine, then you must root it out. But ensure that it is not attached to another tooth; at this point, you incise it with an instrument of this form; it resembles a boar's tusk and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And your incision should be made on the side where you will incise it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not connect with any other teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian iron file of this form:
And it should be made entirely of Indian iron and used carefully; it should have small sharp points like the file on which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed a little at a time over several days with ease, so that it does not injure any other teeth in the process. And at the end, smooth it with linen, and polish it with some razors.
And if it is a tooth of which part is broken and you run your tongue over it, then you should file down the inside until the roughness of that portion is smoothed out and evened, so that it is filled in such a way that your tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or dislocated by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite properly due to this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further complications, you should restore those teeth with gold fillings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be made with such subtlety and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of application is that you take the gold filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then gradually extend it among one or more defective teeth until it reaches a healthy tooth on the other side. And then continue the application starting from the part where you began, and strengthen your work with skill and wisdom so that it is not defective.
And when you are applying the filling, ensure that it adheres to the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and carefully shape it for each location. Turn and hide these trimmed parts between a healthy tooth and a defective one so that they do not injure the tongue. And then file that part as smooth as a Roman coin.
But if it becomes loose or broken, repair that part with additional filling in such a way over time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the treatment of two healthy teeth and of two diseased ones, as you will see these lines:
And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the place where each should be, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they remain.
And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a similar piece of cow's bone is used for a certain reason, and it is shaped like a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and it remains and serves well for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This membrane that is under the tongue sometimes is natural and one has it from birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is that you open the mouth of the patient, with their head tilted to one side; and raise their tongue, and then cut that membrane along the nerve according to its width to free the tongue.
But if there is any hardness or node in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should gently cut along the width until the membrane is divided and the node dissolved.
And be careful not to make a cut in the upper layer of the skin so that you do not sever the arteries and cause bleeding.
After washing the remnants of the incision with water or vinegar or with water and a sponge, then place linen beneath the tongue; this is the method by which the bad taste under the tongue should be washed every night so that it does not consolidate in any other way.
If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol triturated; but if the blood flows, immediately cauterize the site with a hot iron which is suitable for this purpose. And then treat with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a cyst under the tongue.
Sometimes, a swelling appears under the tongue, resembling a small abscess, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural functions; and it can grow so large that it fills the mouth.
The procedure is to open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the swelling.
And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, to which the swelling does not respond to touch, then do not touch it, for it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined toward whiteness and has moisture, then you can proceed with the incision using a fine scalpel, and cut it completely; and if blood flows during your operation, immediately place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which is vitriol, to staunch the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have treated it completely, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other necessary care until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from both armpits and those in the groin and other abscesses.
When you find in the groin a gathering of glands that are somewhat assembled and appear outside, which are called armpits, when you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the swelling is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; rather, let it mature inside. Either you will then extract it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the swelling is slight, then that should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested and healed after resting completely or if it has diminished in some way. Then make the patient sit facing the sunlight, with their head to your right side, and expose the mouth of the abscess, and the assistant should hold the tongue down with his fingers while you use a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as fine as a knife.
Then as you press down with that instrument and the abscess becomes visible to you, place your hand firmly over it, then make an incision and insert the instrument into the center of the abscess, and pull it outward to its full extent. Here is another tool for opening any cause of the tunics, and immediately use this instrument which has the following form:
Here is another tool for opening any cause of the tunics, and immediately use this instrument which has the following form: and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of its are curved, thus the orifice of each of those is in line with the other, sharp, which should be made of iron.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then use the scalpel which has the following form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have made an incision, make the other following this method of incision, and then wash the wound with clean water.
But if there is bleeding, wash with water from the decoction of lemon peel or myrtle leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes there appear in the neck other abscesses or those two armpits, and incise those as I have said regarding the incision of two wounds similarly.
And I once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her neck, which was turning blackish in color, barely sensitive, and was already causing difficulty in breathing due to swelling. She had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she would have reached the point of death within another day or two if nothing had been done.
And the abscess had become so severe that it had formed two channels through which it could drain by two openings.
Thus he cut it fundamentally and placed it in one of their ounces, and pulled that out, and from there the larger portion was removed, and then he incised that where he understood the connection to the other side, and then he closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then he placed the ounce in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood came from it. Thus the woman was completely cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she ate food. I did not stop incising that abscess for many times over a long period, and an abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Thus I brought in smoke and cauterized the wound with it, thus treating the addition; and then I wandered around and did not know what God would do next regarding that.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
When the milk is discharged from the breast, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, it is then called a bubo.
But when it is cured by what we have described in the division, and your treatment does not conflict with that cure, and sometimes even after cauterization, if it remains and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round. And if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt its incision, because there is fear of harm in such cases.
And when you see it according to the method that I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which shape emerges and immediately place the incision in the new area, and pull that down and dissect it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the dissection of two membranes.
And you should not incise it beyond the natural limit without addition, for if you incise too much, you will harm their speech.
And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is terrified by the incision, use something to cauterize it without fear, and the method of the cautery in this case is nothing but sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your lap, and immediately press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to that area, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Let the extremity of what is cauterized be where the medicine is placed just as in a ladle made of brass, and place the instrument with the medicine on top, and the patient lies on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out due to the internal medicine, thus preventing any cause for it to end up outside and damage that area.
And then with your hand on the medicine, apply it to the uvula for half an hour until you see that area become blackened and numb due to the biting action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the wound, then dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert both the wound and the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and afterwards let it be so that it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so. Then after cauterization, clean around the wound with cotton soaked in it, and modify what is around that with the substance from the medicine, let it be washed with wet water, and treated externally with an embrocation, and proceed with cautery inside until it heals.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration out of fear.
In some cases, the wound is treated with something that is gentler than cauterization and incision. It is healed through sublimation in this manner: take salve, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian cardamom, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, then boil it. The pot should be moderately heated, and at the bottom of the pot place a tray made of reeds in this way; it can be made of silver or reed.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the pot so that the vapor reaches the wound above the tube until the wound is sufficiently covered by the steam.
And afterwards repeat this several times until it dries up, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh on the abscess. You should not do this; instead, you should allow the abscess to come to a head before cauterizing.
If this instrument is not at hand, take a reed and attach to it a piece of cloth at the end, so that the mouth of the patient may be protected, for the cloth of the cloth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the gums and of other causes.
Certain objects may adhere to the gums or be caused by a fish bone or some other reason.
Then you should remove what is obvious from those objects, upon which your sight falls, and press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that it may be revealed to you what is in the gum.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the gum, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the gum will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce leaves or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it firmly with thread, and have the patient swallow that, as it passes to the place where the spine is, then it will expel it. And if you take an eel and bind it with thread soaked in honey, place it gently and remove it carefully; or take a probe and gently insert it and then carefully extract it.
And if it does not expel with the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And let the pus be thick and run a small needle into it, and at its extremity make an incision which you shall insert into its mouth with facility.
And when you place the sick person upright, and be careful not to touch his bone of the throat, for so it would hurt him and those who hold him, or that the physician with his hand.
But let the patient himself insert it if he can do so skillfully, knowing the place of the cause and holding on to it, and pulling his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity which is prepared within until it is properly done.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Removal of a Bloodsucker Attached to the Throat.
When a bloodsucker is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider the hours of the day when the patient is exposed to the sun, since you have already prepared his tongue with the instrument that we have recommended.
Then if you see the bloodsucker, remove it gently with a small incision or with subtle gestures carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and subsequently place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls from the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a vessel full of fresh water and pour it into his mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any cause prevent you from doing this, and pour the water out gradually with his hand, for as soon as the bloodsucker feels the water, it will try to escape.
If it is not too much trouble with what we have recommended, then fumigate the wound with camphor or with asafetida with the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall out.
And this is another method of operation in fumigation of that area: take an urn in which there are burning coals and the urn is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole; attach the end of the instrument to that hole, and proceed with the fumigation from above. Have the patient place their mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting point, for the blood will immediately come out.
And if it does not come out, then proceed with the fumigation multiple times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and give salty foods and herbs, and do not let them drink water. It is also necessary that they follow this regimen strictly.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the groin is performed when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you may have seen, but it has some curvature. which is placed in the groin, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses any area, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which the essence of the discourse on the preparation for treating abscesses and their incision is summarized.
Abscesses are various types of swellings, of many kinds, as I recall them, each in this book.
They are diverse in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the type of abscess itself; and by what they contain of moisture.
And the second method concerns the locations where they occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part of the body is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but allowed to reach maturity of the pus within them or until they come to a head.
And there are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are small and have not reached maturity according to their full development, such as abscesses near joints, because an abscess close to a joint can extend into the surrounding area until you puncture it, which could corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb; or if it is near a principal part of the body, and if you delay its puncturing while it matures, it may endanger the main member; or if it is close to the buttocks, then puncture it before it has matured; but do not puncture it when it is raw, due to incomplete digestion, except for one near the buttocks, so that it does not perforate deeply into the internal parts of the buttocks and cause a fistula or spread further without healing. But it is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the subsidence of fever, and soon after the decrease in inflammation and pulse rate, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And take care that you know the puncture should be made in the place where the pus is deepest in the abscess and from which pus comes for the healing of the elevation.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places of tendons, ligaments, nerves; and finally, in all other equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use a puncture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is best to wait until the internal puncture is confirmed after proper digestion of the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture before that, it will prolong the illness of the patient and cause excessive harm, and make the lips of the abscess harden and deepen.
But some abscesses should be punctured across the length of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a larger puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary for the incision to be hollowed out and dissected, when it is made as such, it should be done at a time when it has already become mature, just as in cases of excessive swellings and buboes.
And among those that are incised is one having three angles; and of this kind is the one which is incised as in the figure of a myrtle leaf, like the abscesses of the fingers.
And among those to which round incision and lunar incision are administered, and similar ones to these.
But in the case where none of these applies, such as with superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture it with a superficial puncture or simply make it flat.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected pus and sediment, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part from it, on another day incise the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its gradation until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is a young man, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly in debility, for in such cases the animal spirit is quickly resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you should observe them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and after your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, make sure to cleanse the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat incision; at that time administer some of them or of antiseptic cloth. And if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are many, then you should place wax in each tract until they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the cord or have concave it around the circuit, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you have treated pustules or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed to treat it according to what is needed from the remedies until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then prepare water and vinegar in which to dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
If the blood continues to flow, then you should administer treatment and healing, using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and burnt oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and keep this moist until the third day, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to its healing whatever is necessary until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure separately by chapters.
Chapter XLIV.
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
And they are soft, and those that contain moisture similar to jelly. Of those things which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those things which are stony, hard.
And in the section of all things, and in the extraction of those [things], there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose nature.
And the operation in the section of those [things] is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section along its length according to a superficial section in this form:
And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. When the humidity is evacuated, then you should excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause for harm, as closely observed wounds return if any cause remains.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, as this will dissolve all that remains of the membrane.
And then repeat the treatment on that wound with Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains hard lumps, then you should incise it according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and extract once between two lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If a wound from an arrow causes trouble, then at that time do what I have recounted first.
And similarly, treat the abscess that has formed through section and treatment as we have said to you; and section on an abscess that has formed is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that occur in the head in certain people who do not have much moisture throughout their body; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to hit it, they would hurt themselves.
However, in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case with this chapter; also, regarding abscesses that appear on children's heads and behind their ears, the section for all of these should be a superficial incision.
And pause the puncturing of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
And treat those accordingly with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only the ones containing moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you find to be well disposed upon examination, the color of which is clearly manifest and matches the color of the skin, and it is soft throughout, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard; proceed to incise that at a superficial dryness above the part and below the body according to line .G. between the line .B., and peel that off entirely, and extend from the edges of the skin by one inch or two inches if you need those, as we have said concerning the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut unnecessarily with your hand, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery during your operation, immediately apply a green vitriol plaster or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the bleeding, and leave it there until the acute stage of the abscess subsides and the inflammation becomes mollified and begins to pus. When the blood is constricted.
Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
And immediately inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, avoid incising that scrofula at its root. And be careful to bind that one with a firm double bandage and let it fall by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old lint which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat that area.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then be sure to approximate the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is room for superfluous fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then be sure to incise its root and evacuate it and administer sutures as described.
And for the scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you the place of maturation is, and pause before making another puncture deep into the base of the mass, as we have said.
And then administer punctures, cover them with ointment and similar applications, so that it aids in the corruption of what remains to be corrupted. And when you see the wound already cleansed, then treat it with an ointment of generative flesh so that it may be healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the division of the pus duct of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Thus did the ancients call this section in the epilogue, and I have not seen any man in our land who has performed that incision.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men who have a weak constitution, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiploon, as this cannot be done safely because all the veins and the main vessels are here.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or behind the ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epiploon to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epiploon below three circles of its own circles, or four for a smaller section along its length between two circles in quantity. The section should be made in the fat, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
And if the physician is cautious, it is better to first extend the throat skin by one inch and then make an incision into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then cut the fat as we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal by the phlegm which is from that secretion and by the loss of voice.
And let the patient rest for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is delayed due to fear of perforation, join two edges of the skin of the wound, but leave it slightly apart from the cartilage.
Here is the translation:
And Al-bucasis says that the main point of the speech which we have recounted is this: the exposition is nothing other than to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come within a hair's breadth of death, and the air passage is cut off; therefore, some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason, the command is to leave the pus inside until the maleficence of the illness is consumed; and the maleficence lasts for three days; therefore, at that time, the command is to treat the wound so that it may heal.
And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into their windpipe and cut out a piece of the trachea, and I was called to treat them. I found the swelling as if it were that of a dying person, uncovered the wound, and saw the blood that had come from the wound in small amounts.
Therefore, I confessed that in that case, neither a vein nor any other part had been incised, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated it until she healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Chapter XLIV.
On the incision for an abscess that occurs in the windpipe outside, which is called a hernia of the windpipe.
This swelling, called the hernia of the groin, is a large swelling according to the colour of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case happens in two ways; one of which is similar to fat nodes, and the other way is similar to a swelling caused by an artery knot, and in that case there is reason for concern. And it is not appropriate to make an incision with a knife except in the case where it is small. And you should examine that and investigate it carefully with the finger, and if you find it similar to a fat node and not attached to any veins, then you incise it as you would with nodes and extract what is inside like that of hair and bursiclam; otherwise, you must thoroughly explore its nature, and subsequently treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the Section of the Kinds of Nodes.
There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And it is necessary for me to describe as well the difference between a node and an abscess so as to cause no doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and severe pain until the fermentation of the excess matter subsides; and it completes putrefaction at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
This may not be heat nor fever nor pain, and it continues as if there were a lion's paw in that place.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus whether larger or smaller, and they are of two kinds, either dry containing heat, or greasy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are motley, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about its beginning at the moment which is called intromission, as its form will come in the chapter which is near this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this moment and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve it little by little until you know that the moment has already penetrated the tissue.
And according to the measure of the size of the abscess, you proceed accordingly, then extract the moment and observe what has come out in its wake.
And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if from the wake of the moment you do not find moisture, then you know that it is greasy.
And make an incision over it in the shape of a cross according to this form: as I have taught you, and suspend it with threads, and scrape the tissue from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that area, and extract the pus from the node.
If the maxilla is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract it whole, and you must break it up into pieces so that you can remove it bit by bit until nothing remains.
If any part of it breaks off for whatever reason, whether little or much, the remainder will return to its place according to the maxilla.
And if you see that any small part remains broken off, then apply a poultice of some corrosive powders and clean the wound, and place over it an abscess cauterizing agent, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
And if the remaining piece is large, then you should suture both sides of it and treat it with something that promotes healing.
If a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is encountered, then tie it off and apply the dressing with vitriol three times so that the wound heals and the blood clot stabilizes; and afterward return to separate what is broken from the remainder.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, there are instruments of three types, some of which are large, some medium-sized, and some small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Here is the English translation:
These are the forms of the practitioners, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And it consists of three types, for among them is the great one, the medium one, and the small one.
The form of the great practitioner, its form is as follows:
The form of the medium practitioner, its form is as follows:
The form of the small practitioner, its form is as follows:
They are suitable for treating abscesses, excrescences, fistulas, and buboes, whether they affect the bones or other causes.
They make rods, thick needles, and lions, just as with large needles used to sew saddles, and they are made of citron wood, or wood, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
They are made by practitioners with black feathers, who agree that with these, fistulas in which there are reflections should be opened, so that the contents are reflected out due to their lightness through those reflections.
And it consists of three types, for some of them are long, and others are medium-sized, and the others are short, depending on the quantity and width of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of the great practitioner made of lead:
The form of the medium-sized practitioner made of lead:
The form of the small practitioner made of lead:
The shapes of the lancets are of various kinds, for some are simple, having only one curvature, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
And their points are hooked, and there are three types of them.
And of those that have two curves, there are three types.
And of those that have three curves, there are three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple lancet is as follows:
The form of a large lancet having two curves is as follows: The form of a medium lancet having two curves is as follows: The form of a small lancet having two curves is as follows:
The form of a large lancet having three curves is as follows:
The form of a medium lancet having three curves is as follows:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are excised, and there are three kinds, for among them is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Form of the large knife:
Form of the medium knife:
Form of the small knife:
The sharp ends of those with which acute incisions are made are such and the other ends are not blunt in this manner, but so that during the excision of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and by them the patient may be healed and peace of mind restored somewhat due to the adjustment which follows the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble a reed from which alcohol is made.
And it has a pointed end on the left side with a spatula hidden in it, and along that edge are parts inside and outside, as you see when you want to.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the said forceps during the puncture of abscesses so that the patient does not perceive them, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of veins from which the blood flow is severed are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
They are made of thin skin, round in some length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these kinds of veins—large, medium, and small—so that with them you can sever the blood flow quickly when necessary, and at other times when primary medicine is not available.
However, do not use them to sever blood in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as the joints of the arms and legs, and the joints of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and thighs, and similarly to the fleshly joints of humans.
And sometimes they are made of other small instruments resembling the teeth of combs according to this form; by which the blood is severed when performed for phlebotomy, or in incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell due to an excess during sleep when they begin to mature, and subsequently their breasts swell and resemble those of women, and we call them Roman apostems or abscesses.
And for that which you wish to excise, cut it in this lunar section from the line of .B. to the line of .G., then scrape away all the roughness, then fill the wound with flesh-generating medicine, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
If the mammary gland inclines towards the sides and is softened by its size just as it does in women, then cut it into two parts with its pus inside, each part in sections resembling a lunar shape, of which each should be contained within the other at their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then scrape away the tissue between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have mentioned about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the excision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's discomfort and bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Near the Throat.
These abscesses that occur near the throat are often of the type known as scrofula, hard and covered with a thick skin.
And of these, only some contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be cut in a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all is evacuated from the abscess along with the pus, then fill it with dry cotton and leave it until the next day.
Let the cut be cleaned and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the types of the glands or of the scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula similarly.
And if the plague has spread to the point of gangrene, then administer cauterization as we have previously mentioned.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the part where it was located becomes inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated near the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a sound like a whistle.
And when it is due to a vein, it is round on the surface of the body.
And the incision of this abscess is dangerous, especially when it occurs in the armpits, in the angles, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; it is serious, therefore care should be taken to avoid its surgical treatment, and if it is in the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided even more.
But in the case where it is due to inflammation of the artery opening, incise along the length of the part; and then carefully cut with hooks near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
Upon that needle I place and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with fine thread in two places, which procedure I explain in extracting two arteries, which are found in the temple.
And then apply the place between two bandages with a poultice so that the blood comes out completely while it is there, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the bandages can fall off; and subsequently treat it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess and the condition, and then insert the needle below the place where you had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread until you extract that from the other side, and subsequently ligature the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you in the bandaging of vine leaves on both sides of the thread's extremities.
But if you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the thread with that needle below all the abscess where the first incision was made, and tie the threads in four places.
And then dry the abscess in its proper place so that when what is inside comes out, you incise the excess of the tissue, and leave what from it is adhered.
And then apply powder that you have submerged in wine and oil, and subsequently administer the treatment with dressings and remedies until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to nerve strain.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so too does an abscess occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similarly.
And it happens mostly in the areas of the joints or heel, or in any place where the joints are often troubled.
It is a severe abscess and its color resembles the surrounding tissue. It is one of the worse conditions when it occurs with vehemence, and the patient appears in a state similar to stupor.
It is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and because of this it is less painful. It affects the entire area equally and does not concentrate in front or back.
Therefore, when it occurs in the joints, it should not be bandaged with iron, for it will likely lead to contraction.
But when it occurs in the head or on the forehead, apply treatment with spatum (a type of poultice). But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with forceps and incise it carefully.
But if it is large, then suspend it with ligatures, and excise it properly; afterwards, close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to swelling in the abdomen.
Therefore, for some people there are growths in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called mushrooms by similarity to those fungi, whose root is fine and the head of it is thick; and often the lips of these are smooth, and they are small ones, and they are of those that move magnificently.
And I have seen one in whom there were two parts in his belly which were larger and similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
And the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Then I incised them and found one weighing about eighteen uncias and the other about ten uncias.
And the operation during the incision of these is that you consider if the malady is humid, and the color of the tumor is white, humid, with a fine root; then you incise it with a broad scalpel, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, for the moist growths should have their section expelled by much blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
And if you see the malady dry and fearful, guard against incising with iron; but now take fresh lead paste and apply it to that tumor, in the manner which we have described; and leave it for two days.
And immediately adjust the compression of the lead strip; therefore, do not stop applying the lead continuously until the tumor is separated and falls off by itself without effort.
If you are dealing with a large abscess and during its incision there is reason for fear and dread, especially if it is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you may incise most of it, and then afterward cauterize the area so that it does not return.
And afterwards, treat the wound until it is healed.
And be careful not to presume to incise an abscess that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is hard upon examination, for such an abscess is likely cancerous.
And here I will recall something regarding this.
Chapter LIILetters were slightly altered for clarity: Chapter LII
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the abdominal wall above the abdomen, and through these openings the membrane or bowel protrudes as in other ruptures; or by a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on its location, or by trapped air.
If it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the skin; it is soft without pain, and afterward appears in various situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the bowel, then its appearance differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats, and afterward returns; and it is very sensitive to sound, and swells after bathing and hard work.
May it be soft because of moisture, so that when you press upon it with your hand, it is not hidden, nor is it constricted, nor is it hardened.
And if it is due to pus, then at this point these signs appear, the abscess turning to a declining blackness.
But if it is due to excess flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is seated in proportion to a quantity.
But if it is due to airiness, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in it is that you consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to pus from an artery, or a vein, or airiness; now it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter wherein I have stated the abscesses from an artery and a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowels or the membrane, then it behooves you to command the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves; then feel around the entire circumference of the navel, and then command them to stand between your hands on their back; then surround with a spatula at the edge of the navel where you have felt with your hand; then cut half of the abscess above one inch greatly; then tie around the edge with strong thread or cord in an appropriate manner.
And then cut the center of the abscess extended over the ligature and insert your finger into that place to check for the bowels; and if you find them or guard them with the ligature, then you extract promptly and push the bowels to the sides within the abdomen.
And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the superfluities from it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then compress the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place inside which the extended flesh may ooze and fall off by itself; or incise it when it has become softened and will ooze out, and then treat it with water from the herbs until it is healed.
And if the swelling of the navel is made of flesh or because of humidity, then you should conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is appropriate to heal and consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to be done carefully so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also discussed wounds born out of carelessness during their treatment.
And the ancients said that in some cases wounds can be treated in a location where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as wounds in the nipples or in the armpits and similar parts of the body allocated for removal, especially when they are beginning small.
When it is old and hard, do not attempt to treat it yourself, for I cannot cure such a thing nor have I seen anyone else succeed in doing so.
And the operation should be performed when it is prepared as we have said, that you proceed and allow the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then bleed them if a clear abundance of pus is found.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which it will be performed, and then place hooks on the wound as is necessary; and afterward wash all around with a good linen cloth to clean inside so that there remains no cause for infection. And let the blood flow freely, and do not press it too roughly, and squeeze out the areas, and remove the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
But if it is contrary to your ability to stop thick blood clotting from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
On the treatment of hydrops (edema or fluid accumulation).
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, along with their treatment using medicines.
And the type that is treated with iron is only the single type of pleurisy, and not approached with iron for the types of tympanites or hydrothorax, for this is fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of tympanic hydrocephalus with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached a state of debility or suffers from another illness along with that hydrocephalus, just as if it were in the chest or belly area and similar to those cases. Now guard yourself that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
And if you see the patient with excessive vigor, and in them there is no other illness but hydrocephalus alone, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant approaches to press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, pushing the water out from below the navel, and then take spatum spinos in this form:
It should be made of two sharp parts long, with a pointed end like a lancet; however, it should gradually become shorter in length, so that during the operation you do not pierce into the bowel and injure it.
And then consider whether the origin of the hydrocephalus is from the bowels; if so, you should distance the incision from the navel by a length of three fingers below it, directly over the navel.
But if the origin of the hydrocephalus is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the origin of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not advisable for your incision to be on the side on which the patient lies, so that the fluids do not flow to that place and cause harm.
With an instrument, perforate entirely the wound, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with a spatula between the wound and the tissue, and you will scrape off that part; and if there is a quantity of one layer or around about.
And then I perforate the tissue so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is. And then extract that part and insert an instrument of this shape: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's bone, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a pen, as you can see.
And at the uppermost part of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately you should stop above the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of water at once, for if you evacuate as much as does not fit in one go, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it will lead to imminent death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water that is because it is immediately retained by the wound which holds the hole that is on the tissue of which you are instructed to perforate according to that method.
And prepare it again with the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates that, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this with some days in between out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not run out of the water before its time.
But if you fear for the patient, and give a large quantity of water, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture on him in baths, and let him wait long hours in the sun; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize the stomach and the intestines after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what preceded.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their head not properly formed (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, one should attempt to make a puncture for it as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the passage and secure it, and leave it in for three days or four.
And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over that area will not allow this opening.
Let that of which the wound is narrow be treated with a lead splint, as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
Let those in which the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that he who is born and the wound is behind the tip of the penis so that he cannot urinate to the sides; and it is not for generation, so that the semen cannot reach the major second rectitude, and this is a laghid disease.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you extend the tip of the penis with your left hand vigorously, and incise the head of the penis in the place of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as an incision of a feather, or that you shave some part so that the wound falls in the middle according to what is needed.
And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause to address the bleeding before you proceed with the incision, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
About the ulcer that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This ulcer often occurs in the penis and is a soft flesh prominence.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For non-malignant cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and abscind that which contains all the matter; then apply a poultice made from Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat it with decoction until it is healed.
And if it is malignant and of dark color, then you should administer cautery around the incision and the edges.
But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be damaged.
And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise everything that is already discolored and what is about to become corrupted or is already corrupted; and afterwards apply a bandage soaked in honey, which has been crushed with ground and sifted barley bran.
And afterwards treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery according to this method:
because such cautery is beneficial in two situations simultaneously: for bleeding and for the corruption of wounds.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and circumcision is not required on him; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the bandage dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them delicately, then you should scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, its fineness easily penetrates due to its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which has already been moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic juice to ensure it is healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution that interrupts like other diseases: but since it is part of our practice and our will, and since it specifically applies to children, it is necessary that we determine the best procedure and the most gentle way to ensure their well-being.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a scalpel and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; they use bandages made of fine cloth and stitching with a needle.
Thus I have described all these methods and did not find a better modification with scissors, with thread as in the procedure using the fingernail, since most times you avoid the foreskin above, because the foreskin of the prepuce has two tunics, and remove the tunic below, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain. And in the modification which is done by alphabetization, which is digital, used by surgeons, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed, since it easily enters into the space there.
But in the operation with the fingernail, easily you can err and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often seen in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
But regarding the modification that is done with scissors and thread made of silk, the quality, through experience I discovered this, because the scissors should be proportionate to the incision, for what lies above is as sharp as what lies below; and thus when you press your hand according to these two sharps, and make the incision accordingly at once; and it is done with compression of the silk thread in a shape containing the foreskin all around, by which there is no error whatsoever.
And the method of the first operation is that you should have the child lie down if it is one who can be treated gently, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave it for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to you according to what he can understand. Let him then be placed between your legs prepared, and let it not be seen by anyone; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them elsewhere, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
Then put your hand between his thighs and blow into the vein, and pull it in so that the head of the lancet exits, and then clean that which is attached to it from impurity.
The shape of the scissors for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of blades be blunt and the other sharp, so that the tip of the blade does not protrude, and let the length of both cutting edges be equal to the length of two thumbs equally.
But the mistake in cleaning is that you may forcefully avoid the intrinsic vein entirely, or part of it due to the incision.
Therefore, you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the swelling of the area and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a probe and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling below the testicle has subsided, now allow what is inside to be discharged once the abscess is cauterized, and scrape that which is easily accessible, and incise it as soon as you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not be affected by this.
And therefore, treat that with what the plague cures from the powders which we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised from the tendon too much, and you follow the instructions above, do not pay attention to this.
And therefore, treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and violent means are necessary to address the malady, then it becomes necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a quill pen, about half the thickness of a sparrow's feather, and its length should be similar to a palm and a half, and at its tip there should be a slender tube.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thin piece of thread and tie it securely to one end of wool or cotton; then insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and if there is any excess of wool, cut it with scissors so that it can be inserted into the tube forcibly. Then gently pull on the siringua while holding an egg white nearby.
And place the patient on the cot, and raise the bladder of the patient and the penis with olive oil and myrrh.
And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the base of the penis; and then bend the penis above the part where it is bent; and then push the siringua inside until it reaches the bladder, and that will ensure the stone to be reached without any obstruction, and if this order is not followed, but instead the path in which it goes tortuously.
And then slowly pull the thread along with the wool little by little, as the urine will wet the wool.
Here is the translation:
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enemas for the bladder, with a clyster syringe and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when blood is clotted there, or when a foul discharge is obstructed, and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but at the end of it is blunt, that is closed. And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, as you can see.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which what is to be introduced is placed, and its quantity should be appropriate for filling that space without addition, so that when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when expelled, with it, according to how far it is expelled, as a clampcedra has naphta applied to it in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw in the liquid that is introduced into the upper parts, as the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the urethra as we have recommended in the circular part; and then introduce the moisture with the liquid you are introducing, as that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and thus relieve the condition.
The form of the clyster syringe with which the bladder is enemasmed is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with its head being like a small feather, and below the joint the length of a finger.
And take a bladder of an animal, and put in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the tube.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it is stretched properly so that you can feel when that humidity has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available to you, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and perforate that throughout its entire roundness; then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then attach the circle as it should be attached in this manner, so that you place in it what you want from various humidities, oils, and waters.
And then tie that to the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which this manual operation is performed, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And he who wishes to narrate it does so with clarity and conciseness.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among the signs of it is that the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety but contains sediment like sand; and the patient scratches his genitals frequently, and there are times when he experiences pain, and shortly after he becomes erect; and for these reasons you will understand this condition.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals. But in young people it is somewhat easier compared to those who are older.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment takes longer; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to achieve the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient's bladder by extracting all the sediment that is within its folds; for this sediment sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to obstruction.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and pressed firmly to help the stone descend to the neck of the bladder or jump to another location.
And then place the patient with their legs raised and prepared, and have them lie on the side where the stone is located, so that the bladder inclines towards that side.
And thus he examined it and all around it.
So if you feel the stone in the space, now you should cut it out immediately.
And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now you should anoint your index finger of the left hand, if a girl, or the middle finger if a boy who is older, with oil, and insert that into their anus. And examine the stone until you feel it with your finger. And gradually turn it little by little into the bladder neck.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel it outwards towards the place where you made the incision.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula of the following shape: and make an incision between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but to the left side; and let the incision be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you can extract from the stone, as much as possible without being too large, because it is easy for your finger, which is in the anus, to press the stone out after the incision.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to remove them.
And there is one that resembles a hedgehog's spine, it is round, and it is easy to remove.
Then for that one which has angles and edges, adjust it into the crevice.
And if it is not inserted properly, now cover it over that area, or tighten around it with a suitable grip, the end of which should be like a file with which you tighten around the stone, and do not let go of it; or insert an delicate instrument with a curved end beneath it.
But if you cannot do it around that area, now expand the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, cauterize it with vinegar acid.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it there; and then gently move a little towards that area; and similarly do this if they are in clusters more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to cut that with a large section, because this causes the patient one of two bad outcomes: either death or that they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area does not heal completely.
But administer an expulsion to remove it internally, or devise a fracture of it with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with aloe fibers and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. And apply on that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may yield.
And apply the poultice on the affected area of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then apply a cleansing ointment and a healing ointment until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the wound, it is adhust and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and this is known by the mixture of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to hasten its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you should observe both the conditions and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommend before proceeding to surgery, for many have been accused of performing unnecessary surgery due to this treatment; and thus I advise that you take a fine iron probe, which has the following shape:
with a triangular end, sharp, attached to a handle.
Take some oil, and pour it over the rod below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Insert the tool into the rod with ease until it reaches the stone. Rotate the tool gently with your hand against the stone little by little, and you will gradually enlarge the opening so that it can penetrate from one side to the other; for urine will soon be released.
Then press your hand on what is broken of the stone that is outside the rod, for this part is shattered and will be expelled with the urine, and the illness will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some cause that prohibits it, then pour oil below the stone and some oil above the stone. Then incise on the stone in that rod between two bindings. Then extract it. Then loosen the binding and clean the collected blood, which has formed in the wound.
It is not necessary to bind oil below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other binding above it should not be removed, for when the oil is bound near the extraction of the stone, the wound will return to its place and heal the injury.
And for this reason, when you pour oil above, it is necessary to elevate the wound to the upper parts or return to your care as we have said, so that the injury heals.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in one of them, the treatment is difficult at that time, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of the reasons is that the woman's body is very weak.
The second reason is that you do not find many women who are honest enough to confess to their condition, whether they are unmarried or married.
The third reason is that you do not find many women who are knowledgeable about this art, especially the operation itself.
The fourth reason is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a large incision, and there is fear associated with it.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to find an experienced and honest woman surgeon, but few are found.
However, if you do not have access to such a person, then seek a skilled and careful man surgeon, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable about women's conditions, or a woman who has some part of the knowledge in this art.
Therefore, present that person, and command him to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is honest, so he should put his finger in her back passage to feel for the stone.
Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and then order him to sew it up.
But if it is not a virgin, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area properly.
Thus if you find it there, then proceed to gradually extract that from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts as far as is possible within its reach until it reaches the end of the issue.
And then sew up that apposition in the middle of the vagina at the end of the issue from whichever side is convenient for you and center the stone in that place, so that the finger does not dislodge the stone when cut below it.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Thus you should know the types of stones according to what you understand and wish to convey about them.
And if you wish for blood to flow, apply vitriol thrice to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Take care to prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then sprinkle powder on the site and dress it with powders and bandages, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after some days and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Chapter LXII.
Of section on hernia preparation.
A hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white band that lies below the tendon of the groin muscles, which is called a band.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer that nature has prepared for the region of the groin, where it appears as if another hernia; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white band we have mentioned, and this is not so quickly apparent.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin muscles.
And this moisture may have various colors, for its color can incline to yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and the latter is preferable.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of fluid such as this is: for if it is in the white tissue which we have mentioned, then at that time the boil is round and inclined a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the gland appears, because the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the boil is round like half an egg, and for this reason it is estimated to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the tendon of the glands and the white tissue, then feel below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then express the color of the moisture in the boil at the incision site; and according to what is seen in the signs of the incision, judge of what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then see that you command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and apply the body of the instrument to it.
And let it be raised up on the back slightly on some reason, and place below it moist cloths.
And you stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to be on the right side of him, who extends his arm to one of the two sides to the tendon of the glands and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the tendon of the glands at the middle place along its length towards the navel.
And the incision should be made according to the rule equally distant from the line that you should follow on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane.
And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should continue until it is suspended on the muscle more finely, and examine the scraping according to what is possible for you in quantity.
And then pierce the white membrane with water through a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two edges of the incision with forceps, and extend the white membrane in both directions; and do not touch the tissue around the genitals, and incise the white membrane in that manner as is possible for you. And incise that area entirely or in pieces, and especially the lateral part finely, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the muscle protrudes from its tissue at the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the white membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two edges of the genital tissue with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the muscle corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, remove the muscle, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate areas, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that area as you did in the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert cotton soaked in oil or rose oil into the sections; and place over that another piece of cotton which has been dipped in vinegar and oil; and spread this over both groins and the abdomen; and cover with folded cloths and poultices, and bind all these together with a bandage in the following manner:
And then two cloths should be taken and filled with crumpled cotton according to this pattern; and the ends should be made such that they press against the skin or moistened wool, and they should be attached to the structure in the girdle of the trousers, and one end of them should take hold at the buttocks inside the other, and the second should take hold at the part of the pant, and two ends over two thighs, and two other ends over two flanks, and all binding should be adjusted in the girdle of the trousers.
And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with a knife; and it is that you take a thin cautery blade and incise the groin seam with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white fatty tissue containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery in this form: and it resembles the Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the fatty tissue with hooks, and lift it with hooks, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise it as much as is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the hand does not touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in stopping blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if an abscess or inflammation opposes you at the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then treat according to what contradicts you for that purpose, with a treatment that suits what is said second.
But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation because of its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Now it is necessary for you to have the patient sit on some elevated cushion, then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and extend the incision according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
And then make an incision over the area and ligate it there, so that the remaining water can drain out. And then treat it so that the illness is healed.
But if an obstacle prevents the escape of water when you puncture it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the opening of the abscess obstructs and prohibits the exit of water, then you must place a probe or instrument used to extract water from hydrothorax into the abscess; or apply compression to the abscess with a small object.
And know that the water returns, and it is kept for about five months or so; and when it has been prepared in this way, then at that time it should be perforated according to that method, because thus the patient will have passed his days.
Chapter lxiii.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of danger in its major occurrences; therefore, in my opinion, it is best to avoid it and be saved by that better course.
And I am now recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute sharp superfluity, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And when the abscess is stone-like, its color is dark, and there is no comfort from it.
And at times it is caused by the knotting of arteries, and by the swelling of those that have already been perceived through memory, or by the swelling of veins.
But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein is not dispersed for any cause due to the compression among those mentioned.
And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other flesh; you should cut the tendon of the genitales, and nearby there lies the groin, extract that from the white fat, and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and cut the suspensories after you have freed it from all parts of the groin.
Then if the groin has already united with those flesh wounds, now you should extract the groin and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if it is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, now you should cut all that there is, and extract the groin as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and afterwards care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
On the treatment of hernia that is of vital parts.
A vit is an abscess wrapped in some covering similar to a boil on the softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the condition.
In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a certain condition or symptom.
However, it is necessary to mention the operation as it was performed initially.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised chair; then pull up the scrotum with your fingers; and then place your hands on the groin muscles and grasp the testicles firmly with them and the penis; and have another assistant, different from yourself, extend those [parts] vigorously.
Then incise with a sharp, narrow spatula across the middle of the scrotum so that the vessels are exposed.
Then carefully cut away in all directions as we have said regarding the extraction of arteries, which is done on flaps.
Then place a needle with double thread in one of them and tie it at the first site where you cut, and tie it again at the last site. Then incise them in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would any other wounds to ensure proper healing, so that the vessels do not cause one of the testicles to darken, because it is not harmful for this to occur.
But if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or to attach them to the vessels so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and thus become atrophied, or to attach them in such a way that no benefit can be gained from them.
Chapter LXV.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens when the cicatrix extends over the abdomen on the side of the groin, because through this rupture some of the bowels enter.
And this rupture is either of the cicatrix or near it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by crying out, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the cicatrix, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it appears as an abscess because the cicatrix compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the cicatrix, for at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it appears as a different abscess near the groin area, because the bowel has been pushed out, and the body of it is outside the cicatrix.
And in some cases, the membrane is torn along with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in some cases the bowel develops a tear, and this remains there, causing great pain to the patient, and often causes severe pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, for it is advisable to avoid using instruments in such cases.
Here is the translation:
From the side cut the channel through which the cord of the testicles is connected above, and incise the channel of the testicles all along its length; then place hooks in both sides of the section as you deem necessary to hold the section open with them.
And if you consider the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it.
And then remove the fatty tissue around it until the white hard capsule of each part is revealed.
Now insert your finger in the incision made for the testicle, between the white capsule that is behind the cord, and between the other membrane, and separate any adhesion that is in the part behind the cord.
And then tie the cord of the testicles to the parts behind, and with that stretch the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the cord with the capsule to the part of the incision; and instruct the assistant to extend it upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind completely.
And carefully with your fingers ensure that there is no cause for the bowel being wrapped around the white hard capsule. But if you find any cause for it, now you push that back into the abdomen behind it.
And then incise below the scrotal skin of the testicles in such a way that blood and pus flow as we have recommended in what we have said previously.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it over it; and apply the bandage we have recommended (and occasionally the exposed area is cauterized, as mentioned after the incision to prevent excessive bleeding, which happens sometimes); and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself.
But if the dressing is delayed, then hot water should be applied to it, and place it over the wound as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, there is none who has dared to treat it with surgery.
And the early practitioners said that it should be treated as we have recommended for hernias caused by veins; which is to tie off the veins near the site with ease; and then dry up in the middle area around the abscess until the veins collapse.
Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said until they are healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the incision that is made in the glands.
In some cases, an incision is made in the glands as we have said, and the location is examined.
And they do not provide any cause for the sacs in the groin; and if they do provide a cause, it is rare; and it returns at all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this condition, a small opening is adjusted in the scrotum through which the sac descends into the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, as we have said, which is near the glands, because it causes the area to soften and become swollen, and this is examined.
And the treatment for it is as described by cautery, just as was preceded in the narration.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across its width according to a length of three fingers.
And then stretch the white scrotum that is below the groin until it is exposed.
And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points on either side of the scrotum at its extremity, and sew one to the other with a suture.
From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and do not incise the mesentery throughout its entire length, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And similarly in treating this as you would treat other wounds, when you incise the tissues, clean that area and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the mesentery is contracted and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is best in this place, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Often the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the tissues that are within it are softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to place the patient in a position according to his need, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
And if you wish, cut away the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and secure it with firm sutures.
And then incise between the sutures; and then treat as you would other wounds until it is healed and the tissues have knitted.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is read to me which makes me remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when someone is asked about it by a physician who seeks treatment, he knows the cure for it when it happens; and the other way is that we have sometimes need of castration of other beasts for our use through them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by division and cutting.
But in the one that is performed by excision, the method of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those with your hand until they are released and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration performed by division and cutting, make sure you hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side with a cut so that two sides are processed.
And then make an incision on those parts after you have peeled each one. And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but rather make the incision subtle so that it is above the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by inversion, because inversion leaves little cause for the animal to desire sex.
And properly treat the illness until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodozia in men is according to two methods: one is when there appears in the space between the testicles, where hair of a female nature grows.
And sometimes in that case urine is discharged from the place between the testicles.
In women, there is one type: it is that the female genitalia above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly below and forward as the scrotum of a man with two testicles.
And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women. It is that you should cut away those tough tissues until the excess is removed, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
And in the second type for men, from whom urine is discharged from the place between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery to be performed.
Chapter 21.
On the treatment of hanging and protruding flesh due to causes related to women.
This dark spot is usually light in color and is adjusted according to natural causes within which it is situated and made legible with regard; and some are magnified in some women so much that it spreads just as in men and reaches up to the act of intercourse.
Then you should remove the excess of the spot with your hand or with unguent and incisions.
And do not proceed with incisions, especially near the root of the hair, so that there is no flow of blood.
And immediately treat that with the care used for wounds so that it may be healed.
Hidden flesh is the flesh that grows in the fold beneath the mother's tail where it fills that area, and it is usually situated at the parts around like a tail (and for this reason some of the earliest called this "tail disease"); then you should incise it just as we do with spots, and treat it so that it may be healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Alopecia.
Alopecia is when the woman's hymen is not perforated, or the opening is small. And it can be either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh poorly adjusted or by subtle or thick phlegm.
And it occurs either near the root of the tail, or on its sides, or at the upper part of it, or at the lower part, and you should prohibit intercourse and conception and childbirth, and usually menstruation is also prohibited.
Of that knowledge is made by observation of the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed; but if it is not apparent, then at that time do around it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to fine scabs and it can be reached with two forceps, then grasp it and remove it.
And place sponges over the two forceps, and then place your fingers or probes near both sides.
And the woman should lie on her back, her buttocks raised, and then spread the two forceps forcefully so that the fine scab is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take some lint and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and have the patient return daily so that the cut does not heal too quickly.
But if the scab is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a scalpel or a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then lift it up slightly and cut it.
And have with you the medicines that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as hystiatia, dragon's blood, and ensus, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep that in place for several days and administer dry lint.
And let it be treated along with the other treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
And in some cases accidents occur during the major separation of other tissues, and at such times it is necessary to incise according to this method. But if this is due to chronic abscesses, do not make any opposition to the abscess that is in the major part in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form into nodes.
And now I have mentioned in the division the species of these and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and nodes when they are in the vicinity of the major part and do not appear to the senses, at such times there should be no treatment applied to them.
But those that are at the opening of the major part and which can be felt, these are the ones that are treated.
And you must place the woman in a comfortable position and then extend those nodes with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with scissors.
And then powder should be applied to them to promote the flow of blood from one of the powders used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar substances.
Then warm his feet for an hour, and then immerse them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have him sit in a decoction of sumac, orange peels, walnuts, and similar substances.
Then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster, which you should apply to his back.
And if the blood is clotting, that is good; but if not, apply cupping glasses to the back and make incisions at the breast.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of cilantro or anise or fennel mixed with sour wine, and apply it to the affected area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat the area until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On Piercing the Bladder in Cases of Accidental Injury to the Abdomen.
Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as gangrenous, stone-like, ulcerative, hemorrhagic, phlegmonous, herpetic, fistulous, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their types and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
Here is the translation:
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp due to percussion and phlegm and fever, and if you see that redness appears and feel the sensation there, at that time do not treat it with puncturing, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuity of the symptoms subsides.
And then you should have the woman lie on a bed with two pillows; and let her recline on her back and adjust her legs below the abdomen, and spread out her thighs, and place her arms below her elbows, and bind certain parts with bandages as is appropriate.
And then the midwife should approach from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is to be enlarged, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the birth canal of the woman, and ensure that what is inserted into the birth canal does not exceed its diameter and causes harm. But if the instrument is larger than the diameter of the birth canal, then you should place pillows against the tissue around the birth canal to prevent any instrument from being inserted into it.
And you should place the screw that runs along the side of the instrument, and have the minister hold the instrument while turning the screw until the opening of the birth canal is enlarged.
And when the secretion appears and is touched with the hand and feels warm and moist, then you should dry that part of it with a dry piece of linen.
And when the sanies is evacuated, then place upon the wound a medicated cotton dipped in rose oil or vinegar which has some styptic quality; and let the poultice be applied to the area around the main part of the wound.
And place around the main part of the wound, and on top of the linen cloth, clean cotton dipped in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until you find the method that is suitable for healing it.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or long pepper has been boiled, and then return to the appropriate treatment.
And if the wound is deep in a damaged area, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, except treat it as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat male infants when there is an abnormal condition according to the figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman push downward with her parts and desire to breathe in the air, and she is illuminated by what is above her, and hastens the delivery of the infant, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and the delivery is over its head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend upon their head, they are delivered from there on the second stage, and this is cleaned of those superfluities by proper cleansing.
This other type of delivery is unnatural and disgraceful, for when the embryo is born on its buttocks and the body of it is born before its head and feet, or one hand or foot first, or the head and a hand or foot, or the belly, and quickly turns over onto its neck, resembling the figures of those that are disgraceful.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And thus showing all the figures of those and which origin is in those so that it may be signified by this and stand upon this.
When the fetus is born upon its head by natural effort, and it is difficult for the woman and childbirth is hard, and if the strength of the woman has already been weakened, then give that medicine to her, or let the women have this, and evaporate the sweat from her with fenugreek seeds and moist oils.
And then the midwife should insert her fingers gently and split the second stage, or dry that with her fingernail until it stops being moist. And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be cleaned with powder of feathers and powder of fenugreek with scissors.
And he commands the assistants, near the surgeons, to hold him cramped and make him sneeze with appropriate conditions; and place his mouth and nose under something for one hour, because the effect will be apparent immediately.
And if both of the parts of the operation are immediately successful, then you should reduce those with ease little by little. But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her up off it, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the parts are not returned to their proper place and the operation fails, then you should incise those areas and extract the remnant of the operation or tie the body part with a thread and extract it in an equal manner, because this will be immediately effective.
When the operation is on its feet, then you should push those upward, and then turn the operation slightly, and then equalize it, and then take hold of one part and extend them little by little.
But when it is inserted into the things, then you command him to expel it, and make him sneeze with appropriate conditions, because it will be immediately effective if God wills it.
And if it is not immediately effective with what we have recommended, then you return the operation little by little until you place it back in its natural position, because it will be immediately effective at this point.
And if it is prohibited to use all that we have recommended, then take mustard meal and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and afterwards mix it with water the hand of the woman, at the base of her abdomen. And afterwards apply that paste in hot water until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the lower parts of him are cleansed and treated, then perform the smoke inhalation with myrtle and apply that beneath him. And when he has the sub-inhalation for one hour, then have him sit on a cushion, and afterwards make him sneeze and clear his mouth, and remove that, and press the lower part of his abdomen with gentle compression, because the gas will soon be expelled.
This is a suspension of the testicle pendulous laterally from one of its sides. Try to reduce the dislocation of the hand, but if you cannot do so, then elevate the patient and let it happen naturally.
And if it does not reduce on its own, then make the patient lie down and vigorously shake the affected part, and subsequently apply bandages soaked in mucilage.
And if the birth has occurred, then make her sit on that [seat], and subsequently examine the reduction of the hand, and restore the condition according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze inwardly until it is expelled.
Suspension of the testicle on the shoulder with its cords and the fascia extended over the back of the body. Let the midwife hold the testicle and then gradually roll it to facilitate its movement.
And when it is in place and the appropriate time has come, then apply to the wound what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
And then command them to squeeze it gradually little by little, and when you have done this, make them sit on a chair and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be compressed; and make them sneeze under certain conditions. The delivery of the prepared fetus on the side.
When you suspend the testicle from the inguinal canal according to this method, examine it, and then incise it with your fingernail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside until you reach the second part that is needed, and tell the woman to press herself several times, and it will be quickly delivered if God wills it.
Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins usually are born in several stages, and sometimes three or four [births occur], but this is rare and takes a long time; however, these causes are due to nature, not life.
And among those, whether they are multiples, there is a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinct from each other through the entire ligament at the navel of each. And sometimes they are delivered in stages as if it were a single fetus naturally quickly, and sometimes they are delivered in stages as we have recounted, which is not commendable.
And if some of them make childbirth difficult and it reaches the state we have described regarding unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, whether promptly or slowly, and acts according to all figures as prepared for the delivery to ensure safety.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Sometimes formations occur at one month, two months, three months, four months, five months, six months, seven months, and rarely ten months, and it should be verified that a woman may miscarry at six months, while another may carry to ten months, the cause of which is established by measurement according to the wise.
And thus it is that a midwife must be in the knowledge of this science, for often it appears to her as such, and therefore she should act upon what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it does not come out on its own, and you are forced to use surgical intervention, then it is necessary for you to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of the accidents that lead to fear of loss.
Now it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
And the attendant should hold her in both parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mouth of the fetus with oil, honey, and mucus made from alum, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then gently insert her hand into the fetus, and then search with her hand for the position where the hooks can be placed in the fetus.
And appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider if the fetus is positioned to descend by its head, and now you place the hooks in its hands, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the chin, or in the clavicle, or in proper places on the ribs, or under the armpits.
If the swelling is on the legs, then apply it to the navel, or to the middle of the back.
And he should hold the bandage in his right hand, and place the curve of it at the point where his left hand's fingers are positioned, and insert the hand with ease so that the bandage is placed in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen area.
And he should place and fix it in such a way that another bandage, or a third if necessary, is applied to provide equal traction, and not simply extension according to its straightness alone.
And it should be done gently in all parts, so that the swelling is alleviated just as it is done around the area to be treated.
And it is necessary in this that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is restrained, then the midwife should anoint some of the said substances with oil and insert them carefully and rotate around what is restrained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is protruding, then the bandages should be moved to a place that is easier; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is swollen in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by compression, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and subsequently extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both legs.
If the swelling of the fetus is large, or if it affects the skull during delivery, or if it occurs in the head of the tightly wrapped umbilical cord, then one must intervene between the spined spatulas and cut open the head to remove the fluid, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments described near this chapter.
And similarly if the fetus has a large head by nature: then it must be intervened with some kind of restraint, or taken out using an instrument called “alundat” as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones using forceps.
And if the head is delivered and is constricted behind the clavicle, then it must be cut so that the fluid in the membranes can be released.
But if it is not complicated and does not obstruct delivery, then you must cut the head as soon as possible according to what seems appropriate to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or affected by hydrops, then you must pierce it so that the fluid can drain.
But if the fetus is positioned feet down, then the traction on it is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is also light.
But if it is constricted behind the abdomen and membranes, then you must remove it using a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and membranes so that the fluid can flow out.
But if the other limbs are stuck and only the head can be turned, then place your left hand inside; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the fetus’s neck, and search for the head, and pull it out with the fingers, and afterward insert a hook or two hooks, and pull it out with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it must not be incised upon it; but rather, at this time apply effusion of moist fatty substances. And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the abscess is on the side, then at this time, if possible, it should be lanced: and that which we have said about the living fetus should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside from the second incision.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then apply that which we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur on the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and right above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other focus was a dead fetus. An abscess occurred near the navel for a long time; it became swollen and internally inflamed, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Then I applied various strongly adhesive plasters to it, and extracted one bone from it, and after several days, another bone; and I was very amazed, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
Then I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Then I probed the area and removed some bones from it, which were located in her thighs. After doing this for a long time, I noticed that one of her arms had improved.
And I did not find it strange, since in this lies the science and assistance for what the physician uses his hands to administer treatment.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Shape of a spiral in which the main one is used:
This is the shape of a forceps with which he grips the limbs; at each end of the two branches, there are spirals. However, this spiral should be finer than a needle and should be made of ivory or the wood of a tree.
And the width of each branch should be two fingers, and the thickness of each at both ends should be one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two branches are two adjustments made of the same material as the branches, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the main part so that they are engaged when you rotate the prescribed spirals.
Another similar shape, but finer and more delicate:
Here is the translation: However, at the end of the membrane to which additions are made in this way as often as necessary, and the length of those additions is one palm each, and the width of each is two of these.
And when you want to open that one of them, then you should have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument in this way as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the opening of the passage until the sound is what you want.
The form of whirlpool which the ancients described:
Form of impelling with which the substance is pushed out:
Form of connection with which the large part is contained
And it is similar to forceps at whose end there are teeth as often as necessary, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as often as necessary, at whose end there are teeth like those of a reed with which it is cut and held. Form of connection for a few:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two ends at which the head is divided:
Form of two spatulas:
Those instruments are exercised in such ways, and when their varieties are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for them to perform their operations and they should be made according to the quantity needed for people.
And you should not refrain from preparing any of those instruments, wherever they may be needed, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the second one.
When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should command the woman to hold her breath, and then induce her to sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it causes expulsion by this method, that is good.
And if not, then take a mixture and pierce its cover with a hole, placing it near the mouth of the mother along with remedies such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian scammony, cinnamon bark, and saffron. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the mixture, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then induce her to sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be expelled quickly.
But if this treatment is delayed and it does not work, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond butter, and then insert it into the vagina to search for the second birth. When you find it, take it out gradually piece by piece. If it is attached to the membrane of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second birth, extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then you must guard against overworking on that account through iteration of abstention. Rather, ensure that what has been ejected from the mouth of the mother lies near to the woman's body, and afterward crumple it up into a small mass and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to dry up within a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled.
But when it dries up, it is raised to the head and to the stomach, and this gives you the illness; then it is necessary that sublimations and appropriate remedies be administered for this.
But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitrated tartar and dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
It should be made of wood or ivory.
And the fine end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another.
Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Many children are born with their anuses not open, which is small, closed up. Then it is necessary for the midwife to carefully open that small closure with her finger; and if not, she should use a sharp probe to do so, taking care not to touch the membrane.
And then apply poultices made of boiled wool with oil; and subsequently treat that area until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to pass gas.
And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur nearby.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are usually small and thick, which appear close to the anus or on one side.
And it is either one fistula or multiple.
And as that small area becomes old and drains watery white pus or subtle purulence, sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeper.
And these penetrating ones are known by what is expressed from them through excretion and gas formation; and sometimes there is an obstruction in excretion, and it easily indicates the nature of these issues.
Of those fistulas some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and of those penetrating into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the genitals.
And in which the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is known, you should insert your finger into the anus, and insert a fine probe of horn or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that, now insert a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of this nor proceed with the treatment for any cause of evacuation such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and now apply yourself to its cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of it is that urine comes from there, and the prohibition is such that the site must be healed by medical treatment.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circumference, then the sign of it is that the probe passes through here if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and there is pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have an abscess permanently; and treatment with medication does not work there, nor is it healed by application.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment for these is the labor and effort of skilled physicians upon which it depends.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
And it is when the patient lies between your hands, raise his sides and place him so that things are inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if it is in an ulcerated tortuosity, until you know where the probe passes.
And if it is there that the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, or what you feel between your finger and that sinus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment by which hope is placed in him, you should make a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues adjacent to the fistula are hardened, like the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages soaked in butter until all those hardened tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside; you say which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or of leather, and sometimes the fistula is on that which lies on the surface of the buttocks, then the buttock dries up from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying up both the probe, and it should be in the fistula inside until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe passes, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
And then cleanse those fleshy parts that are gathered like the tube of a bird's feather quill and do not leave any part without cleansing it of any cause.
But if blood flows when you are examining those fleshy parts during your operation, then the thread and the pus can be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of the flesh that has been conjoined, and the other is the absorption of blood by drying up the humidity.
And then treat it with bandages wrapped in boiled leather or in soft cloth until the area gets better, and afterwards treat the wound with hard flesh remedies that generate and consolidate.
And medicines in which there is astringency and drying; when these are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already extends inside the anal region and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of leather or flesh, and it resists penetration, then at that time there is no operation to be performed but rather proceed according to trust and hope.
The cause is to be addressed in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce certain instruments and proper treatment; do not proceed with drying if doing so might injure the muscle containing the bowel, and do this under anesthesia without the patient's voluntary movement; then treat that wound with what we have said because it will heal quickly; or lengthen that flap and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus as we have said, either by hand or by another sharp instrument, and subsequently cleanse those ulcerated tissues which appear in the drying section through perforation; then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus opening has not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the buttock area, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it lies beneath the surface of the body around the circumference of the anus and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle prepared in this manner:
and insert it into that faithful wrapping of five threads or around them; then introduce the probe with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to proceed.
But if it penetrates the margin of the buttocks near inside, then you extract the thread from that spot as though you were inserting your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together, and tighten them, and leave this for one day or two, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, tightly close it so that those tissues between the two ends of the thread heal.
Regarding the treatment of internal wounds, until they are healed and strengthened.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its position, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with barbs used to incise the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during their incision.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like coal pieces, or they are soft and resemble grape bunches. And they can be small or large, and the blood flows from them continuously and is one type, and multiple, and outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which flows a small amount of yellowish water or blood continuously, and their color is like the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you proceed carefully and suspend them with hooks or what you have available, and then incise them along their roots.
If the hooks do not hold in those places because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cord or flaxen bandage, extract them with these tools mentioned, and subsequently incise around them and sprinkle certain powders near the incision, so that they serve as cauterization; or cauterize them as was described in the chapter on cauterizing. And subsequently treat them with other methods until they are healed.
And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and it should be washed with water which facilitates easy evacuation when the pus is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easier to address, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and subsequently treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who require suturing, proceed in the following manner: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the upper part, and make the thread pass through the opposite side with the needle, wrap both ends of the silk below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly, and then tie off the silk and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax; and put that on the affected area and instruct the patient to rest. This is from within that which enters the cavity; and when it is enclosed, treat those things with what one finds or with another treatment until it is healed.
And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, then you should scrape those areas with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and discharge pus from them, which prevents consolidation; and subsequently treat them until they are consolidated.
Now you should scrape those areas with more vigorous pus discharge until some bleeding occurs and they are inflamed; and subsequently treat them until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is key, and it is nothing but red spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and it appears all over the body but mostly below the waist and in those areas, and from these you feel pain.
Then it is necessary to incise what is in the area around the spot, and hold it with pliers or tweezers, and eradicate it from its root; and subsequently treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the affected area as described in its chapter.
But warts are small, hard, rough, round elevations on the surface of the skin, and they frequently occur in most children.
Of the treatment of the urethra, which is extended and incised there, one should use a thread or hair tied within it to close. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
A mole is a small raised or puffed swelling on the surface of the body that itches, and when scratched it becomes painful like an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
The treatment for this is to take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place that on the mole so that it covers the circle of the needle from all sides; then rotate your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the mole, and place it in the flesh of the itch, and remove the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of metal in this manner:
Let the upper part of the needle be drawn with subtlety, blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger, its movement and rotation are controlled.
And if you wish, cauterize the mole as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Some cups are made of silver or lead or molten or hammered metal; and some cups are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are narrow or painful, the cups of those should be small.
The form of the large and few cup:
The top of the tube of leather above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the end of the tube below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, made fine; and on one side of it there are two flaps, and on the other side one flap, and the width of the flap should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and the length of the tube should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong vinegar from raw honey, or around them; and adjust the bag tightly at that point; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the cup between two distinct strong bindings, and then seal each thread: But the quality of sealing there is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise their buttocks with something under them like a cushion or a folded cloth; then anoint the tip of the cauterizing instrument with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then gently insert that into the anus with ease; then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it strongly inside until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the instrument and the patient lowers their buttocks to the bed.
And if the medicine causes it to be expelled immediately, let it remain as much as possible; and if it sleeps in it throughout one night, it is better for healing.
But if you treat that with rectal treatments for abdominal diseases and their expulsion, then you repeat the treatment until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a very soft and fine rectal tube, like those used for children's enemas.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already said in the section on the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with medicine according to the completion.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes for which plagues occur are such as stone retention, or cutting by a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object, and if it has only bruised the bone but caused a large swelling and you fear that there may be an abscess underneath, then immediately examine and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the affected part; and protect the patient from overeating and from heavy foods.
But if some reason prevents you from performing phlebotomy, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or heavy foods.
And pause treatment on the plague if an abscess forms underneath; then apply only rose oil or in a liquid that has been stypticated.
But if you are certain of an abscess underneath, then pause treatment on the plague if it is still fresh and the blood and air have not changed the powder that I recommend to apply shortly.
And if the air has already changed that, pause at certain intervals until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to a fracture and the lips of it cannot be approximated, then approximate those with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and flesh, and there is no need to retain it except for a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitches, and command the patient to be nourished on foods that are nutritious: such as meat, eggs, and similar items until he recovers.
And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is purulent and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding could occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should inquire about the condition of the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do something different from what we have said, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder those with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sift. Apply this to fill the wound, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And bind tightly above the poultice that which is below it and leave it bound until such time as it is not inflamed, for medicine does not reach it while it remains unsanated.
And sometimes this cure is used when the presence of enses and dragon's blood is not available.
And this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a compressed state and to treat fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer times, then do not apply this powder directly to these wounds. Instead, treat them as we have said, placing some cooling digestive herbs on them, or applying flour poultices mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterward, cure them with the other method until they are healed.
But if the wound involves a small bone fracture, then you should treat it with herbs.
And I shall describe the treatment of skull fractures in what follows.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple head wound.
But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not use any cooling agent but avoid treatment with anything that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that harm the nerves and contract them. Do not pause on any cause of trembling, for the substance of the nerves is trembling and their continuity ends at the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if he is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rosin oil or non-resin oil, and then wrapped when washed with warm water along with other mineral preparations according to this method, and find moisture.
But if the condition is severe, then administer stitches, or close its lips, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is corruption at its lowest part, then pierce that area in the most depressed location.
But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize that artery, or tie it off, if necessity prompts you to do so.
But if you have already cut the vertebrae of the neck or completely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should approximate the edges of the wound with sutures above the bone of the neck and do not touch it; instead, equalize that area and reduce it to its natural position, and afterwards strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; and afterwards treat it with dressings that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; and what is not within your capability, leave until the wound becomes pus-filled, and let it separate so that the swelling subsides.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found in its appropriate chapter.
If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and if you examine its depth, then consider whether there is swelling when the wound festers; at that time, you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then at that first hour apply powder, and do not press on it so as not to retain the blood in its depths and cause harm, but rather apply a drawing agent, and leave it uncovered for two days.
And if the drawing agent is not available to you, then place a piece of cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie on the wound so that the fluid within can drain.
But if three days or more have already passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of the breath has occurred, and you see other good signs in it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with bandages and appropriate care until it is healed.
But if healing of it is unnecessary and the area has remained open for some time, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a knife or a sword, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as would be done before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already affected the bone, and some of the severed pieces are loose, then you should turn the wound to try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, as their extraction would be difficult.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The injury that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small disruption is difficult to repair by other means, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their proper place, as they swell and become enlarged, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, nor is it too difficult as in the two previous cases mentioned.
And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more properly in the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Then I say that when the wound is small and it becomes compressed by some cause of the bowel through that, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, there are two ways this can happen: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the bowel has become inflated due to the coldness of the air.
And then when that is so, it is necessary for you to warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflation is resolved.
And sometimes I do this with those in whom there is spasm, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflation.
And when you see the inflation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which rue and mallows have been steeped, for by this the irritation of it is alleviated slightly.
But if the irritation of it is excused near this treatment, then divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there should be no need to dry it out near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of the sharp edge of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip fine, but not as fine as a needle, rather slightly blunt.
And thus when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the belly, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, for that is better.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, now it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his arms further away than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place his head and feet further out than the sides.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now you must constantly direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is lies further out than the other.
And so you must administer this in both large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, prepare what is needed, and then have the most skilled among you perform it, who should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it for some reason or another.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or an equivalent to a needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then place the end of the suture from the tip of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not insert thread at both ends of the stitch, but rather between the two ends of the tissue on either side of the wound; and as soon as you have joined both ends of the suture and both ends of the cleft, it makes four stitches.
E around the needle tie a double thread in a circle, and some stitches on both sides upwards, and then bring together the two lips of the wound and close it decently; and then lay aside the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and then tie that as firmly as you tied the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh too quickly; and thick ones are difficult to insert in the tendon, and therefore it is fitting that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
And it is not fitting for the needle to be placed at both ends of the tendon too close together, so that the flesh is not penetrated quickly and the wound does not separate before its consolidation.
And do not extend the stitches too far apart so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place over the stitches pads expanded from all sides, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you often need only one or two needles or around that number.
But the second type of stitching is common: it is that you manage in one go the four extremities, of the tendon and two ends of the skin, with a needle which is properly wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part from which you began, so that the thread exits at the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture is a cloth-like stitch in which the threads are tightly drawn.
And pause between each suture by the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to the people.
And in such a suture, I sewed the wound that was caused to a man in his abdomen with a knife, and the rupture of the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was situated around two palms from the midgut and the disruption was at the midpoint of the limb; then I reduced it after the gut had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was treated and recovered; afterwards he walked with crutches for some time, and then returned to his usual condition.
And other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any ointment, since it was in a place where no ointment or medicine was available, but I placed a knife twice daily on the wound and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two types of suture according to the narration of the Text.
And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and then pass the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place tie knots according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside part to the outside part at the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this knot, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
And make your penetration such that when you penetrate into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And then start from this side and proceed to the other side at the extremity where the suture is in the other knot, and withdraw the needle from the bone that it penetrates, and then reinsert it into that bone with the extremity of the suture that is on the other side at this extremity of the wound; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
And do this one side and then the other, and do this one stitch after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture thread as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it for another stitch until it is completed.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at the end closer to you of the wound, and make it penetrate inside the wound through one point, and cut off both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it exit from inside out through both ends of the thread.
Then turn each one of them around and make each one penetrate from the inner part of the wound to the outer part through both ends of another point on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Gualia
And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each one and begin by inserting one needle on your side according to the stitch, and make it penetrate into the opposite side as you would when缝合身体其他部位。
And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of it is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
The reason is that when you manage to treat the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and make the thread and needle firm; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then wait for a short while, because it begins to form pus, and change that twice daily, as I teach you, until it is healed, so that you may not need another medication in many dispositions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the main limbs, then wrap a piece of linen in high-quality oil or in rose oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and apply them as such.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bladder, as this often happens, then use black styptic tebe, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the bladder and an abscess has formed within it.
And know that what is of the large bladder heals more slowly than what is in the small bladders.
And it is difficult to heal because the bladder called “gegunu” does not easily recover from wounds that occur there; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that which is fresh, reduce it as you would with equal care to how you reduce bladders.
But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply hot iron to the area that is discolored, so that blood flows, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
Here is the translation:
Remembrance of the afflictions that occur in the bowel.
When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is sometimes possible to repair it in some people, because I saw one who had been afflicted in his belly by the thrust of a lance, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge from the wound and gas.
Then I bandaged the wound whether or not I was confident in its healing, but I attempted to stimulate that part which would heal and where the area would be strengthened.
And when I saw the area already healed, I guarded against any harm that might come from the bad event in his belly; and no one suffered any harm from this evil accident by changing their food and drink habits, and soon they were bathing and exercising as usual.
And some experienced people say that when there is a small affliction in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has its mouth open, on the edges of the wound; thus, when it bites onto them and holds tight, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop this until you have placed ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
It is possible that the ligature be made with a fine thread from the same intestine of an animal as it is used for sewing; and you should take the extremity of this thread of gut, which must be stripped of its outer skin, and join the end to the thread of the ligature, wrapped around, and then pass that thread through needles and attach it to the ligature, and reduce it at the point of dissection.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second means of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, for then there can be only a partial healing, and not complete restoration of it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and swelling when it suppurates and becomes old, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge for a long time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is universally called a fistula, and we call it that kind of abscess.
And truly a fistula is a felted node, hard and white, at which there is no pain but which itches like the itch of bird's mites; and for this reason it is called that kind of rash, that is, an itching affliction.
And it is in some people a moist condition, which discharges constantly; and the moisture is easily excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
I have shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and the cure for each with medicines in the division.
And it is appropriate that I tell you about the treatment of a fistula, which is done through an operation with my hands.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among them are fistulas that affect major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the bowels, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some of these are near to the main part of the limb and similar.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, there are diseases difficult to heal, and they do not easily receive a cure, and the treatment of them requires labor and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with that.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of lead, for the lightness of lead causes it to float and curve around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then anoint the openings through the openings, for the moisture with which you anoint it will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire very carefully, according to the method by which you can know whether here there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is far or near, or if it is a fistula with all its openings lying on top of everything at the limit of your strength, of your thorough inquiry, of which you inquire about the disease, and the cause of the pain lies under your compression upon the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
And when you have stood upon all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is a fistula that is apparent, near, or in a salt place, far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you about.
Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or tissue and similar parts, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, you should incise it to the primary wound as far as possible, and then remove all the corrupted flesh; afterwards apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have prepared with iron.
And do this several times so that the sharp medicine dissolves all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, without prohibiting any cause related to veins or nerves or a major limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it thoroughly with the strongest means available, and afterwards treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep parts of the body, which have not been reached, and then in that case all that remains is to lay open the area.
And if the corrupted bone is small, you can remove it; then you pull it out with fine forceps, which are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those ligaments or muscles if necessary, and release the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at that time, then apply what can alleviate the inflammation to the wound, and leave it as it is until the next time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and guard against the wound consolidating, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation does not become constricted.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply to the wound a cloth submerged in hot oil with honey, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, because when those ligaments need to be relaxed, and the bones are separated from them, and their attraction is eased.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and only the surface of that bone is corrupted, then scrape off that part with resistance only behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close off that area and completely incise within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
Here is what is recommended to you concerning what happens when attending to a person in their condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man around xxx years old experienced pain in his body, and the part inside him was affected by an internal condition where matter has reached the area causing it to become severely abscessed, and this is not due to an external cause.
Then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians, causing the abscess to become hard and filled with pus, and his cure was delayed until an opening was made in the swelling, through which all the putrid matter and moisture from the body were discharged.
Then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
I saw the swelling on him and the matter that was running from those openings in large amounts; his body was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
Then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and it reached the bone.
Then I promptly examined all the openings and found that they reached throughout all parts of the swelling.
Then I decided to incise over one of the openings where I could expose part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already reduced to dust and decayed. Part of the swelling had penetrated into the marrow and was also corrupted.
And then I used what was shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out what was not bone but that corruption which I had already diagnosed and prepared to remove.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I re-opened and exposed the bone again beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I treated what appeared to be that corruption, and then I was forced to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it did not restore.
And then I exposed another area and did not stop from cutting away the bone little by little specifically to restore it, and it did not heal until I cut around one palm's width of it, including its marrow, and afterward I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the condition of its fever and the lack of tolerance of it and its fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation of syncope malaise.
And thus he is fully healed, and there is no soft flesh in the place of bone; his condition improved in his body, and his vitality returned; and he recovered to his original state and did not experience contrary effects during movement or harm from any cause.
But if there is an elevated bone in the place of the injured body, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to stretch that part; pause with a thicker piece of wool after the first thread; then wrap the thread over the flesh near the bone, and extend the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart, thus exposing the skin where you wish to suture so that the sutures do not cut into the flesh.
Place a cushion or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw over the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and not appearance are evident, and perhaps you may need to锯过另一侧。由于之前的句子在翻译到“serratura de lu autra veguada”时似乎出现了中断，完整翻译应该是：
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, join one piece continuously to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it; then you uncover all parts entirely; and immediately apply a bandage below, and immediately suture that from the first part where is the corruption until it is continuous with the suturing of the other part.
And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not within reason but is problematic.
And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the nature of the corruption as it appears to you, and you should open that area, and cleanse that according to each possible disposition, and in every case where there is a problem, you should correct it for yourself, when no vital veins or nerves are encountered.
And you should know which incision tools and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness, and their rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
And you should know that this operation implies the need for the specific tool of which you require; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and evidence from various illnesses, then at that time you will yourself possess what is appropriate to use the instruments for every illness.
Here is the translation: Shape of the saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of a large saw:
Shape of a reamer: Let the head of this reamer be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be in the form of the steps of a staircase.
And it is not convenient to use them unless the heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another well-made saw: let it be made with the most durable part of the iron for the teeth, and the handle of horn or wood properly made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor with a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tenta (tento):
Form of a smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a nail, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Form of a nail which is suitable according to the ratio of those bones that are to be penetrated:
And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the reasons we have mentioned for knives, incisors, and saws apply.
Regarding the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
Extremities may need to be amputated either for an intrinsic cause or for an extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads from a member without any reason; then it is necessary to incise that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or malice, which is a greater harm to the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom it happens is that the member becomes black as if burned by fire, or the corruption spreads near the blackness until the infection reaches that member and affects the whole body. And then you should perform an incision on that part.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a venomous sting from certain causes such as a scorpion, viper, or similar creatures.
And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you should cut at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space for the corruption to enter beyond the joint of the elbow.
And if it spreads from there, then you should cut the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then in that case it is fatal for the patient; and to administer another remedy at that point would be in vain, as the amount of help available is limited.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption spreads to the toe; then you should cut it at one of the joints.
And if it reaches the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot. But if it spreads to the toenail, then you should cut the toe at the joint of the toenail.
And if the corruption has already spread beyond the toenail, then there is no remedy but to leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it is that you should bind one ligature below the part where you wish to cut, and place another ligature above the location; and extend one ligature to the lower parts, and have another extended to the upper parts; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures by about a span until all the flesh is exposed; and it should be cut or tied off accordingly.
Place a cloth over the patient from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and apply to the diseased part an ointment and cauterization.
If bleeding occurs while you are working, immediately cauterize the area, or apply powders to arrest the blood flow; and then return to your treatment once it has stopped.
And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you what happened to a man in his house, which was an accident that I and you have recommended, the kind that suddenly affects him with discoloration on his body as if it were burnt by fire.
And that corruption suddenly begins in his finger and then tends to spread over the entire body.
And then that man prepared for his own death because he feared that the treatment would lead to the limb being amputated due to the intensity of the pain and discoloration, and so he decided to sever the leg at the joint, and thus it was healed.
That sudden corruption then occurred in the thumb of his right hand.
And then he came to me, and I applied what was necessary from the medicines to remove that excess for him, along with the purification of his body; but the excess did not respond as expected and began to spread to the other fingers starting from the hand.
And he asked me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for a response from that excess, and fearing that the amputation of his hand would lead to death, as the patient's condition was very serious.
Of the pus that comes out of me, it returns to its source, and I perceive that the man prepares and incises his wound entirely, and he is healed.
And I have adhered to this narration only because it may assist in understanding the nature of this illness, and what its significance is, according to which it is described and acted upon.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged internally so that there is a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, allowing the pus to be discharged, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane above it remains thin like cloth, without having reached putrefaction, nor has it affected the bone or nerves or tendons, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged internally so that putrefaction affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
The treatment for it is to incise that membrane completely as it revolves, and especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place due to its putrefaction.
However, if you expect the membrane to adhere and that the putrefaction has not reached advanced stages, and there is pus present in the membrane, then you should treat it with enemas.
And when you consider the hemorrhoid, if it is large and the limb you are treating has a foul odor, then you should administer an Egyptian medicine as an enema. This medicine consists of oil, vinegar, and camphor in equal parts, which are mixed in a vessel and heated over fire until the mixture becomes thick like honey.
Take the water that is necessary and dissolve in it honey and water; and administer a cleansing enema with it, and strain the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract it in that manner; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is removed.
And sometimes it is administered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; then strain that and administer it until you are confident that the sinus is healed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed three times, and also administer water and honey mixed with vinegar, for the property of honey cleanses and washes, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has a surplus of styptic and drying properties.
And as you do this for several days and become confident that the sinus is cleansed, then administer it with water that promotes flesh growth.
And you should take diaphoretic herbs and dissolve them in rose oil and styptic vinegar; or administer it with several medicines and other herbs that have the properties I have already written about in the chapter on herbs.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not receive the enema tube, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause with cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon herbs until it is enlarged.
If the opening is wide, then you should suture together the edges and leave a quantity in which the enema may be introduced.
And if the opening from which the arm protrudes is raised to the upper parts, then you should make it dry in the pus base located where the arm can pass below, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the vicinity of the pus base as you wish, then you should perforate it so that you prepare the member in such a way that the arm can pass easily according to your preparation and without any obstruction hindering the arm.
But that which is over the sinus opening should be changed at all times so that it can absorb what is adhering to the arm. And so that you may know whether what comes from the arm is much or little, or is digested or undigested.
Thus you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter lying over the orifice of the sinus has adhered or tends to adhere, then you must loosen it either on the same day or on the third day, and when you loosen the plaque, then change the dressing for another one and renew the application.
But if the sinus extends into spaces where there is thin pus, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing will tend to occur in such cases, just as some people experience delayed regeneration of flesh in their plaques, while others experience the opposite.
And if from the sinus there has been discharged for several days a foul and undigested matter, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect in your medicines. If these medicines are moist by their nature and in their virtue, they must be dried as well when applied, especially when there is an excessive addition of honey.
And the last thing to do for those who are cured is to take a finely prepared ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Let this be applied over an old dressing that contains beneficial substances, and apply it as needed.
And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no foul matter, to take a finely prepared ointment and honey which has been cooked until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and other ingredients, mix them all together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture over a cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; or spread the honey that you have cooked to thicken over a cloth and sprinkle powdered ingredients over it.
For some wounds, administer a bandage with long and fine threads of celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use these simples or mix them, tear them up and sieve them, then powder them over the honey which has been recommended; and thus apply it.
And if the sinew is extended and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its root, and it has already spread to the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails, and on the cutting of an additional finger and sectioning.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the edge of the nail of a toe or finger, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes extended and its treatment is delayed, it may be an abscess caused by cautery or it may become corrupted. It discharges pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail; it often corrupts the entire nail and can even reach the bone inside, causing a foul odor. The extremity of the finger then becomes blackened in color.
And when you have followed the treatment as we have described in the division and your condition does not improve, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the excess tissue that is rotten from the nail and promptly cauterize the wound afterwards, for prompt cautery is beneficial in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already retracting inward into the flesh, causing pain, then it is necessary that you place a thin thread behind the angle of the nail where it pains, and push it out and incise the flesh easily, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is thoroughly cleaned; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, at that time you must incise the bone and extract it, because it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints as is appropriate for its recovery, and subsequently treat it until it is healed.
But if there is an injury or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and subsequently dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from above to below, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for doing so would cause intense pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excessive granulation tissue in that area; and then treat the affected area with something that alleviates pain.
But the finger that is swollen, which occurs in many people, is mostly fleshy, or slightly on the bones, or mostly in the nail.
And some of them appear at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some joints of the fingers. But that which appears in some joints of the finger is not serious, and that which appears at the joints is more troublesome.
And for those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is slight, and you should incise it near its root with a broad instrument.
But for that which appears at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
In that which is born from the nut, you should incise at the beginning the flesh around the bone in a round incision, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and afterwards treat what lies inside until it is healed.
In the case of consolidation that occurs between certain movable parts or due to the birth of a person in such a way, or due to the healing of an injury or burning by fire, or similar cases, then you should treat that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
And then place between the edges to be fused in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain parts of the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
For incisions on veins, these are varicose veins.
Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly with an excess of melancholic humors, which move through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times to strongly expel it, and afterwards bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and completely extracted.
The section of the operation is as follows: At the beginning, place a cup with warm water under to allow the thick blood to dissolve, which becomes sediment in the cup. Then raise the cup from the patient's body to the most pus-filled part of the wound below the navel with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one point, or two, or three for wide cutting, and then lift the black blood away with your left hand below the cup towards it and above upwards until the amount of blood that you want and which is sufficient has been removed, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
And then advise them to avoid foods that generate black bile.
And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this at night.
But the lifting of it is as follows: You who shave the cup from the patient, if on him there are many hairs, and then place him in a bath and immerse the cup of the patient in warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or exercise him with strenuous exercise if a bath is not available to you, until the limb is heated.
And then dry the bandage on the right side of the vein by cutting either at the end where the navel is, or lower down near the buttocks.
And then wrap the bandage with hooks and incise the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should notice its appearance declining towards blackness.
And thus as you proceed, use the bandage to ensure it appears white where it is tied.
Place then the rod inside which is raised and inclined from the collar, and suspend it with a hook of gold.
Then cut another section near that section according to three statements, and then dissect the collar above the vein that appears.
Then raise that and incise it at the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it so that it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is the highest or most distant of all the sections, until everything is removed; then incise it.
And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-edged needle and pull it out, or insert the rod below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise it and you will have caused harm to the patient by this injury.
And when you have completely removed it outside, then apply to the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and unguents made from oiled and non-oiled substances, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosity in its wrapping to the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along that at every part of its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and serve your prudence in it.
Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
It should not be as sharp as a knife nor have a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should have great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein because of its thinness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
Of the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands such as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India where no grass or vegetation grows.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its formation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come forth within the body between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this condition is that inflammation occurs violently in the thigh; and nearby, the area becomes blistered; and soon the vein begins to appear from the location of that blister as if it were a plant rash.
And when the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around that area a piece of lead weighing about two drachmas, and attach the lead to that spot so that it hangs from the thigh.
And so many times when you see some cause for parts outside, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if it is elongated, then you cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that little piece until it has come out, for if you cut that one, it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
So it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains no cause for it in the body.
And this vein has emerged in some people to the length of five palms and I have been told that one reached twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract of it and perforate that one along the body until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days; and afterwards cure that with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has multiple openings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes out through multiple openings, and is spread from each opening.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been said above.
On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often among them there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it shows itself to the sensation beyond the nerve from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
Concerning generation from corruption, it is through putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and parasites occur in the belly.
It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, at that moment it forcefully ruptures there and causes various illnesses.
And when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it is done only by means of the gradual movement and appearance of it to the senses, and at that time you should press what is above it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and afterwards it dries up and extracts that.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you pause to cauterize with fire upon the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it by which the place is corrupted as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and afterwards dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
Regarding the treatment of nasal disorders.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then changes from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that as I will now describe to you. I went to visit a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been punctured for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation moved just like a live worm ascends this way, but more quickly than seems possible, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
Then the pain moved from that place to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it quickly moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then he told me that it was moving throughout her body as I had seen; and I was greatly amazed at the change and the speed with which it moved from limb to limb. And I had seen something like this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen the pain change from one limb to another so distinctly. But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of delicate constitution, with thin limbs and exposed veins, in which this airiness of sensation appeared to change.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are robust and have healthy flesh with sturdy veins.
And when you want to treat it and the patient feels this pain, immediately apply pressure to that area gently and quickly move over it until this confined airiness has exited, and then cauterize the area.
If you do not use them [the fingers] to feel the swelling, then treat it with a decoction of the body and with what expels wind, and charm those nasty pills and those of serpentium and similar.
Of the extraction of thorns.
Thorns are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, some concave, others blunt; and among them are those with three angles, and those which have tongues; and there are those which are like slender rods.
And the signs of the brain are when you catch the thorn, it penetrates the bone, and exits at the cephalic point which is above the brain, for it causes sudden fever, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the fingers, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Moisture like white powder comes out from the location of the wound, and its appearance resembles a watery consistency of flesh.
And therefore if I show you these signs, then you abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mark the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel there where it is fixed in a hard part, not in a soft part; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and there flows black blood from the wound, and the extremities become cold, and sweat turns cold, and syncope occurs; therefore you know that death will come very soon.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are foam of blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the complexion is changed, and he exhales a great breath, and demands for air with difficulty.
And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no movement at all of the limbs by the muscles.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very soon the wound vomits some undigested food.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is fixed there, some part of the wound splits open, or the membrane, or intestine which is ruptured, then there is no hope in the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine is discharged, and some cause of injury spreads to other parts, and very soon there is pain over the body, then you know that it is fatal.
Like other members also as in the face, the neck, and the groin, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the chest bone and things like them of the members, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find vein nor artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment.
The reason for this is that when an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, I extracted it from him on the other side, left the granules behind in his ear, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in him in the gray matter of his eye, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be completely removed except for a small part to which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp arrow of those used by Turkish soldiers, with iron like a lion's head but without ears.
And the Jew recovered, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, which had ears; then I incised around that between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I carefully worked on it, and soon afterward I removed it, and the Christian recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his belly, and he was thought to die because of that; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he recovered, and no harmful accident befell him.
And a man was wounded by an arrow in the buttocks, and the wound healed over the arrow, and after seven days the arrow came out at the head of the anus.
And a woman was wounded by an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound healed over it inside, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any difficulty with any of her natural functions.
And there was another man who was wounded by an arrow in his face, and the wound healed over it, and they removed the arrow without him experiencing any pain, and this is similar to the previous cases.
And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had been embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly moved towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment near the time of removing the arrow within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it with a probe, but could not feel it there; however, he felt pain just below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the area that has attracting and digestive properties, hoping that it would cause an abscess to appear so that I could locate the arrow there.
And no significant incident occurred in the area where I thought the arrow might be; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident occurring; and meanwhile, the wound healed, and he complained of pain from the extraction attempt over the course of several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine for several days until it penetrated the wound, and then I tested that by touching it, and found the extremity of the arrowhead fine, which adhered to the shaft.
Then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me clearly the extremity of the arrowhead, and passed for me through a period of time within four months.
And after the wound had become enlarged, and I was able to insert forceps into it, but did not oblige myself to do so immediately. Instead, I continued to refine and devise methods of extraction until one day I began using the forceps as described at the end of this chapter to remove it; and then I restored the wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered fully without any further cause for concern.
And I advise you about the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may apply this rule and its significance to what has not been mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not comprehensible in narration nor understood without this book.
And the wise craftsmen compare in few words; and about what is present concerning what is absent; and discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes foreign to the art when they occur.
And therefore, I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite part.
Of that which is pierced by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and removed.
And if he does not obey the advice about the hour at which to remove it, you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals and the attachment and its removal become easier.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey your advice, you should leave it for some days and gently move it each day to ease the attachment until it can be removed.
And if he does not obey your advice for some days, then you should drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine gimlet until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already hidden in the body and out of reach of sensation, then you probe for it there, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instrument suitable for attracting the iron.
And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins here, then enlarge the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is adhered to the ears with any instrument attached, then cut away the flesh in which it is embedded as much as you can; and act upon this, if you cannot avoid cutting the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting them until they yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it yields; and be careful with the greatest care that the arrow does not break and that it becomes difficult to attract it and extract it.
And if you cannot manage it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become pusified, and then attempt it when they are softened. But if bleeding occurs contrary to what is desired, then administer what we have said about the treatment in that chapter.
And guard against cutting into veins, nerves, or tendons, and administer your efforts in every possible way to avoid the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I recommend to you.
And so that you make the incision according to the shape of the patient's body, in accordance with which place the fire for securing the bandage after the incision, for it is more helpful. If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
However, for incisions that are made on the opposite side from where you are, or if you have already processed some part of them outside, or if there is inflammation at the end of the incision due to feeling pressure below the rib area and you raise that part; then you should cut above it. And let the section be according to the amount by which the forceps take hold; and then pull that part, for it has been made light by this method.
However, if it is retained in the bone, now you should twist the blade according to the opposite direction in which the incision presses against the bone, and enlarge as you insert it, and then extract it.
And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat it when the time is right.
And if the shaft of the incision is there, now you should proceed with it at that location.
However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer impulse, now you should insert and do this, if it is dull, use a curved tool so that it enters the curvature of it into the base of the incision and then proceed with it there.
However, if the incision is curved, now you should proceed with it using a strong tool by entering into it, for the incision is lightened by this.
And if the bandage is poisoned, now you must hollow out all the flesh in which the venom is, as much as is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and it is close so that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, now cut over it and guard against injury to veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound as seems appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which bandages are pulled:
Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like pincers so that they do not let go of the bandage.
And from those are made special hooks, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the size of the bandage and the scarcity of its pieces, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a rod so that it may easily guide the instrument into the concave bandage and is pushed with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which one usually performs bloodletting are thirty, of which sixteen are superficial pulsating veins, two of which are near the ears and are called alhasisain; two branches that appear in both temples; and two veins located at the inner corners of the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein situated at the middle part of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two grooves on the neck; and two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five. One of these is the cephalic vein, which resembles the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it sounds (likely a transcription error or dialectal usage), and it is called a median vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and they name that one the people call "vein of the whole body," and the basilic vein is situated on the domestic side, and it is called "little finger," and they commonly call it "the vein of the abdomen"; and the flexor of the arm, which is located over the cubital area, and in this one phlebotomy is performed, and it appears on the forearm by a clear appearance; and the salvatella vein, which is between the thumb and the smallest finger, and it is found in both arms.
And in the thigh and the groin there are three veins. One of these is located below the curve at the back of the wild side; and the second is called sophena, and its location is below the groin on the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the groin on the wild side; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins near the ears is for catarrhs, emigrations, and old ulcers and bad chronic conditions of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head, and rub the patient’s head in the occipital area at the location of both veins with a large cloth with good friction; then hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations near the ears appear in two lower areas of the head; and feel them with your finger, and if you can feel the pulse in those veins with your finger, this is the sign to proceed.
Then take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and then insert it beneath the vein until the blood flows to the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the surrounding area upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers aligned or around that much; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
Then hold it with bandages and let it heal.
And already in the beginning of the book, I have described the incision of those veins and their cauterization.
But for the two arteries near the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for chronic and severe migraines, continuous ophthalmia, and acute effusions of excess fluids to the eyes.
Of the quality of phlebotomy I will now tell you what I advise: constrain the patient to sit upright so that his two veins appear clearly and feel his pulse below your finger; then you may begin.
And now raise the tourniquet above the vein with your indicated finger, and introduce the lancet below, raising the vein up; and incise it as you did with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a bandage and poultices, and bind it tightly above with strong compression, leaving it so until it is healed.
And now I have recalled them, and described the incision, and drawn them at the beginning of the book.
And thus the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is now the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraines and severe pain and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy from there is what I advise you; so the patient should bind his arm with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Place the sharp point of the lancet at the head of the vein and press it upon it either by inclining or for any other reason in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's puncture and bind it until it is healed.
In some cases, the phlebotomy is made lateral, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and the incision is made transversely because the bone is close by and a sharp phlebotomy might easily break through to the bone when it is subtle.
May the treatment of the two veins which are next to the tear ducts of both eyes be for eye itch, pain, and grease in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should hold his arm with a bandage, and then you should perform the phlebotomy there, while you stand above the patient's head.
And the phlebotomy should be performed transversely along a little distance from the phlebotomy point because in that location there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy tool is subtle, its tip could easily break through with little force.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on that spot, hold it like that for one night, and then release it.
May the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose be used for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient should hold their own neck and then place your left hand on the patient's nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy tool long and insert it in the middle part of the nose base straight, for the vein does not appear to touch here, and blood will begin to flow immediately.
Cut off the vein gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it up for one night, since it heals quickly.
The benefit of phlebotomy is that it prevents the swelling of glands, the beginning of leprosy, and many other diseases, as well as impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers, just as in the case of herpes.
And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that the patient lies down with their head lower than the rest of their body; and the surgeon stands over the patient's head, while the patient sits upright on a stool.
And then, phlebotomize the long vein with the wide one gradually in small amounts; and afterwards extract blood according to the season or quantity needed as per your requirement; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and stretch both veins gently to prevent them from being constricted, and leave it for the night since the ailment is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy for thick veins is also helpful against small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and severe ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is that you make the patient lie before you, and tie their head with a bandage, then open their lips and examine two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication for each is by the darkness of each, and this is more evident because around them are small black veins; and then you incise each separately.
If there is doubt in you and you do not know which one it is, then understand that the incision should be made into the largest of them and the most evident of them.
And make an incision between the two veins that are on top of the lips.
However, the incision of the two veins below the tongue is more appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic area, for preventive measures that are in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that it prevents the disease between your teeth before the sun rises, and it raises the tongue up, and look below the tongue where one side of the vein and the other side of the vein are, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to cut too deeply when phlebotomizing them, for below these are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the neck are those that run through all people, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done in two ways: either place a small mirror or olive branch with subtlety inclined; or use a scalpel for phlebotomy, and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it.
Should the abscess be large with frequent occurrences, it is convenient to open the curved veins that are full and whose origins appear thick, and those that contain thick blood should be treated.
And this incision is of lesser width and has a finer end, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
But the benefit of phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that affect below the nape and neck, and from what affects the legs and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to have great fear of it, because below the vein there is an artery. If he errs and hits the artery during the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a profuse flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting blade like a lancet.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another, or search for some branch of it. Or you can perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and perform phlebotomy on that with a lancet as we have said.
But if you want phlebotomy of the median vein, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm to touch the place between where you know the location of the wrist, and slightly above that point; and then hold the arm and locate the vein with a concave incision for phlebotomy using a lancet as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of its location.
When you see, as you bind the bandage, swelling in the place that you have marked thin, then that swelling is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and thin, then you know it is the blood of an artery; and then you cut and pause your hand above that for a long space; and soon remove your hand, and if the blood is cut off after so many moments, then you bind the arm and leave it.
And keep the patient away from his mucus, and let him be overcautious about it, and do not allow that for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood does not stop flowing and you must act without medical assistance present, then you should cut the artery if it is apparent to you; for the extremity has become constricted and the blood is no longer flowing. Or take a piece of cloth, wet it with water, and apply half of it tightly over the vein with bandages and powders on the other side the next day.
And if the blood has stopped flowing, that is good; but if not, then proceed with the treatment as described in the previous instructions for stopping the flow of blood.
And stopping the blood flow from him is difficult in many circumstances due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful in extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; as we have said, this is composed of parts of basil and parts of cephalic, as we have mentioned.
Here is the translation into English:
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And here precisely, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either an olive vein or a myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to arteries nor nerves.
But it is often the case that an abscess forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt, so do not neglect to address that abscess.
The first of these is about knowing that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are suitable, which are: cephalic, fusca (blue), and basilica. It should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of repletion appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
And let phlebotomy be administered whenever there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not have phlebotomy done on her except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women who have passed sixty years should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
And when someone wishes to be phlebotomed by any method, it is appropriate for them to cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with an enema, if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels, which are pure, and so that they do not affect the principal limbs.
And do not phlebotomize patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, or those recovering from illness or intoxication until these conditions have subsided, nor those with dropsy. Also, be cautious about performing phlebotomy near the onset of colic pain and vomiting, and after bowel issues, and during periods of frequent sexual activity, work, or exercise, or fasting and sleep deprivation, and any other cause that dissolves virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
And before performing phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of the humor, especially if the blood is thick, by observing diet and drinks, and using medicines if it is possible to do so.
And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no prohibiting cause, or exercise for some time to make the blood thinner.
And stop the phlebotomy at noon on that day, which is about the hour of terce, as we have said.
And pierce it so that the foot of that person may be protected on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as cramp, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive work and unnecessary pain and fatigue and similar things.
And at his seat have the causes present in the use of which it is customary for people to employ aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And the phlebotomist should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who is to be bled.
And then draw out his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around two times.
And let the ligature be timely, for if the ligature is not tight enough, or if it is too loose, it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too tight, and then it prevents the course of the blood too much.
And then after the ligature, have the person who is to be bled rub his hands together vigorously among them until the veins are swollen and become distinct.
And then the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy instrument with a little bit of proper old oil; and then places his index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein moves slightly, and the percussion is steady because among the veins there is one that acts like a fleeing string for the phlebotomy, and from those it is full of air; when you place the phlebotomy instrument on that one, it contracts away from the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is confused; and the phlebotomy does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, that one is narrow.
Therefore, let the phlebotomist be steady and diligent in all these matters.
And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, that is good; but if not, repeat this at another site, or wait a little while, or proceed with caution, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes fearful, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for that would quickly cause an abscess, nor should the patient bathe.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will flow to reach the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy at that site cautiously and make the incision slightly larger, but do this carefully before the area becomes inflamed, for in most people a small incision causes inflammation.
But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, for it will serve no purpose; and apply some part of the incision to a poultice of oil, as this facilitates the flow of blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer a poultice of oil for every phlebotomy in which you open veins that are restricted by the flow of blood, and use this when paused between procedures on the area, as the blood becomes finer and is less turbulent when it flows freely.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a great abscess is generated, which happens sometimes, and especially to those who have not been bled recently or whose vein was only slightly opened, then you should treat it by placing a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, upon that area for one hour, because it dissolves.
And make sure to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if a black or green discoloration remains in that place for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some poultice of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
And sometimes abscesses and swellings occur instead of phlebotomy from the basilica.
And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find softness from your compression on it, then that swelling is bad and harmful; and then be careful not to apply any of the preparations we mentioned, for the blood will easily flow from an artery.
And apply a plaster that has styptic properties to harden the area, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to draw blood from a person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing in the blood as it overcomes.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is diminished.
For someone who is healthy and strong and in need of bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and let slowly.
And for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it should be extracted in small quantities over multiple sessions, and let quickly.
And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in lemon juice or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
And if the patient is of a delicate constitution, then before phlebotomy give them bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic syrup with a pleasant smell.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then they should drink water and a fragrant, subtle syrup; use aromatics with vinegar, and apply cold compresses to their limbs.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve the blood for the second time, he should use the feather, whose virtue is to evacuate the blood little by little, as is in proportion to the amount of its virtue over continuous days.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and remove his blood for the second time, and if his body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And for one who wishes to draw the blood from his body contrary to the side to which it inclines, he should be bled on the second or third day.
And for a body in which there is already hot and congested blood that causes fever, it should be drawn off once, and a large quantity of blood should be taken to avoid syncope, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse point where the blood leaves the body, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this has happened when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to release the vein and evacuate the blood for the second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it suddenly, for this is too harsh.
Handle the release within which you are to phlebotomize again; or remedy this by applying heat to the congested area of the phlebotomy where blood has coagulated in the vein opening; or apply on it a plaster of theriac or sage, and compress it gently until the blood is out.
And if the vein is inflamed, at that time do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in another site on the same arm or in a vein on the other arm.
And when the vein called "the cord of the arm" is punctured instead of thefuscus or the basilica veins, since they are not easily found or hidden, it consists of these.
And the quality of bleeding the arm is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until it turns red, so that the vein appears clearly.
And then wrap a tight bandage above the area where you will make the incision; and then bleed following the small transverse direction, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
And let the incision be wide, and let your puncture for bleeding that person near the joint of the hand be small.
And if the blood flow is restricted, then immerse the hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and similarly pause the process of stopping the blood flow in warm water during winter.
And the puncturing of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you bind your hand tightly or with a cord, after placing it in hot water so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible to everyone; then cut across that vein; and if you do not cut it completely, this will be harmful.
And do not release your hand after the phlebotomy, for fear that you might injure the nerves of the aforementioned parts deprived of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow in that manner, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, and this is prohibited.
And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then apply pressure on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this for all procedures carefully.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein on the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly with this phlebotomy as you did with the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the sephena vein is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient plunges his arm into hot water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear; and he puts a cord above the joint of the arm where it bends, and the place of the vein appears below the said joints, and from there spreads on the face of the arm in small branches.
And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the bend below the said junction, for it is better and more effective.
And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the arm, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the face of the arm, and pause your phlebotomy at the point where you phlebotomize across, as if you wanted to incise it.
And so the phlebotomy is complete.
But if the letting of blood is prohibited; then you should immerse the arm in hot water again and allow the blood to flow in that area until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another phlebotomy above the previous one, for the location is effective; and do not fear this mistake, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same for the phlebotomy of the other arm.
And for the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the knee behind the bone.
And the benefit of phlebotomy is to relieve pain in the side when it is due to excess blood.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into bath, and hasten and strain the body of him from the part of the navel up to above the ankle in four places with a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this.
And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle as is possible and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by cutting, for the place of him is salt.
And it is in the words of men a slight swelling; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is which appears on the two of the hand behind the finger auricular and the finger anular.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
And then loosen the bandage and pause on the place of the phlebotomy to compress the place, for it is quickly healed.
Of venotoma and of the qualities of using those.
Venotomies are usually made from horns, or from earth, or from flint.
And venotoma is done according to two methods: one of them is as scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is venotoma without scarification.
And this venotoma which is without scarification is according to two methods, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And the venotomies that are usually administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, of which one where venotomies are placed is alnocrati, and it is at the back part of the head; and another middle place between two parts of the neck; and venotomies under the chin below the jaw near the mouth; and venotomies of the two cheeks; and venotomies of alohoster, which is above the collarbone; and venotomies of two armpits; and venotomies of two thighs; and venotomies of two feet.
From the swelling you do not draw blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this you do not catch the virtue through those [veins], just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor does it matter whether venesection be performed near a fire or away from fire in any disease caused by retention until all that is within the body is evacuated.
If necessity causes venesection due to illness or for regular maintenance, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the location and at whatever time may be appropriate.
And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that venesection be performed after two or three hours have passed from noon.
The benefit of venesection from the neck is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and what causes sinking in the eyes; but it must be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this vein is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not good to use that which is of full friction, or in which there is a cold, because it gives great harm to the patient.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those old veins, and in many cases, they cause fragile illnesses.
But for the one who is continuously having it done on them, memory loss may occur; and therefore, you should instruct the practitioner to pause their hand briefly when removing the cupping vessel from the area, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
But cupping on the nape is in the place of phlebotomy for the dark vein and the basilic vein: and thus it benefits asthma, constriction of breath, splitting pain in the chest, coughing, and congestion.
And it is necessary to lift the cupping vessel on the nape slightly, for if it is left below too long, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And cupping on the back of the head benefits accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy for the basilic vein.
And you should instruct the cupping practitioner not to press their hand during incision so as not to injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And cupping below the chin benefits alcohol-related issues in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembles treatments for similar illnesses that occur in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Avoid the windiness that is made over the two spatulas by applying a compress, which is made by an abundance of heat.
And for the windiness between the two parts inside the flanks, apply forceful phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because they attract blood from all the smaller veins in that area more than other larger veins, until the attraction reaches these three veins.
And command the windworker not to proceed with incision, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it alone where there are nerves and arteries.
And it is a windiness on which the treatment is applied over the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers that are nearby.
And you should command the windworker to make a large and strong windiness, because the area in question requires powerful drying. For traumatic cases, use subtle windinesses and apply incisions where necessary.
Avoid windinesses on small areas because they draw blood from the entire body and can cause pain in old wounds of the ribs and chest, and bladder issues; they also provoke menstruation and can lead to boils and abscesses. They should be used instead of phlebotomy from two saphenas, alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
However, they weaken the entire body and can cause fainting in many people.
And for the windiness of the alahorcoben, the force applied should be proportional to the force used in windinesses of two areas.
Regarding the quality of the position of the cupping vessels, place the vessel at the beginning and suck it gently and appropriately, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but place them quickly, and remove them carefully, so that the humors come to the site by equal distribution. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the firmness of the blood becomes apparent.
Now you should make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and then observe the disposition of the body.
For a person with tender flesh and few pores should be scarified only once, not pressed repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to enlarge the scarification slightly and prolong it, and perform the suction with ease and moderation.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first session the pathway for the refinement of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second session, use the acquired precision for the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very impure, then perform the scarification for a third time so that it achieves the desired result.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify more extensively.
Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the wound is concerned only.
And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cupping vessels be anointed with soothing, penetrating, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or oil of crushed daisies, or goose grease; and if it is in winter, narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or linseed oil, and similar ones.
And if the exudate is thick and congealed, then the oil should be marigold oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
But if the cupping vessel has large pores for soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for these the places of cupping near the cupping should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutio, or chicken broth, or bouillon, and similar ones.
And for the one whose blood is of thick moisture, wash his cupping sites with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar ones.
And for the one whose exudates are thick, wash his cupping sites with aged vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar ones.
And it is necessary that the cupping be done before bathing; preferably it should be administered shortly after bathing by one hour or two, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the cupping.
What is needed for the regulation of cupping or bloodletting before cupping.
Consider this at the beginning: if the cupper or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and there is wind in the sharp blood with inflammation, then you should give cooling causes such as sour grapes, endive, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
And pause their food such as poultry, meat of suitable birds, and sweetened foods, and things similar to these.
And for the one whose complexion is cold, you should have them drink syrup of amber or syrup of saffron seeds with sumac, and some moderately strong spice between dawn and night; and advise them to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods such as poultry, fish, small birds, and doves.
And it should be that on the day of cupping and bleeding, drinking should be more than food.
And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people tyrian al-farakh, or medicine of musk, which is masticated musk, or rock candy before cupping or bleeding or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood becomes finer; and they should not take those heating substances.
But let the cupping be done without incision in areas such as above the groin, on the thigh and gout area, and around the navel, at the locations of the costal arches, and the hollow of the flank, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
And it is not sought for anything else but attraction of blood from a limb, just as the cupping glass is applied to the breast in the disease of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that so that the coagulated phlegm may be dissolved by the inflammation of the limb, just as the cupping glass is applied to the belly and navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it and removes the pain by resolving the flatulence.
And it is applied to the veins when they are obstructed or weak, for by the power of attraction it raises obstructions and eliminates weakness from its place.
And similarly it does when applied to the liver and spleen to expel flatulence, for it encloses the air in those organs.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with suction only; and some are administered over a fire.
And some are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping glass may be full and larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Form of the cupping glass administered over fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon (a term possibly referring to a material or substance) shall be half a palm; and in its middle part, at the location which is in the circuit, let it be half of that, with the rim small enough so that a needle can enter it.
It should be made of ram's horn or citrus, with thick edges, leather, gums, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
And let a thread be passed transversely through the bone or iron, upon which is placed a candle at the fire.
And this large suction cup is greater than the one we have recommended; and the small size depends on the illness and the condition of the person using it.
And the suction cups for children and weak individuals should be different from those used by young and robust people.
And the quality of placing this suction cup over fire upon the limb is that it should extend the skin over the fire of wood sufficiently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it on top of the transverse thread in the proper location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the lower part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And it should be placed upon the member of the patient, and the finger should be on the spot we have mentioned, so that when we use the suction cups and do not want to keep the finger there and allow the vapor to rise over that spot, the suction cup will dissolve immediately.
And apply the skin according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
But in the case of a suction cup used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no transverse thread or spot, and it is applied to the limb only when full of water.
And this is the form of it: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, so that it can hold a greater amount of water.
Chapter XC VII.
Bloodletting should not be administered in the joints but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or on parts of the body devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters below clean and wholesome places.
And then they should be left in clean water day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause inside them; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the member of the patient until it reddens; and then place them on the area.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if it is possible to suction the area with cupping, it is better for relief.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood flow extends around the site where the leeches were applied and there is any residue, then place a piece of linen in cold water and apply it until the residue is absorbed.
And if the blood continues to flow, then sprinkle vitriol powder or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply crushed fava beans to the area and leave them until they adhere to the site, at which point the bleeding will be stopped.
In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when possible replace those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspending, then at that time wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots to let blood; and afterwards they should be paused, for those when feeling any blood will immediately react.
And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash on them, and they will stop immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations, accidents involving the bones.
Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the unlearned, and those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it for any length of time; and I have not adopted what follows without extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, extracting the science from them.
And thus I directed my efforts toward experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience contain; now I condense this for you to spare you the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of explanation; and present various forms of instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of the essentials concerning fractures of bones, from which a preliminary understanding is necessary before we begin the recollection of the parts of fractured limbs and their various treatments. Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter by summarizing the essence of the discourse. The chapters that follow will require the craftsman and student to stand firm in the truth of these matters; thus, you and those like you who wish to know or learn this noble art must be prepared.
And therefore, I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, twist, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to begin either with phlebotomy or bandaging the injured person, or both simultaneously, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of constitution, if the one who has been affected is an infant, old and decrepit, or if it is a time of extreme heat or intense cold.
And therefore, let the patient be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body excessively, and all foods that cause the veins to swell with blood, until you are assured of the safety from abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And now return the patient to their usual regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
And as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are rich and heavy in consistency, such as those made from boiled wheat with water, rice, beans, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the bones in children and young people and in the elderly cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by drying out the limbs.
But nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from all parts for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting it from performing its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstains from foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the skull is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the leg; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I wish to provide a recapitulation of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
The variety of fractures within themselves. And there are diverse types of fractures in the bones; for one kind of curved fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the skull and star-shaped and non-star-shaped, just as it is done when a pen is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with a stripe and disruption on the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each kind has its own torment proper in the restoration of the second, which will come as a reminder of the distinct ones in their places.
Mark the signs of a bone fracture. And by this, a bone fracture is known: it is the twisting of the bone, and from its prominence and appearance to the touch, and also when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in its place or sound, and it does not cause significant pain upon gentle touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be twisting or a small fissure, so do not press on it with your hand and by compression of all means; instead, apply one of the medicines about which there is a reminder at that moment when you deem it necessary for the location; and it may be tight due to subtle constriction.
And know that the place where it is curved and not split into two or more parts as happens in the skull, as is described throughout its comparison, now you should begin from your time to correct it whenever an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs in the wound, immediately do not delay it for any days until the abscess ceases; and then clean it according to each method that you can by lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and alignment of it is easier than that of the bone in which such a fracture occurs.
And then strengthen it according to what will come to your recollection.
But if the bone is fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a proper position according to its natural figure, while the parts that are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those adductions with skill and according to each method that you can into their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient because of your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you apply your hand effectively, and if you encounter any different cause, correct that and adjust it according to the extent of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish surgeons often cause an abscess in the wound by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their misguided actions.
And the quality of the constriction of the calm limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and largeness and in the form of those.
And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that their wrapping be leather and hard, because the leather binding connects the large limb and strengthens it on all sides with equal constriction, thus preventing any injury.
And then begin, after the proper evacuation of the constriction, to pause conveniently for this, on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the limb requires; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then go to the upper part of the most prominent site of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your constriction does not hurt the place where you have tightened the fracture. From around the fracture, extend the bandage a little, and gradually loosen the tightness, until you take from it a large part.
Take another bandage and wrap it again around the fractured area with the wrapping, and then bring the wrappings down below the fracture; and your procedure should be in tightening the bandaging and loosening it as we have said about the first wrapping above.
Then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth equal to the curvature of the fracture if there is curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
Then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time pause where the abscess is and where the inflammation is; and leave it like this for several days; and then you will strengthen it with the plasters.
And let the plasters be half a cubit wide in length, and well formed wisely; or let them be made of pine wood; or from palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size; then reinforce the plasters with another bandage as per your initial tightening; then tie it above properly as we have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening most near the fracture site more tightly, and the further away from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use cords made of hair for their threads, it is a great mistake, when one considers the need for equality in tension.
And similarly, very fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be at least one digit between each needle.
And if the patient complains of pain at the ends of the threads near the ligature in those places, then pause and use thread made of lion's wool or carded lamb's wool until it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and there is disruption in the bone, and I will recall this case in that chapter in the second section.
And know that not every broken member should be set with threads on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be set with threads but after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty regarding the danger of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over injuries.
Method of making a plaster for the quick restoration of fractures, suitable for various conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that settles on the walls of the mill after grinding.
And confine it as it is, but sift it through white cloth, and stop the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method for plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of cerate, of acacia, of inula, and migraach, which is the rind of wild millet, of each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes each one half drachm; alochil two drachms; all should be thrice sifted and mixed with water or with white cloth if the composition is hot; and then use this plaster, for it is good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and confine the patient to movement.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach and root of white mullein one drachm; myrrh and aloes each half drachm; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole two drachms.
All should be thrice triturated in a mortar with a concave shape, and should be sifted, and should be compounded with water or white cloth if the composition is hot, and it should be administered.
Method for plaster for joints and bones that have moved from their places, and for accidental pain in them and for splits and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the location.
Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for treating abscesses and properly expelling pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of preparing a quick plaster for administration during the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the pus abscess: take rhizomes of elder, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all together and boil with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
But if it is inflamed, now mix that with cold coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method of making a very strong plaster for resolution compared to the first one, when there is a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rhizomes of elder and seeds of linseed, and pomegranate flowers, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all together and boil with savory water or with gentle water or with wine, whichever suits the condition of the limb and according to its repose by its color.
But Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration other than wax made of beeswax and oil, and he recommends that it be moderate between coarseness and fineness.
But in Wales, it is observed that they are applied to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is a slight drying with warmth as well as substances like myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Method of preparing a plaster to relieve injury and pain: take pitch, linseed, human hair cut or bird's feathers, and elder, and salt, equal parts; mix all together, sift them, and boil, then make into a plaster.
The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not take place nor is the bone out of its place; therefore, do not loosen it for several days. And if intense pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it at that hour, and remove the plaster from there.
And take linen cloth and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in fresh water, then use it to wash the area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; afterward let the limb rest for an hour; then place it on wool saturated with vinegar and oil or scented oil, and bind it there overnight until you are sure that no abscess has formed, and until the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it is relieved.
And afterward, repeat that gentle bandaging and small plaster without tightening it as much as the first time, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess, swelling, pain, and inflammation have all subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then repeat that as you did at the beginning, similarly.
And if no cause arises for the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three or four or ten or seven days; and in some cases all of this is left for twenty days, as you deem appropriate by loosening the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
At this time adjust the tightening more than in your first stricture entirely, and adjust according to the thickening of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by the recollection of it.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and becoming more exposed than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore apply to it a plaster with vinegar which you should always replace whenever it dries out; and do this for all three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, and by this operation direct nutrition to the member, and it is healed quickly.
But what those foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as necessary, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if there were a judge, this would be greatly enlarged in the Ancients' books and recognized as such.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do so.
Chapter second: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, and the impact removes all the bone within the skull, which is behind the bone, just as it would in wood, and thus this type is named a schiña; or the object incises some part of the bone, and cuts into the flesh but does not penetrate beyond that point; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
This is about the injury of these two fractures, either it is great or small, and of the fracture that is comminuted or crushed; and the cause of them is impact with poor ground or falling on stone, and things similar to this.
And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the peritoneum below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is either great or small.
And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like structures, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar actions, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter into the soft tissues, and it occurs in the concave location just as it happens with ribs when they are impacted and broken inwardly into the surrounding tissues.
And this is more commonly caused in the bones of children's bodies, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
And for all these types of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately. And I will return to the recall of all this in its place.
And you will recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their symptoms and the appearance of damaged flesh that is over them.
And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone, and when it is cleaned and examined with a probe, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that it signifies clearly from fear, as is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and hoarseness of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and such like of the symptoms in the major dispositions, without doubt it is not healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms that give hope of health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause of which is known when it comes to you as a condition in the beginning as it is a condition and this is on the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the nature of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is on the days of summer, then it is necessary that you expose the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what is around the bone may become corrupted by pus, and that symptoms which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the dura mater covering the brain and is in small pieces and abrasions, then it is necessary that you excise the comminuted and abraded part, as I shall relate to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient who is afflicted, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the injury, and that it be clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone, bleeding, or abscess requires caution, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to apply the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure there is no further bleeding; then begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
In this way it should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of such a shape, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor, this one slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its form:
And then apply an even wider incisor than the second one.
And it is necessary to have several different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, and their tips should be sharp, made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease during percussion on the incisors so that you do not damage the head and tip of them.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the incisors with the chisels, which are called non-profound chisels.
And they are called this because these do not reach the depth of the bone of the head as far as what is adjacent to it; therefore, the chisel has a rounded tip or margin above which is like a small circle or margin that prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these chisels, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you have present in all parts of the head an end that is sharp, with a quantity in length and shortness according to the thickness of this part.
This is the form of three kinds of probes: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the probe on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the probe to another spot, and insert it throughout to a depth equal to the thickness of the shaft or about there.
And then incise with an instrument what is between each piece of the bone, and make that pus as fine as you can at the end for lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through disturbances which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as probes and fine forceps.
And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the wound.
And so when you have perforated around the bone, and it will be separated from the wound if it is continuous there, and you will extract that, then rasp and smooth that in the roughness of the place where it is in the bone with another tool similar to an incisor, but it must be softer and finer than other incisors.
And if any part of the small broken bones remains and you are struggling with it, now take that with ease using what is at hand among your tools; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guilla and the lauzec praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have placed below it the extremity of this slow and cheerful incisor, which has this form:
And so the lens-shaped part is solid and does not divide for any cause, and the sharp part divides it into two parts lengthwise, as often happens; that the lens-shaped part fit to the suture with the dividing surface sharp on the bone.
And therefore, you strike upon the sutures of a part with a small hammer so that you divide all the bone easily as it is revolved, and you be sure of the periosteum so that no accident happens in any way, and if the surgeon were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Now if there is any cause attached to the bone of the periosteum in some places of bone, it will divide that which is near the end of the lens-shaped suture, and it will separate easily, for it separates without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is separated or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in roughness and small protrusions, now you should shave off that roughness and eradicate those protrusions with fine razors for which you have prepared different quantities so that you can administer those most suitable for each location and most appropriate according to how your operation leads on that broken bone and the shape of it.
And you should administer according to your proportion at which you shave the bone initially with the widest of those razors, and then gradually use the finer ones, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
But in each of the other small, hairline fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of them.
And it is not surprising that they are not amazed by all those who have studied in that art. And this concerns what we have written about the great fractures.
And if the fat is rectangular when you remove the bone, then cover it with a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or triple-layered piece of cloth and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible so as not to disturb the tissue; and then apply a linen bandage, but do not wrap it tightly except just enough to cover the wound.
And leave it like this for one day or two until you are sure of the condition of the abscess; and then untie it and administer medicines that relieve excessive dryness, such as linseed poultice and flour of oats, and powder of vetches and of aristology, and similar remedies.
And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is finely ground and applied to the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And act according to your virtue so that the wound in your treatment remains clean; do not let it become infected or worsen; and do not allow its virulence to increase. For when it is properly applied to the fat of the brain, it corrupts it, weakens it, and leads to further illness due to this malevolent condition.
And it affects the tissue of the head, as when the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is postponed, there appears a blackness on its surface; and therefore consider whether it leads to the illnesses we have mentioned, for then you should be wary without any doubt.
And if the blackness does not come from medicine that was applied above it, but rather due to the virtue of that medicine which caused the blackness, then you should take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and immediately apply that over the wound; and afterward treat it with the spices appropriate for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or occasionally just one of them, because there are two bones in it; the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but only becomes bruised, swollen, and distorted.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture with your finger inside, and hold it in place externally until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the tip of a probe with some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described above.
And attempt the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
Approach the end of the nose with a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or use two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and let each piece be thick enough to fill the groove of the nose.
Some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be dipped in butter and changed every day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is advisable to dip the cloth in egg whites mixed with powdered sugar, and then place the cloth on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And in some cases, a piece of leather wrapped in linen should be inserted into the nose instead of cloths, if the fracture of the nose is more severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing through it.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you prefer, do this, and if you prefer, use cloths.
And if another situation arises requiring cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or wax dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or with cerate.
But if cauterization is not necessary, then you should apply a plaster outside with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg whites; place it over a piece of linen, and do not cover the nose with anything.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then you should cut around them and extract them using instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the gap and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and use appropriate plasters.
And if it happens that plague befalls the nose, now you must treat it with poultices and administer lead tubes inside until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not have inflammation, observe now whether the fracture is only outwardly displaced, and it is not broken into two pieces and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
And what you must do, if the fracture is on the right side, is to insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right thumb; and press with it inside the swelling of the fracture outwardly with ease using your other hand from outside the bone; do this gently.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to straightness as much as possible until they are aligned.
And if it happens that the teeth are knocked out due to a disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect them to break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply a cloth on the broken jaw, and then place it on a doubled cloth, and place on it a bandage properly made, or a piece of softened leather equal in length to the jaw; and then tie it above as is convenient for you to secure the binding and appropriate application, so that it is not destroyed.
And he commands the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to pause from eating liquid foods.
And if you find that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should apply heat and loosen it; and afterward, correct what has already been altered with powder of myrtle, egg white, or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the cerate from it, and place over the dressing a piece of linen.
And then when it is attached and adjusted to the plaster on it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for in about three weeks this fracture usually becomes strong.
And if an abscess occurs at another time, then administer what we have said should be done during the treatment until it is healed, and allow that abscess to drain.
And if the fracture is with a splinter, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, and you should carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them using the instruments.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount necessary for your needs.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and none of them will drain by itself, close the opening of the splinter if it is wide; and if not, place one of the dressings that are appropriate for this on it to promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 4
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Most often the collarbone is fractured in the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without the occurrence of displacement; and it is easy for its restoration. Or it happens with displacement, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the fracture is along the surface.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is along the surface, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and supports the broken collarbone, and the other extends the arm to that part.
And then mold the fracture with the fingers so that it is shaped as needed, and there should be neither a small prominence nor a depression.
And if you need more extension, then place under the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand so that you can mold the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches the clavicle, then have the patient lie on their shoulder, and place under the muscle a pad about half as large.
And the assistant presses the muscle below so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated to meet the clavicle, and then you should correct the fracture and mold it with your fingers as needed.
If you feel pain from the furcula and its maladies, now you must cut into it and extract those pains with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you paused below the furcula the tool that serves as a pick; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a bowl of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the scarcity of the space.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; let there be two ends as you see fit, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the pain from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, now you must bring the two lips of the wound together with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess, now you should treat the wound with plasters and powders according to the quantity of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess does occur, now apply a plaster made of green vegetables and rose oil mixed with vinegar, and place it over the area.
And do not let the splint press down on the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so that when the bandage has loosened or you see the splint already moved, then you must correct this and tighten the binding.
And place the patient's pillow on their neck, and place beneath it a small roll to elevate the support of their back, so that when the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by the muscles, or the arm is bandaged to the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless an abscess occurs in the vicinity or within xii days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that the face of it needs it, and adjust it to the constriction and restore it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture is healed.
And it is tightened and comforted according to the measure in xxviii days, and in some cases it is done in less time for some people.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken in the middle and not shattered but only cracked at the edges.
And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle — and it is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
And then pause over the place where you sprinkle powdered egg white and stop there; and then pause over the doubled cloth; and then pause over the sieve, taking a small amount of powder according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
But if you leave the sieve with a hollow in some part of the spoon, then you fill that hollow with cloth and then press the sieve according to equality.
And then apply pressure above with a metallic hook of appropriate length and with firmness to the sieve so that it does not move from its place.
And examine the bandage each day; and every time it is softened, change it on another day and tighten it and adjust the sieve if it has moved from its place.
And place the dressing on its side as is appropriate.
And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
When this number is complete, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know for certain which are the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed with the piece of bone and place the chain underneath it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the collarbone or abscess cauterization if this occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the ends move as cicadas do, moving separately and apart.
And of the conditions when the middle of it is broken, it is that it inclines towards the internal parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid supine on their bed, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs by bringing together more than two ribs, and carefully perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
And then place over it a plaster and cotton, and place beneath it thin splints of wood or reeds or something similar in lightness, after which you wrap that in cloth; then gently bind that over the broken bone without putting too much pressure; and go around the binding several times along the back, and tighten that with appropriate firmness; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it becomes loose, tighten it.
And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in the area, then you should cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened with this method of treatment; and immediately replace the plaster if you have to do so for that part; and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they meet; and at their extremities in front, such fractures do not happen because those parts are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden to the sense of touch during the examination of the aforementioned parts.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture of the aforementioned parts according to the possible method, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, just as in the case of one who has wept, and because of this, the bone puts pressure on the membrane; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to treat.
And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause severe inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Let us proceed with what is necessary to avoid causing unnecessary harm that might lead to the formation of an abscess by cautery, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, now help with this.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and near where it draws up strength; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound may draw the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage fits according to its roundness; and treat the wound as you would for the cure of pleurisy with food and medicine.
And if the wound is caused by violent constriction that cannot be tolerated, and the bone pierces through the membrane at a point, we fear for the wound; now it should be necessary to cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument that preserves the safety previously determined, and with ease, incise the bone and extract it.
And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should incise it and apply poultices in rose oil on the area, and treat the wound with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let them lie supine on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the cervical vertebrae and the collarbone.
In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the collar, and treatment for them is similarly applied to the vertebrae of the spine. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider: if you see their limbs already softened, numb, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain, then you understand that they are not going to recover, and in such conditions it is fatal.
And if you move those limbs and feel constriction when pressing on them and piercing them with a needle, then you understand that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if the vertebrae of the neck show similar symptoms and you want to know whether they will recover or not, then observe their breathing.
At this point, if you see that they are already weakened and the condition affecting them is similar to what happens in their limbs, and shortly after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary defecation, and sometimes they lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you understand that it is fatal, and at that moment there is no need to work on treating them.
But if none of those symptoms occur, then the cause is better and farther from being fatal.
And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the abscess on the affected vertebra. Place over it, at times, rose oil or boiled linseed; place this over it several times until the abscess is reduced.
During the hours, apply one of the comfortable and stimulating plasters, and place it over that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where there is pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is bruised or for some cause has already become separated from it, then place a cloth over the wound and remove that bone; and immediately adjust the two lips of the wound, using stitches if it is large; and thereafter treat it with one of the ingredients of the remedies until it is healed.
But if the tip of the bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, then place your finger of the left hand in the buttock, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and thereafter apply a plaster and splint to it, if you need those, and secure it.
And if you feel bruised and broken bones in it, then act on that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad (area).
The bones of the broad areas are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture in them is only communication at the extremities of those bones and they split along their length and incline to the sides; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the movement is restricted when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it aligns with the figure of the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then you should apply padding according to what seems appropriate to you by way of equalization until it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines towards the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their back so that you may prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have padded that, place an emplaster over it, and then place over that a splint of wood or cane, and bind with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any point of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
And pad the concavity with what fills that space until it takes the binding according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should stop the extension of the limb and its restoration until the abscess is brought under control, and apply what soothes it as has been done previously; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and bind it as is appropriate.
And if you encounter crushed or comminuted bones, then you must treat them accordingly.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct (note: "adjutori" may refer to a specific part or bone, possibly translated as "auxiliary bone" or a supporting structure, depending on the context). For precise translation, more context would be helpful, but based on the text, it refers to the restoration of a fracture involving an auxiliary or supportive bone.
The adjunct is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take smooth wood of medium thickness in this form:
And let it be held in two places by threads, and let it be suspended from a high place.
And let the patient lie on a stool; and then lay the broken arm over the wood until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the wood is attached.
And then suspend something heavy on that, or the patient will extend it to the lower parts; and then the physician should place the fracture with its sides upwards until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other way is that the patient lies supine on their back and suspend the arm at the neck with a thread; then command two assistants, one to hold above the fracture with its upper part, and the other to hold below it; each should extend it in their direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie threads above and below the fracture, and each of the two assistants should pull in their respective directions.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the thread over the midpoint and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then it is necessary to place the thread over that location and above the joint.
Take that [wound or incision] with ease and work on it, and as soon as it is well healed according to what is needed, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the stitches internally on the seventh day, and place over it a sponge soaked in vinegar and rose water until the abscess subsides, and then you can strengthen it.
And the method of strengthening it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then place a bandage of wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand upon its own muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen it over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a position of stability, if there is no cause prohibiting this from the broken bone.
And now use a splint.
And it is that you place on the fracture a splint that is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
And then strengthen it on the splints with the bandaging method that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandaging over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is longer, the bandaging should be lighter.
And so, when you see the situation of the splints and the bandaging as we have said during the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you should proceed accordingly.
And if you fear an abscess, apply caustic on the seventh day as we have said.
And for this reason, consider bandaging all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place of swelling or inflammation; or food should not reach the member due to excess tension; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be raised to rest on their shoulders so that it is above the stomach.
And place a padding filled with wool over the helper, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too slack; thus correct this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at the beginning until healing starts; and then it is appropriate to gradually increase the quantity of food.
For the usual practice regarding the splint and bandage is that they should be tight for forty days; and then it is appropriate to loosen them, administer a bath, and treat with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is rough and irritated, then do not loosen the bandage and splints for several days or even up to two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna; of which one is small, and it is the one that lies under the wrist, and the other is large and is placed below the small one, towards the lower part.
And often it happens that only the larger ulna is fractured, or the smaller one, and frequently both are broken together.
And when the smaller ulna is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the ulna is fractured below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the smaller ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a small extension with ease until it is bandaged.
But if the larger ulna is the one that is fractured, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
And if both ulnas are broken together, then it is necessary to allow the most vigorous extension.
And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand at the upper parts, as mentioned before, and the thumb be lower than the other fingers, and the patient lie resting on a soft bed.
And let a cushion be placed under him on one side or the other, so that the patient does not have to work.
And let one minister extend the limb to be operated from below by the waist or with a bandage, and another minister extend it similarly from above.
And let the surgeon then adjust the bone into place as best he can according to its proper shape.
And if in the setting of the bone you find any protrusions, then you must reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if a protrusion appears separated from the rest that prevents healing and is not to your hope for the restoration of the patient, then you should act upon it and remove that part according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to infection, I have already treated this in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration process, then apply a cloth dipped in wax made from olive oil and white beeswax, which should be between thick and thin consistency. Place a strong bandage over it with gentle pressure to allow the abscess to subside; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg whites, and subsequently place linens; let the linen placed over that fracture be farther and tighter.
And know that the number of bandages for the arm varies in major treatments, or rather when the fracture is in one bone or in two bones simultaneously.
And then apply your bandaging over the site of the fracture tightly and forcefully. When more strain is placed on the parts above or below the fracture, apply the bandaging a bit looser according to the preceding instructions at the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths with which you wrap the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage that is applied should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging after several days. And if any cause arises for which adjustment is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And do not constrain the limb until it rests, and then resume the bandaging.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is in a similar condition, then adjust everything with your skill.
And be careful if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days so that nutrition can reach it, and then tighten it.
But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandaging for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then suspend the arm of the patient due to their skill in moving it actively, and have them lie on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the skill of the practitioner.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hand and the fingers.
Know that in the bones of the hand and the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it rarely affects them unless after many days.
And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, it is necessary that the patient lie flat and on a hard surface, and place the hand upon it extended.
And then the assistant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should ensure that they are properly aligned.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and wool padding, unless an abscess requires cauterization; then place a board above according to the size of the area, and you should have wrapped that in cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, then make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their injured palm; then wrap it tightly with cloth.
And the board should be made of wood and wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the surface fits the palm; then wrap it as needed.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, then place a board above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; then apply the bandage, as if rotating the hand at the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones mentioned, then immediately the said bone should be straightened according to what is necessary and placed upon the palm, and if you wish, place under it a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
And if the fracture is in any of the others mentioned, such as in the middle bone, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then it should be straightened and placed on the affected finger; or all should be laid out in sequence, which is better; or place it over that small splint, as we have said about the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration and subsequently, the disposition of abscesses and opposing conditions — during your operation — according to what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narration.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the forearm.
The bone of the forearm, when fractured, is felt and revealed to the sense according to how it has moved apart and to the side.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
And subsequently, the minister should extend all the bandages to their position according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is closer to the wrist of the forearm, then the bandage should be extended towards the palm at the position of the metacarpal, so that the extension reaches there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And if the fracture is near the knuckle, then at this time bind it to the knuckle, and extend it to the parts below.
And then the surgeon should equalize the bone on both sides but ensure that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; now it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess subsides, and afterward return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: you must wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the joint at the parts below, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the uppermost part of both sections, and then wrap around the limb and the thigh what remains of the bandage.
And then place strips of metal over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place one strip over the bone of the limb.
And then fill the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is compacted.
And then begin a strong bandaging over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, your wrapping should become lighter and looser and softer.
From there extend to the two extremities of the vein to the parts below until it reaches the navel cavity, and strengthen both the extremities of the stitches on the other side so that the ligature is not loosened from its place.
And then lay the structure over that, so it is such that corrosion or abscess does not occur in the member nor swelling and similar things; and if any cause of those should happen, immediately cut away what is damaged and correct it right away as we have said many times.
But if in the bone there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed, then try to align it as best you can; and if not, fix it in place and do not move it, and care for what precedes the healing until it is healed.
And at times this fracture of the rib is strengthened by stitching it to another part in the same way as we have said about the assistant and the arm.
But in the restoration of the limb in such a manner that no bad lameness occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone or another chamber is applied to it, then it is necessary that the patient limp permanently.
And know that the rib is strengthened in forty days or a few more months, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb bone.
Know that the fracture of the thumb bone often occurs at the base, but it happens many times near the joint.
If it happens that you encounter a fracture, at that moment it is nothing but a split or injury to its parts, and this is in one side or six sides, and on this everything stands as feeling.
And the restoration of it consists in putting together what is broken of its parts as they are inside, so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equation, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need one; and strengthen above the constriction as is appropriate.
And then consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, in such a way that you oppose every accident accordingly until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
Know that in the hip there are two bones of which one is thick and is named the hip bone; and the other is slender and is called the femur.
And if any of the types of fracture occur to these two bones as occurs to the two bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one.
And if you break both bones together, the hip is affected in all parts.
And if the more slender bone is broken, the hip is affected in the forward parts.
And if you cut into the bone that is thicker, feel for its surface, and be cautious of those causes which could harm you.
And then administer the extension, alignment, and binding of the bones according to that measurement.
However, be careful if the fracture of the skull is hard and uneven; then the extension should be gentle and slower, and use your utmost caution.
And when there is any cause for an operation on the skull, and when you align the bones and complete all of the work involved in the procedure, at that time you will take pieces of wood from a tree that has thick fibers under its bark; these should be made similarly to palm branches. Choose those with slight roughness, not grooved like fingers, and their length should match the length of the skull, leaving an inch inside.
And then wrap around each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one over the front part of the skull on one side, and the other on the opposite side, leaving an inch inside at the base of the head.
And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure the skull is prevented from tilting to either side and remains in proper position.
And now a piece of wood has been administered according to the length of the skull; and it should be placed in such a way that the skull can still move slightly.
And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly diagnosed as such.
And so on each day consider the wound and study it according to that last study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, then act upon what is needed for it to be healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the heel bone and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
A complete fracture does not often occur in the heel bone; but fractures sometimes happen to the bones of the foot. Few fractures occur to the aforementioned bones of the foot, and they do not usually occur there except in cases of disposition [for such injuries].
And if a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot and those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should rest their foot on prepared ground in such a manner.
And then rest one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then press on them, and bind them until they return to their proper place.
And then apply a plaster and place it above, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two flat ends.
And then bind that to the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloths and for other necessary reasons.
And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound together, or joined, or dislocated, and the operation on these is as you know.
But if any of them are joined together, then separate them and bind them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of those of the hand. Take a piece of wood and shape it according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly thicker at one end; then place this tool below this table as recommended to you, and tighten it with appropriate firmness.
If what is being cut involves two, three, or more bones, then place over each finger a stick of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the base of the foot, so that it stands on one end of the table, thereby providing good support for the arch of the foot.
It is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every possible situation as needed.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the chin in women and of the pubic bone and penis in men.
When the chin of a woman is fractured, then make that suture in the form of a crescent, and slightly incline it towards one side, and let it be placed behind.
Then the midwife should fill the chin with cotton, and it should be placed in the chin as if it were a sphere; then gently encourage the woman to cough, and gradually elevate her head, for all of this is intended so that before long the chin will return to its proper position as if it were a sphere and the fractured bone will heal.
Then place pillows under her head, and when she needs to urinate, lift the cotton for ease and allow her to urinate, then reduce it and return it according to the method by which you initially placed it, and then return it to its original pillow.
And so it should be done for about seven days or around that time, because then it is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the wound with a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and then blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, because the fracture returns to its place.
And then fill it with pitch and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, then administer what we have recommended for the hip bone in its restoration and alignment.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use of understanding my book; for this fracture signifies to you in the major positions through directness in its restoration and constriction, and thus you understand well.
But in the arm of a man when it is broken, take a splint made of wood, and place the arm in that; then cover it with a cloth wrap, and bind it, and leave it for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when there is inflammation.
It is appropriate for one who suffers a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the helper bone, or similar to that, that you apply cupping and bloodletting immediately if the conditions for bloodletting indicate it to you as we have said above.
And if the pus flows from the wound, now is the time for you to turn your attention to the retention of the powder that you triturate and sprinkle on the wound, unless some other cause is present.
And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, now you should postpone the restoration for seven days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day or even the fourth, for you may cause further harm.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, now is the time for you to reduce it and equalize it with your utmost ease and with minimal extension.
But if you are not prepared for extension and cannot equalize it with your utmost effort, now you should reduce it using this instrument; the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four such instruments according to what is needed for the treatment in all types of fractures.
And let it be round, and let it be in slight convexity so that it does not become bent under the pressure upon it during the operation.
And let it have sharp edges at its ends, with margins on both sides; and let the upper part be thicker in tendency, and from the middle to the parts thinner.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "voluntary palate flap", that is a small palette.
So that the extremity of the bandage may be laid flat, raise it above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And impel it into a place where the bone can return to its proper position and become aligned with some fixation.
And thus strive to align the ends of the fractured bones between them, and if the end of the broken bone is slender and does not take the instrument well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has grip on it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone as we have recommended, then insert it with that which seems appropriate to you among the instruments we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And rasp that which remains on the bone of roughness and small ridges.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do what will provide great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in styptic black vinegar, and if it is summer, do not place wax or any other oily substance on the wound, so that decay and corruption do not occur.
And afterwards administer poultices at the appropriate time of your bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert dressings with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the plague on the fracture, for many times fools among physicians have done this to their patients, causing death or corrupting illness, which is gangrene. And if the swelling is soft, lax, different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the swelling is large or it is bad swelling, and you fear some of the harmful accidents which we have recounted, and you feel pain in that place, then do not rest on those splints, but make an envelope of hard cloths instead of splints and apply them to it.
And as soon as one or two days have passed and the swelling begins to subside, indicating that pus has formed inside, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it, and soon administer poultices, such as those we customarily use for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmakon and similar remedies.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it should be such that the pus can flow from it to the lower parts with ease.
If several days pass and the swelling does not consolidate or pus does not begin to discharge from it, then you should know that here one must use small incisions to inquire about the condition of the swelling with a probe. And of those incisions, those that are separate and can be explored and extracted, you should do so. For those from which nothing can be removed and which cause pain when the limb is moved, perforate them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if it happens that the wound is gangrenous or ulcerated, which are stinking and other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you should use one of those remedies with which it is convenient for the treatment of which a preceding narration is given in its chapter.
And concerning that in which my speech must stand and you should present your procedure: when the bone is broken, it protrudes above the limb as does the bone of the wing and the helper and similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for whenever more than two weeks or three passes it causes death; therefore leave that inside which heals, for surely light it will fall out in about twenty days or thirty; and then care for the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knotting that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
This knotting often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and it significantly impedes the limb from its natural function.
Then consider whether the knotting is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, myrrh, mastic, sarcocollo, atractylis, and similar ones; take some or all of these and combine them with vinegar or egg white or water to make a paste. Apply this paste over the knotting using a piece of linen, and secure it firmly in place with proper bandaging.
And leave the bandaging in place without removing it for several days; then remove it and apply another, until the knotting is reduced. Or gradually heat a lead plate over it, as lead has the property of reducing what is swollen in limbs.
If a swelling has become hardened and turned into bone and it is narrow and causes necessity to remove it quickly, then cut it along the part where pus is most abundant, and excise the excess that protrudes or make an incision in such places as are convenient for it to be removed; and take care within so that it may heal.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are set and then the limb is moved gently but according to its natural movement.
When a fracture is set and the limb is moved gently, it is done for various reasons: one of which is too much soaking of the bandages and binding them not as needed; or by excessive tightness of the bindings within which the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb; or by an excess of poultices; or by unnecessary movement out of its proper time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their body soft so that blood is multiplied in it; administer baths; and apply warm herbs and myrtle over it.
And then apply a plaster to the limb so that the plaster draws in nourishment, or continue poulticing it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent the necessary operation on them.
When it happens to the member that has already been restored near its healing from curvature and prominence of the broken bone and joint stiffness, and this is because of the form of the limb, but nevertheless the limb is not prevented from its natural function, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that limb to be newly broken.
But now there are many false doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a shameful one leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if limping and stiffness are recent, then they should be soaked in hot water with soft herbs such as willow bark, hawthorn leaves, and melilot; and a soothing plaster should be applied like well-made mallow; or take mucilage of marshmallow root and mix it with linseed oil or olive oil, then apply it; or soak fatty figs in pigeon dung and use similar remedies for strengthening the limbs.
And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be applied to the most moist areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
But if the curvature has already advanced and is hard and turned into bone and necessitates treatment with iron, then it must be that the pus above should be evacuated and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and that which is excessive in stiffness of that member near the bone should be cut with fine instruments, and ease should be administered to it with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On Speaking of Dislocation.
Dislocation is when any of the joints loses its proper location, thus preventing movement, and the figure of the limb becomes distorted, causing severe pain and great injury.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it and not delay in doing so, for if there is a delay, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or keep the patient standing during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasms and severe pain.
But when this happens, it is necessary for you to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and then allow time for the inflammation to subside; afterward, the limb should be bathed in warm water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
And thus I have arranged the chapters on dislocation as they were previously organized for fractures; starting with the more important parts of the body and then proceeding to the lesser ones.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated, they do not move easily; the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are partially displaced from their proper positions with some movement and slightly softened; or they are completely and fully dislocated, to the point where they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth and the patient cannot close it properly, and the tongue is covered by the soft tissue.
When the dislocation of the bone is slight, it returns by itself in major positions due to slight cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be treated with immediate reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister have the patient lie down, and insert his fingers into one side of the mouth towards the site of the dislocation if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both sides with his fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and he commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them so that they can move from each part; and the physician then aligns the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously, then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides, and do not delay the reduction of both from entirely as we have said.
And when they return and are properly aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place soft cotton pads covered with wax over them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and afterwards bind it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be positioned between both ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut into small pieces, until when the pain subsides and the jaws are well healed, then allow them to chew as they wish.
Thus it should be administered with ease, and he should not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and have not returned to their places is difficult, fevers often occur with constant sweats, and very easily the patient's belly becomes distended, and very easily he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and very often he who suffers this dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the chest internally due to its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply a plaster and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which connects to the neck and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and as you are prepared.
And then apply a plaster, powder, and bandaging to that area, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
The second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
It is more often dislocated and comes out below the upper part, especially in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick muscles, it comes out with difficulty.
It often happens to some people that due to a blow or fall, their muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and it is caused to be dislocated by this swelling.
Then you should understand this while you are in charge of it, and at that moment proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is below the upper part; thus, you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and one that is not, as there is a clear difference between them. You will find a concavity at the top of the muscle below the upper part upon touching its head as if it were hollow, and the affected person cannot move their hand to their ear or perform any other movement with it.
If it is dislocated, you should place the foot above, and you will immediately recognize this clearly, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation a quick reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the surgeon raises the limb to the upper parts; then he places his hands below the joint and raises it firmly back into its place with strength, and the surgeon raises the hand of the patient, and extends it as needed; then he pauses it there until it returns quickly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and at the beginning when the dislocation occurred, after a few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and given embrocation to soften and relax it as if for treating rheumatism, using alfalfa, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
And then the patient should be placed on their back with their joint hanging down to wait for wool that will fit between the laxity and tightness. Then the physician places the patient's heel on a ball and raises the muscle upwards vigorously, and pulls the patient’s hand so it is not injured below, while another assistant holds the patient's head to prevent it from being hurt below, as it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side. Place the patient's muscle below the joint and raise the joint upwards so that the patient is suspended in the air, while another assistant pulls the patient’s hand from below their abdomen. If the patient is restless, it is necessary to keep him occupied with something else or divert his attention for some other reason, because otherwise the dislocation will recur immediately.
And it is reduced in another way: Place a long post in the ground with its top rounded like the pestle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and have it positioned near the patient; then place linen cloths over the top of the post. The patient should stand along the length of the post, and extend one arm behind the post while the other side of the body is extended with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a post that is two arms in length and four fingers in width, and its thickness should be proportionate to the size of a reed according to this form:
And then place linen cloths over the round top so that the post does not hurt the patient.
And then place the reed near the patient's armpit, and extend the arm or forearm over the post towards the opposite side, and wrap the post with helpers and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, while the other side of the body is suspended from the other side, because the joint will return immediately.
And when the instrument is completed according to whichever method is possible for you, then place a pad of wool under the armpit of equal quantity; afterward, apply a plaster prepared with powdered moly and egg white over the entire muscle, as mentioned above, and then bind tightly around the armpit with proper tension. The bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's arm should be attached to their neck, and left alone without disturbing it for seven days.
When the patient's food has been restricted for a short time, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier to heal thus.
And when the food is given more freely after seven or five days and movement is exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to repeated exposure to moisture that occurs to it or for some other reason, then cautery should be administered three times, as was said before in the chapter about cauteries.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and compression are reapplied several times, yet it remains unstable and the patient cannot raise the arm above certain points, then you should know that the nerves of it, which attach to the head of the bone, have been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension, until it returns to its proper position.
And let the other compression be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness and slowness in movement occur during the healing process in the limb, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation does not hide from you when it lies below the view or touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated bone, this is clearly declared to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch that muscle.
And you must treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed, it is difficult to reduce it, and even when reduced, it does not heal completely; especially when it is in the backward position, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many die from this.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended towards the two shoulders, and the arm be expanded, and the doctor's hand should be above the collarbone and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingers together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the forward direction, then it returns as he bends his hand towards himself, until he strikes the collarbone with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and force.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it firmly by both sides so that it does not move due to the extension.
And so wrap the arm completely, because it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth around the hand, or with bandages.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps with the lubrication of the joint and ease; then forcefully push the joint inward until it returns.
And so for the reduction of the shoulder, it should be placed on a support that has stiffness and stability with an eagle's claw bandage, and it should be wrapped tightly with strictures downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left like this for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, now you untie the bandage of it and leave it like that.
And if you see that the joint is not properly set, now you should reapply the plaster and bandages, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; then loosen it.
But if you encounter serious pain during the reduction of the joint and the patient is in motion, now administer hydration through bathing and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something soothing on the joint, as movement causes discomfort; then bandage it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And then take that off, and put the patient in a bath; when they are dry, now rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply something soothing on it, as movement causes discomfort, once, and the second time, and the third time. take an instrument for probing, enter with it carefully.
And if you wish, place a poultice over that moist and inflamed fissure at the edge and apply it; do this for several applications, since that area is moist, and reduce it to its proper condition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
When the wrist of the hand is dislocated in some cases, the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important to act with speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the patient’s arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already displaced toward the front of the hand. If so, the patient should place the two sides of their hand on a table during extension and reduction; if the dislocation is toward the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be placed directly on the table, so that the physician’s hand can press over that prominence of the joint.
And if it returns to its place immediately, that is good; but if not, then apply a compress over the swelling and leave it like that; do not repeat this, for otherwise, neither will it tolerate nor can you perform the reduction of the dislocation beyond a few days.
However, if the joint remains rigid according to its curvature; and you find no other cause for injury, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you know that the nerves are severed or torn, and then there is no generation in it unless it be strengthened by cauterizing proper to the case and thus confer some cause.
Then when the inflammation has subsided, you should pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it lie and strengthen for five days; and thereafter it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
However, if the movement of the patient remains restricted and you encounter some gravity in it, then treat that with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joint.
In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated toward the thumb or the palm, then hold the finger and apply pressure to its dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly aligned on its proper day.
And when it is night, bandage it as described, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
If it seems necessary, if the joint is dislocated at the elbow, and bind that to that part and do with this the first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the spinal vertebrae or neck vertebrae and the vertebrae move out of their places, there is no treatment at that time, for death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the excretion of the patient occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often some parts of the body on one or both sides are weakened, or an arm or leg becomes paralyzed; or a vertebra has moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and at other times it returns to its original position.
When that has moved to the rear parts, it is called kyphosis.
However, the treatment for this is that at that time you must consider whether the kyphosis occurred due to weakness, because in such a case there is no treatment and no complete recovery.
However, in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or similar causes, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I have summarized for brevity; but I have simplified that from which little is lost by my proximity to understanding and explanation, with which I have expounded and formulated using a different approach than that used to demonstrate this and explain that.
And those are not cured except for the one that occurs between the two precisely as I mention.
And it is that the patient lies on his back on a flat surface near a wall, and he should be placed low enough so that the feet do not touch the ground.
And near a straight pole should be placed, planted in the ground at the end of the bed around his head, and another pole on the other side by his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the attendant should hold the pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another attendant should hold the other according to that form.
And wrap a bandage around the head of the patient and under the armpits tightly bind it; and extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is behind his head, and tie it there; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient near the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is behind his feet.
And then the attendant should extend the bandage to the side of the pole, and do not move the two poles and the bandages from their places where they are placed, but rather keep them as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the patient's spine with strength until he returns, or place him on a table, and then adjust the patient’s feet on the table until he returns.
If the patient does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig near where we said the patient should be a place into which the end of the table can fit. And place the middle of the table over the spine, and the physician places his weight at the other end, and gently press until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you want, open again the part that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head at the end of two posts, the length of which should be one arm's length, and behind the patient's head place two more posts in the same manner; and the distance between each post should be a palm, and secure each post firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
And place one round post in which is the ring, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two posts.
And at the end of it is a trunk from which the post is formed, the length of which is one palm around where it is wrapped; and on the two other posts there is something similar to that.
And then tighten the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet at the trunk behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied around his shoulders at the ring behind his legs.
And then place someone behind each ring who will turn the ring with their hand, and the physician will compress the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned and the place leveled, now cover with an astringent plaster mixed with egg white, and then apply wool; and then place over the plaster a stick of wood whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length should match the extent of the swelling, and on either side of the spine.
And then wrap it with the bandage we have mentioned, and use a nutritious but light diet until it is healed.
And if there is any stiffness in the area at the end of the healing process, now it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and lubricate the joint over a long period, as we have recommended; and also apply a lead plate to that location.
And sometimes stiffness occurs in the back of the lower spine due to that dislocation; and it is this bone for which one should not make any preparation with this medicine, for it could easily cause death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the attachment of the muscle are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what other joints with small movement and concavity may endure.
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: either inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is more seriously dislocated towards the interior parts, and slightly towards the anterior or posterior parts.
The sign of the dislocation of the thigh towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the bed of the healthy limb against the affected one, it appears longer and its joint is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg towards their chin, as this position has become inflamed due to cauterization for an abscessed condition; therefore, the head of the bone has already reached this point.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms are opposite to those mentioned in this context.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that when the bed is elevated according to the complement, they cannot bend it without pain in the joint, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so towards the front. The urine of the patient is retained and their swallowing is affected by an abscess, and they are unable to walk on the toes.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot extend the joint, nor can they bend it forward as much as they could before, and their bed appears shorter than usual. The swallowing (or throat) is softened, and the head of the bone is displaced in that location.
However, the reduction of these types of dislocations is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient. If it has already become fixed in place, you administer reduction according to its disposition at that time, but it may not be fully cured then; therefore, no complete assurance can be given about the outcome.
In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, place your hands so that you can turn the joint and extend it to its limits both inwardly and outwardly, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns to its proper position and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong instrument and extend the ball of the joint from its posterior part, or with its fingers, or with a bandage which is laid over the upper bone; and another person should extend the hand above in such a way that their fingers are placed behind the tubercles. Then tightly bind a lion's skin over the region of the joint, and have another person hold the extremity of the bandage.
And this extension should be from the side or the inner part toward the clavicle, or from the posterior part toward the spine.
And perform all of these extensions at once while the patient is raised onto his shoulders and kept hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type what I say about its proper treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own proper place when it is dislocated, and if the dislocation is toward the inner side, have the patient lie supine on their back; then place bandages over the region of the joint in that location where between the head of the joint and the place below the clavicle; then extend the bandage from above the armpit to the farthest part of the clavicle.
Take another strong minister and grasp his arms, and firmly hold the place of the joint that is dislocated and extend it to its parts outward with great extension, for that returns it to its proper place.
And this species is the quickest to heal among those in which this member is reduced compared to the others.
But if he avoids you and does not obey the treatment for this species of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both sides of the injured part together with a strong, quick, and firm bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each be equal to four fingers in quantity, and let the injured hand be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the injured person be suspended over the top of the beam, and hold it with his hand; and let the length from the ground to him be equal to two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the joint, and let another young man hold the injured one, while the other young man pulls the joint with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation to the outward part, let the injured person lie on his back as we have recommended for lying down after eating; and bind the bandage firmly over the injured hand properly and over his feet.
And then place two beams, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then place adjusted beams on each side of the shoulder placed upon which moist cloths are wrapped, so that the injured person is not harmed by the beam being between his arms, to prevent the extension downward parts from being pulled.
Let each attendant extend his part, and the surgeon with his skill completes the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is to the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the limb be extended quickly, and according to this narration on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with both hands pulls it in such a way that the extended part goes from below to the front.
And if the dislocation is to the posterior parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended to the side and raised off the ground; however, it must be placed on a hard surface, as it should also be done if the hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about positioning on two boards; and it is on his back with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as required — and the sign of hip reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his own leg and spreads it for comfort, then you know that the limb has returned as required — and then you adjust two things and apply a bandage so that the hip is not injured in any part; and instruct the patient to rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare one cavity with the other.
Now, if you see those equal signs in the garment, now you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, now you should return and apply a plaster to it, and strengthen it according to your original structure, and let it be for three days.
Then loosen that [area], and have the patient delay in walking on each [limb] for several days, until it is strengthened.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, for it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward toward the back; but it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of knee dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their knee to the chest; now you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all forms of dislocation is that you have the patient lie on their side, such that they can extend their leg as much as possible; place your hand against the side of it, and put the foot between your legs; then adhere the knee with your palms, and hold them firmly over the knee with your hands, and another assistant should straighten the leg until the knee returns to its proper place.
And the sign of recovery for him is that his belly adheres to his sides without laboriousness.
And then apply a plaster to that and make the belly adhere to the sides, and then bind those areas with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
And do not use the method of walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of him to you is unnecessary, now administer a strong extension with bandages, as was described in the preceding narration about the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its displacement is easy recovery, and it should be extended with ease using the hands until it returns to place.
But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must perform the procedure correctly, and let him have a strong and capable assistant from behind to help at the proper place.
And then place your right hand under the most prominent part of the thigh, and your left hand below the knee at the location of the hip joint.
Place the foot towards you with your right hand, and grasp it with your left hand for two grasps, then extend it with the left hand; and press with your feet the foot with your right hand while working.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then press your feet on the foot for the third grasp, and you will be at the knot.
Therefore, if it returns in one grasp or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes numb, it is good; and otherwise, now repeat the operation, for that will return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce the grasp as we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and tie a stick firmly to the ground, which should be positioned under the arch of the foot, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not slip.
And then the attendant should hold the patient's limbs, and another attendant should extend the foot with his hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should pull against the extension according to their position, and the stick should be placed between the patient’s limbs to prevent it from being pulled towards the sides during the extension.
And then the physician should numb the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy limb to the sides, as the dislocation will return with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is clear to you, now apply a plaster and wrap it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with bandages to the leg.
Be careful not to damage the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the ligature placed over them does not cause excessive harm.
Bind it like this for two days or three; and if the ligature has softened, remove it.
And then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and after this it will not receive treatment.
And if it happens that the abscess needs to be cauterized, you should then administer according to the guidance of the liquid in which our narration proceeds, in another place for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Make sure that the person who is dislocated rests with some extension without work; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some bones of either foot, then you should have the patient lie on their back on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and they should remain lying down as if they were walking.
And then you stand, and place your foot on the area you intend to treat, and then step down gently until it returns to its normal position, ensuring that it appears flat and there is no prominence.
After the pause, place the foot on a table that can support the entire weight of it, which should have two ends, and then bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days; after this, loosen that and let it rest by walking around for fourteen days, until it is strengthened and its improvement is assured.
Chapter xxxv.
About the kinds of dislocations that are made by plague or fracture or any other circumstances.
When one of those causes occurs and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
And because of this, one should not presume to take charge of the treatment unless they are a wise practitioner with long experience, who is merciful and pious, not hasty or presumptuous; and at the beginning, use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, but refer them to someone in whom you have hope for salvation from their peril or relief from their illness, where there appears any hope. And then strive to perform the reduction for them as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among the dried remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you should treat them accordingly, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries, dealing with each location as has been described.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue the one of instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to please your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and most salutary for your true body you will see these in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
