O, my children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine. By its completion at the end and by its explanations and clarifications within it, in my view, I believe I have rendered comprehensible to you the treatise on that part of practice that I love, namely surgery.
For surgery has been greatly neglected in our region and in our time, although the science of it still exists and its foundations remain. There are only small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have led many astray into error and hesitation because they misinterpret its intentions and weaken its power and art.
And it seems to me that I should enliven this treatise by organizing it according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cauterizing tools and other instruments used in the practice may become clear through additional explanation and preparation, which is necessary.
But the reason why a good practitioner is not readily found in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive and requires one to be well-versed in anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, along with their numbers and structures; and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins and their locations.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in deed little, and especially in the practice of the hand.
This we have already said in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not well versed in what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that with lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad physician who had opened an abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, by which the woman died.
And I saw another physician who claimed that he would remove a stone from a man who was suffering from kidney stones, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, by which that man died on the third day.
And I had already examined and called upon to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture above the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure, but did not leave room for swelling.
And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon he rebandaged it, and after some days commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it remained until the thigh and foot became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and upon doing so, he found relief from his pains.
However, once corruption was confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it ulcerated near the armpit, until the greatness of the evil became apparent to his lord.
The cause of which is that the malignant cancer is free of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to affect all the iron [bones], but rather be in the limb where it can be hosted by everything.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a procedure in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
And I have already stated this in every part of this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and leave that, so that the readers do not find a way to criticize and defame you.
And so take up your weapons with vigilance and the protection of God, and treat your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and avoid those things that make you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains more for your glory, and much in this world and later in the praise of your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors are not named.
And thus I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, and bandaging, and extracting arrows and similar things, all chaptered and ordered regarding the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning the head, and the forms of the instruments.
I shall describe the quality of the actions of that cautery and its ingredients, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the actions of cautery and its ingredients is long and extensive, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and many wise people have spoken about it extensively, and they are often discordant about it, but for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing lengthiness.
Therefore, I say that cauteries are applied universally to all parts, whether they have substance or not, with the exception of two parts, which are tail-like parts without substance.
In the dry and solid tail-like part, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful for it, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a dry and solid ailment with something hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite, that cauterization is helpful for all dry and solid diseases that occur in human bodies, are correct, because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But I do not wish to go into that for one who has already been tested and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes of those diseases and their accidents, and the duration of time for them.
But in the other parts, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree about the benefit of cauterization in them.
And you know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is that when it comes to cauterization with burning medicine, fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized, without affecting other members nearby except for minor harm.
Here is the English translation:
Keep the fire, by its height and by the goodness of its substance, does not do anything but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and through length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and for that I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if it were not read in my book at this point I would hide from you secrets with the fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion thereof by which illnesses are expelled, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your wits.
And understand, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and they pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from the cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, such as strength and boils, which do not tolerate delay due to fear of malice that may arise, for it is better than a small harm entering through the wrong time.
And this does not cross your minds, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the illness which is cured by cautery it is not opportune at all times, and they pause in its consequence.
And the reason is not thus because they think it is so, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pains.
But still, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of the speed of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its power.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what is prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness of few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar things, it is possible that that pain will not return in him, but this is done rarely.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cauterization, but because they believe that when all other remedies have been tried without success, cauterization may be necessary.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the treatment cauterization is administered, and it proves effective for that. And here I say that cauterization is not the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and the foolish physicians hold.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its excellence in substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, which is absolutely not true, because I have seen it proven and have observed that this does not work in some bodies but works well with others; cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they say. However, when you perform cauterization with fire using gold, it is not clearly defined for you, since the hardness of the gold determines its quantity needed, and it prepares to receive friction; if you adjust over it with fire, the gold melts due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can shape them according to that.
And thus is made the cautery of iron, which you should apply lightly and gradually according to the right procedure.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those for the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the seeker asking for what they desire.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the humidity and coldness that cause headaches and two other conditions resulting from these causes: one is due to soda and a multitude of traumatic fluxes called herpes, affecting the head and parts around the ears with fluid discharge, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine for the head cleansing, for three or four nights, according to what you deem necessary based on the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a chair and have him rest his hands on his knees.
And then place the palm of your hand above the eyebrows on the shaved part of the nose between the eyes. But when the heat of your finger reaches that spot, mark it with ink, and then apply the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
Then place upon the affected area a poultice made from lint, in such a way that it descends, with which the skin may be gradually compressed, and you should turn it.
Then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of the head of the bone exposed, as much as the quantity of a grain of corn, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cold, until you can see the bone that I have told you about.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
Then place on the wound a poultice soaked in butter and leave it on until the burn scar is destroyed. Then treat the area with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
And if it is said that when the swelling has subsided, the sooner the bandage is removed, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized near the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
Then remove what has adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest part, until it presses firmly on the bone, and this is the way to heal slightly: And they believe that from that place emanates the vapor of the head.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and one should leave that, in my opinion, if it is better for the health. For the head is easily injured by solutions to continuity as we have testified with other members, and especially when the sick person has a delicate nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that one can use it for the benefit of health.
Chapter Second.
On Cautery of the Head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this condition is prolonged in the patient, and one uses plasters, decoctions, capifers (herbal remedies), poultices, cataplasms, eggs, cats, chickens, and similar treatments, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we have described but to no avail for any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not delicate and feels no great pain, one can then proceed to use another form of cautery after some time. And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut open the painful area and expose the bone in the quantity we have described, then cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — which is the location where the vein is situated. And do not apply it in this way, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is more delicate to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput than with that which is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On the cautery for recent swelling.
When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if there is lingering pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and another treatment should be administered, which I have described for various illnesses; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
But if you use a burning medicine for cautery, take a piece of amber and burn it, removing the ends from both sides. And then you should incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly below where it is felt, so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with bandages for about three hours; after that, loosen them and remove the amber, and leave the wound covered for two or three days; afterwards, place a piece of wood soaked in butter on it until the area becomes warm.
And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, use those medicines that I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
And this is how you perform cautery with iron using this kind of cautery tool: fire for the cautery, and here is its form:
It is called a nail clamp, because its head is shaped like the form of a nail, in which there is some curvature, and at the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and rotate the iron slightly by little movements quickly.
And if the amount that adheres due to the curvature is such that half of it sticks, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then put mulberry leaf poultice on it, and afterwards treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of an ancient wound.
When you treat an ulcer as we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease what has been mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot, and place it along the line where the pain is, the length of which is half a finger's width or so; and then raise your hand once and firmly press it to cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and that the lizard [muscle] not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recollection of the regimen of blood flow from an artery according to the usual manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see from this disease that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize him at the appropriate location of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you do, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the rupture of an artery with a cautery having two prongs, and this is better cautery and more effective.
Chapter 5.
Of the cautery for ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, now use the cautery, and this one has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
And bring the puncta close to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part. Hold the cautery on the rim of the ear gradually and mark the place with it.
And if the cautery is applied to those points all around the ear, and wherever it affects, take care of the places until they heal.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of the turtle.
The one for which treatment and cautery are not used is only of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the type that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of illness with jerras and capipurgi and guaraguars, and your treatment does not provide comfort, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below in the temple area, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite part of the diseased area, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the most prominent ear, and then a little above the horn of the head, and in another temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the condition is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific for the ulnar area, the form of which is described above. However, more subtly, it is as you see a little; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive roughness a little.
And immediately treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not apply your medication, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on top of all the temples of their head; and one cauterization on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization in the nape. And the method of the cautery is done as mentioned above.
And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better this way; and proceed with its treatment as appropriate.
Chapter VIII.
On the cautery for oblivion performed with flame.
Give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify the mind.
And then shave the patient's head completely and place on their nape a plaster as described in the chapter on plasters.
And apply that for several applications, for this is the method of the cautery. And do this according to the order I have already mentioned.
And thus if healing occurs well through those methods; but if not, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which extend from the uppermost part of the head down to the part nearest the neck. And place about the width of a finger between each cauterization, and then proceed to treat the cautery as described.
If you want to apply it for the lesser harm, now make use of cautery in its proper place; and if you wish to apply it more strongly, now cauterize over both sides.
Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed as you would in cleansing the head with scissors and water as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and afterward cauterize it with cautery in its proper place on the head, and with cautery over all parts of the head, and with cautery on the rear part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body to treat it strongly and the patient can tolerate such treatment and the illness is severe, now cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with one cautery inside until it is consumed by the skin, and raise the heat moderately. Then proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, you should cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with scissors and with the other treatment we have mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, at that time administer gargles and powders to clean the mouth, before which for two days purify the food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize one with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and on each side of the head cauterize as well. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive-cautery as was previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization for Melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted humidity and phlegm, then cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned while inducing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess leaning towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and subsequently place a well-made tortora over the circle, and then apply it to the middle part of the head.
Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use the grease of sheep. And heat that over the fire with a moderately warm heat, which the patient can tolerate when applied. And then place that in the middle of the patient's head in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this once a week for the wound, and with another regimen to promote healing internally; or if you prefer, cauterize that with small points according to what is necessary, but hold your hand in such an order: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
And then apply that powder mixed in grease or chicken fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending in the belly.
When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that purifies their head, and protect them from all humidity.
And have the patient sweat in a warm bath for several days.
And then command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Cut and apply cautery to all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cauteries at a distance in the region of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come to the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation and caution against bleeding.
And in some cases it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two cauteries properly applied.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old wounds.
When tears from the eyes are old and flow continually through veins and arteries which are clearly visible on the head, it is verified that this is due to an excess of cold phlegm. At this time, cauterize in that place with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter about beginning to draw water into the eyes, and apply one cautery in the middle part of the head, and two cauteries at the back of the neck below the temples, and two cauteries at the back of the neck below the bones. And if you need to add something, then at this time cauterize there across the sole of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On Cauterization for Nasal Odor.
When you treat that condition as we have said in the division and it does not improve with your medication, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward, shave his head, and cauterize there a medium-sized cautery with an olive-shaped cautery. And afterward, cauterize there with a carnation-shaped cautery and apply two cauteries above the eyebrows behind the hair, a little bit.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the shape of the carnation-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery in this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the shape of it:
And if you, when cauterizing above the two eyebrows, use two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand upon the cauteries, but according to the amount by which the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pinch the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and pinch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medicine.
If you cauterize with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to trim their hairs as do those who are clean-shaven, such that they are lengthened and even; and if they pinch where they grow, then bandage the eyes so that nothing enters until the hairs have grown back.
When they have grown back and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap, and gently press on the eyelids where you intend to cauterize, marking it out like a leaf of lettuce, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or mucilage of starch on the eyelid.
And then ignite the cautery which has this shape.
And then cauterize on the figure which you have marked, little by little, in several stages, until the surface of the bone which is like a myrtle leaf is entirely consumed properly.
And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs on it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and lay it aside for three days, and afterwards pause on the wound's edge until the scar is healed. And then take care of that wound until it is healed.
But if the hairs around it grow back and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery on that area again just as you did initially.
But if the hairs remain in the eyelid below, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
But the cautery with a burning medicine is such that you instruct the patient to stretch out the hairs until they are lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take known soap and one uncia or more of a living cause, and mix those causes well, and apply this quickly so that it is not rubbed; and spread this on the paper which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that over both eyes; and place below the eye wound wrapped in white cloth, and the head of the patient should be at your side.
Here is the translation:
And so when he perseveres in what the swelling of the bite is, then leave off the medicine and bathe it with that which you said; and when the biting ceases, then again apply the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider whether the eyelid is raised as much as it was washed, loosen the ligature by fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not return to that of the medicine on the place where you did not use the medicine and let it not darken until your operation be equalled and the wound constricted.
And then pause upon the cut at the border until the root of the injury is eradicated, and then treat that with definite definition or otherwise until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no rust of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after some days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause of hair growth in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then wait until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that the wounds of men vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
And the way to remedy will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the wound.
When you treat fistula with the water we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not confine your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head or chin on something steady, and hold his head still by someone else's hand in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated.
And place cotton or lint on the wound or over the hair of it.
And then heat the cautery, which has this form:
which should be hollow, as in the shape of a reed or eagle's feather, with one end through which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
But the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
And then place the cautery over it, which should be well heated, and hold it from that point with your hand a little away from the wound, so that you do not miss your aim or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edge of the wound and burn it.
And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place cotton around it and cover it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
If after eleven days it has not healed, then apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: enter into the location of the fistula and apply to it in that fissure finely powdered material, whose form corresponds to its shape. And pour onto it one ounce of melted lead; with your hand well restrained, so that no injury occurs because the melted lead does not reach the flesh of that area; and it is necessary to place over the wound cloth dipped in egg white or in water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer traction through the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose as it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of clefts in the teeth.
Fissures often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use small knife cauterization according to this form that will be described:
And the sharpness of it should be according to the fineness of the blade.
Then apply that hot instrument carefully to those fissures until the cauterization reaches the depth of the fissures.
Therefore, take care of that which is inside with wax so that it may be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks open, and then it becomes old, and flows continuously and a fistula is formed; when you treat that and it does not improve, now is the time to cauterize according to the quantity received in the fistula, and then place the heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; at the end do this once or twice. Then treat what we have said about internal treatment until it is healed.
And if the fistula is severed and it heals, that is good; but if not, now it is necessary to discover the location and excise the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterizing the teeth and softening the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, now place the tip of the cautery in your own mouth, and then ignite the cautery whose form will be described later; then place the tube over the tooth and insert the heated cautery quickly into it, holding it firmly so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then take your hand, and then repeat the cauteries as many times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is pain or inflammation, and if you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then cautery in that case is appropriate in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over fire, then cut cloth and wrap it around the end of the horn. Then immerse the heated horn in water quickly before placing it on the painful tooth while it is still warm.
And then repeat that several times until the effect of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the aforementioned horn, and place it on the painful tooth, then place heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
However, cautery with fire is that you attend to the thickness of the tube of iron or copper, so that in its middle there is some thickness and the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
From the fire make the cautery of which I will describe the form, and place it upon the tooth and hold it there with your hand until the cautery is rubbed in; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated either on that day or on the following day.
And it is necessary that by pressure of that cautery the patient fill his mouth with hot water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hernias.
When hernias are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them gently, then make the cautery in the form described below, having two open ends so that the smoke can escape. Hold the ignited cautery with one end, and place it on the swelling once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days, and then place it over the spot in hot water until what the fire has burned is alleviated.
And then care for it with dressings and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cautery for hoarseness of voice and on the compression of the veins.
When the humidity of the veins affects the channel of the lung, and especially when this is accompanied by coldness in complexion, one should first evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part above the root of the throat.
And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the last cervical vertebra. And let the cautery be made in the shape of a nail following the previous method.
And then treat that area with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cautery for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity without fever or consumption and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries above the clavicles in the upper armpit areas; and with another cautery at the middle location of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be made in the shape of a nail according to the previous method.
And if you wish, your cautery can be done punctually with a cautery called puncta, the form of which is described in the section on piercing ear pain.
Let them puncture into veins those things which are intended for that purpose; and afterwards treat that part with the methods mentioned before so that it may be healed.
And let there be three cauteries for that cautery, because with one application you can perform three cauteries in this manner:
Chapter XXV.
On cautery for the treatment of the tremor that affects the head.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humid and slippery causes and it does not return to its normal position after the dislocation, you should first reduce the dislocation and then lay the patient on their back or side; subsequently, raise the neck which is in the part inside the skull upwards with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then apply the cautery having two tips; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates into the opposite side; and the figure of the cautery will now have four tips after this procedure.
And at times it is adjusted according to this method, and thus the cauteries will be eight.
And then place the cautery over it covered with salt, and subsequently keep the patient calm, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts, do it thus: immediately cauterize over the muscle with a cautery nail or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is consumed and the ailment is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is bleeding in the stomach, fry and mix dry substances within it that match its composition and multiply them as much as possible. And if you continue with the methods of treatment without confirmation, then it must be that the ailment is on its second day subsiding, and extend its uses and its things, and immediately cauterize that area with three cauteries: one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and two pointed cauteries below each side of the middle cauterization, so that the figure of the cauterizations forms a triangle; and stretch them apart so they do not touch, which will prevent putrefaction.
And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the rib.
And let the figure of the cauterization be in this form without addition. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle in this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized with points for one who is frightened by this cautery: and that you mark on the stomach with points in the quantity you wish with a needle, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On cauterization of an inflamed bladder.
When pain arises in the bladder due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence that causes the normal urine to be expelled through excessive urination, and when this ailment is treated with the water method as we have described and does not provide relief, then the patient should lie on their back with their head raised. In this position, three cauteries are applied below the bladder near the hypochondria, in the manner and quantity specified.
And the space between each caustic should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the size of the cauteries should be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not compress the area around the cauteries.
And if the amount of water retained is half the capacity of a jug and not more; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they cannot stand, then they should sit, having prepared their belongings, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to perform these cauteries with a knife cauterization when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to press too hard during the cauterization, and let it retain the capacity of a whole jug so that the entire body retains moisture and reaches the bladder, for here the urethra is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Caustics.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will complain of heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, then the pain will be sharp and often it exhausts the skills of the physicians to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then feel the location of the abscess carefully; and subsequently apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire area is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, until it becomes dry and heals.
And then treat that abscess like the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has known many diseases; but even then, this experiment should be attempted only a few times on such an operation, but rather leave that to us, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
The ancients said that cauteries made from the roots of aristology should be applied to hemorrhoids according to this method: take one root of aristology, which is dry and long, as long as your finger, and has a thickness like that of your finger.
Here is the translation into English:
And do not be afraid to use your cautery, but apply it openly in front of the wound.
And just as some ancient authors say that some men used to cauterize with a hot iron like a ray of fire and heated it, and placed it in the place between the shoulders until it reached the abscess so that the pus could be evacuated from it, as we have said regarding the testicular abscess.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is no need for fear, for one dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where the fistula is located and where there is no cure.
Chapter XXX.
On the Cauterization of Boils.
When you treat the disease of boils as we have discussed in the division and do not confer your treatment, at that time the cautery is done in three ways, all of which are effective. One way is to make three or four cauterizations along the length of the boil according to its figure, similar to the shape of the testicular cauteries, the description of which has been given previously.
And there should be a space of the width of one finger or a bit more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the testicular cauteries as well.
And do not be afraid to use your cautery; and the patient should lie on their back for this treatment.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to heat the cautery vertically in two places, as we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the side where the boil is located, so that the patient's left side faces upwards.
And so raise it up as you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two ends, one ignited, into that opening where each of them penetrates the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
And then take care of the cautery so that it does not shake for too many days, for it is more convenient than other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On Cauterization of Hydrops.
Cautery is not used in hydrops except in some specific cases.
When you treat the hydrops using the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, and one cauterization over the stomach, and another cauterization over the liver, and another cauterization over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cauterization on the right foot, and another cauterization over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the chain.
And then leave the cautery open so that it shakes for a long time.
If you do not remove the harmful matter from the treatment before applying heat with water that is suitable for joining the two edges, it will be necessary to hurry with assistance for healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a nail as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be in the shape of an olive according to its preceding description.
Chapter XXXII.
On Cauterization of the Feet and Other Matters.
When the feet are affected by abscesses and are filled with serous fluid, it is suitable to cauterize them above the second toe using water that is between lukewarm and warm, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand and do not return it completely, as the serous fluid will drain.
The cautery should be in this form: And then apply two cauteries on each of the two areas, and at each area use a cautery with the tip of the cautery. And the cautery should be in accordance with the length of the area: one below the joint and the other at the middle part of the area; and apply two cauteries on each area.
And leave the wound uncovered during treatment for some time so that some fluid can drain from it.
And then treat with the causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization of abdominal wounds.
When abdominal wounds are due to friction and internal humidity that weakens the vital forces, which are the digestive and retentive faculties located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with hot applications according to the methods of treatment and should not be neglected. Sometimes when the patient endures well, apply a strong cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, or a subtle nail-shaped cautery; sometimes two such cauteries are applied on both sides of the navel.
And if there are excessive humidities and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery over the navel and around the intestines, gently placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for this is a perfect method of treatment from which you will not deviate.
Chapter XXXIV.
On cauterization of chronic hemorrhoids.
When there is a natural tendency towards chronic hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted humidities, they are treated as we have described in the division and should not be neglected. Then apply three cauteries below the spine on both sides near the small triangular area, and place another cautery above the navel, positioned between these two.
And if you find that the stomach is irritated and the food is not being digested, and the face appears swollen or inflamed, then apply a strong cautery over the stomach as previously described; place one cautery on the spleen and another on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery. Allow this treatment to continue for some time until the patient is healed inside.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery of the artery near the removal of the tooth.
When you extract a tooth, apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Near the extracted tooth, introduce the heated cautery, but do not insert it so far that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the tooth becomes too sore, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and subsequently treat them with what you consider appropriate from among the remedies until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the gum, it is better to do so gently.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cautery of fistulas that are formed in the nature near the parts down there.
When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of that, heal it with a cautery.
When someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what should be done first is to probe it carefully, and subsequently you will know the depth of it by means of the previously mentioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a rod. Then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to how deep the probe went.
And then apply the cautery to burn those corrupted tissues once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And guard against burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard against all those places; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it will not penetrate.
And then treat the place so that it may heal.
And if the place is sealed and the substances are absorbed, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances do not remain inside but come out, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the area of the bone that is corrupted, or this happens due to those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On Cauterization of Warts.
When warts cause pain due to rubbing or excessive swelling, and because of this the patient suffers discomfort, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with a cautery on each wart using a nail of which the description will be recalled.
And apply the cauterization to each one after a small interval, so that there will be three cauterizations lined up, and thus they will be more effective in providing relief.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When it happens that in the bladder there is debility and softening due to rubbing and moisture such that the patient does not retain urine, at this time cauterize in the area near the pus just above the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the pus; and cauterize with one cautery in the lower part near the two areas, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a nail-shaped cautery according to the process.
Chapter XXXIX.
On Cauterization of the Wound.
When there is rubbing and moisture in the wound, and because of this it is prohibited to apply pressure, and her menstruation becomes corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, then it should be that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and one cautery above the area near both sides, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be nail-shaped.
Chapter XL.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Joint.
When moisture and swelling are effused to the area of the joint, and the causes lead to the displacement from its location, and the sign of it is that the limb is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. The place for reduction is found where the bone lies.
Then you should cauterize the malady above the part of the bone in a circular manner, since you will have marked it with thread around the part just as it is turned, and so that the part falls on the middle of the circle.
And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, now cauterize that part with three cauterizations using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the spitting from the entire body; and then treat that intestine so that it may be healed.
Chapter XLI.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the bone, and its cause is friction and humidity, the malady is treated as we have said and does not conform, and this is old-fashioned, now you should relieve the malady of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either use a cautery with combustible medicines, or use fire.
It is done according to two known methods, one of which is that you should cauterize that area above the part of the bone with three triangular cauterizations following this form; and do it with proper depth. And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
And in some cases let the cauteries be on the back part of the head, for there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize also the circle from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the shoulder, and that it be a containing circle and burn the protrusion of the entire collarbone.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adherent to the shoulder and does not extend into the arm.
But if it extends into the arm, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the arm at the place to which you would direct the malady that is the pain; and one cauterization over the joint four fingers slightly towards the wilderness side.
And if the cautery is cutellar, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the protrusion of the collarbone.
And if you direct the malady that the pain extends into the area near the tips of the toes, then cauterize there where you would direct with one cautery at three points or four or more as you may need.
And if you direct the malady that the pain is below the elbow on the arm, then cauterize there with one cutellar cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by this it is upon the malady without harm or contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize over the nail and finish in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reached the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And as a result of a severe purging of the bowels, and as a result of that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say in the cauterization of any cauterizing iron, which is made in this way: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date stone or less by a little.
And inside that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a pea; and those circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those bars should be the size of a pea or two peas, and attach these edges of iron decently to the circles; and this is the form of it.
Then ignite it in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the body, with the malady positioned on the back. And thus cauterize that area three times in one session.
And then let it rest for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and let the wound be covered for more than ten days; and then treat that area with remedies until it is healed.
O son, we have rarely used this type of cautery due to the fear of its observation, and because few people who observe it have found it.
Of the many cauteries applied to him who endures them, he finds great benefit from that one in particular.
The most effective cauteries along with medicines are those you make in the shape of two circles using a perforated armula, through which fits the handle of an iron door; let the length of the walls be as thick as two nuts or somewhat larger.
And if the spaces between each are as wide as the thickness of a finger; and let them be raised both below and above, so that they fit together in this form:
And place it over the part of the arm where the patient is seated, and press your hand on that part of the arm; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quantity of this be small at first and gradually increase, and let it remain for about an hour, so that the patient endures the biting sensation and the application until the biting sensation ceases.
And then raise your hand to the instrument and wipe the hot water from the entire arm with cool water.
And then leave it for three days and place a bandage on it until the discoloration from the application fades, and leave it like this for several more days until pus formation ceases; this is beneficial for recovery.
And then care for it with remedies until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the chest or abdomen, place the patient in the position where they contain water, as is done with the hand.
And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the chapter on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and soda not yet extinguished, both in equal parts; mix them and pour into a new vessel which has a small hole at the bottom through which it can run according to the quantity needed for the remedy.
And place under the bottom of the vessel another inverted vessel, and pour over that alkali and live soda with lukewarm water in which they absorb one finger's width, and then when you understand them to be warm by good compression, leave the hole through which the sharp water descends into the lower part of the inverted vessel.
And then concentrate all that water, and pour it over fresh soda and alkali, because at this time it will have great strength, which is used in various medical procedures and in cauterizing other limbs, as a fire operation.
And for some medicines that are used for wide cauterization, such as vinegar and honey mixed with aniseed and soda, they should be blended.
And here is the account of a man from ancient times regarding the operation and cure for treating pain in the sciatic vein and nerve; he praises it highly as being sufficient without needing any other treatment, since it heals completely once performed, as recommended, and taking baths and exercise thereafter.
And let it be applied near the seat of pain, and if there is no green onion, take a fresh fig; and let it be crushed with a little grease and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the head, or on the thigh, and let it be bound.
And let it be applied for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient finds comfortable from the treatment.
And then put him in the bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the sun, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Galen says that when the narrow vein is cauterized with the split leg of a kid, it benefits the youth very much; and let the cautery be applied in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the bones.
And then take a dried split leg of a goat and burn it in the fire until it turns to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it be spread over it. And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Pain in the Thighs.
In some cases, pain is in the two due to excessive causes, such as by seating or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by infusion of dry and moist matter.
And cautery should not be used except in this single case, which is done by the application of dry matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter, use thin pills and similar to them, which are made over the place where the pain is three lines according to its latitude, such that in each line there should be five cauteries or more, depending on what fits the patient's tolerance and the efficacy of the treatment.
And let the cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a middle-claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Ulceration.
This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure, with swelling and movement.
And you will notice at the last vertebra of the spine and in the nodes that it is already beginning to rise above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: that the cautery should be applied to the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be properly spaced between them.
And then treat the area within it so that it heals as we have said, using what has been described.
But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by the friction of humors that flow into each limb, when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to refer to this as gout properly speaking.
And thus, when gout caused by friction is treated with the method of treatment and not just the pains are alleviated, the cautery is applied to remove them.
And when you cauterize, do so for evacuation around the joint of the foot with the words "cauteris.
And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make punctures on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend to the toes or other joints, and you find it necessary to address this, then cauterize each toe with three or four olive-shaped cauteries from all sides.
And if you must use cautery, and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery, but only around the circumference of the wound.
And if the pains reach into the abdomen and the groin, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in one area and it is called sugar, then prick around the reddened areas as they spread, pricking those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the mentioned areas, then prick around the reddened areas on each knot and on the tip of the hand.
And if the pains reach near to the sides of the ribs or the muscles, then cauterize those areas from all parts as needed.
And if you do not evacuate the malady through proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated along with this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cautery for Fractures.
When you find a fracture in the hip and dislocation of the thighs in front of the pubis, and this begins from nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to refrain from food on that day and to use laxatives so that the wound can open from the abdomen.
And the patient should stay near you on that day and command him to keep his leg elevated so that it is exposed or the pubis or thighs become visible.
And so return to those ribs which are called the false ribs, and mark the rupture upon the bone of the penultimate rib, where its extremity is like half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then use the cautery, which has this shape:
make sure it is hot and sparks. And then reduce the bladder or towel to its contraction, and then place it on the area so that the bladder does not dry out.
And you have already placed a pad between the patient's buttocks and below it put another pad, one serves under the armpits of the patient, and another under the feet of the patient, which should have its own pads.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and proceed until you feel the bone of the penultimate rib in the middle; and repeat if necessary another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
And observe carefully the condition of the bladder during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest the patient dies or suffers another great harm.
And know that when the cautery does not touch the bone, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and measure.
And then take care of the location of the cautery for three days, applying dressings until the burn scar has healed.
And for its cure apply plasters among others inside which it may be healed.
And let the wound lie open on its back for forty days until it is sealed and the pus has cleared.
And it should be that you pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time for the cure of which the intestines are within the belly, and that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
And when you wish to remove it after forty days, administer a properly made bandage, and keep him for other forty days.
And let him be restricted from work and overeating and drinking, and speaking loudly, for when he follows this regimen of complete healing, he will be healed.
And I will speak of the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, if you do not want them to remain, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let that which is excised from it be as thick as one third of it; and thereafter treat it as we have said, and it will not require adjustment.
And some earlier ones said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked by a template:
and a line is marked where you will proceed latitudinally in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then mark your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of torsion.
When pain occurs in any member due to falling or striking and that pain persists for a long time and is not relieved by medicine or cure, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be applied to every member according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, the location of the torsion, and the site of the pain.
If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again. For it is customary with such pains that they are points of the member nearest to them, so you must achieve these points with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On cauterization of leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cautery, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And so when you wish to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is commissional and has been partially cured by what we have said in the division and does not continue, and if you fear for the patient that the corruption may encompass the whole body and its entirety, then cauterize it over the head with four cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and the second further down near the forehead; both on two temples; and one at the back, above the neck or nape.
And finally with the cauteries, apply them slightly enough to create a small impression on the bone, so that the scales are displaced and allow the expulsion of thick vapors; and cauterize over the wound as needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly visible, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; one cauterization on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on each side of the neck vertebrae, six on the lower back vertebrae, one large cauterization near the buttocks, one on each buttock, two on each thigh, one on each calf, two on each ankle and one on each heel, and two on each foot arch. Cauterize those areas over all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each sole of their feet, and on the hollows of their hands.
And be careful of the nerves that run over the heel so that you do not burn them.
And in some cases, it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the type of tools used.
And apply the cautery with flour of fried chickpeas mixed with honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On cauterization for fainting.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the magnitude of the limb or the smallness of it.
And let the fire for the cautery enter slightly under the surface of the skin. And then treat that with a remedy so that it may be healed.
And sometimes faintness is cauterized by treating certain points, which are mostly in the back and spine, and at the sites of the nerves that govern that limb, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
But do not proceed with this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limb and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that are inflamed.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal remedies, then you should cauterize it with a cautery slightly above the surface according to the quantity of the depth under the skin until the whiteness and the color of it change.
And then treat that with flour of eggs and lentils in rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of dove or the blood of quail, taking an equal part of each and mixing them all together, and then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture until it is healed.
Chapter I.
On cauterizing wounds.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing agent in the form of a circle around it as it appears.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in its proper place; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have observed this in some cases.
It is more correct to cauterize around the part in a circular manner as we have said, or rather as described.
Chapter II.
On cauterizing abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturing, and this is due to the excessiveness of its formation or the condition of the patient, who is old and debilitated with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small punctures using a cautery instrument; and immediately apply something that will help it mature more quickly.
But if you wish to puncture it with a cautery, then choose the cautery that has this shape; and place it in the proper location of the abscess until it penetrates the core.
And if the cautery is applied to a location that is further away to spare the tissue of the arm; and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter LII.
On cauterizing with corrosives.
A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place where it can withstand cautery with fire, then you ignite and cauterize small spots, and larger ones as is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is.
And proceed to cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then dress it for three days, and apply ointment mixed with oil to the cauterized spots three times a day until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosions are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method instead of cautery. But cautery with fire is quicker to provide relief.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division above, so use that when you deem it necessary.
Chapter LIII.
On cauterizing of nails and other similar cases.
In many cases, when dealing with the parts of the foot affected by severe illness called gout, which is caused by thick and swollen matter, you should cauterize it; there are two ways to do this, one is cauterization with fire and the other is cauterization with hot water.
Cauterization with fire is done by igniting the cauterizing instrument shaped like a half moon, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that will contain the thick matter from all parts, and it should have fine edges.
And then place the ignited instrument over the thick matter, and then move your hand with the cauterizing instrument around the thick matter until the cauterization reaches the depth of the thick matter. And let that remain for three days until it begins to discharge pus. And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mugwort and salt to it, and leave the plaster on for one night, for this will help eradicate it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a healing ointment for generating flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and in many cases it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, you should administer cauterization with hot water. Take a small tube made of iron or other material shaped like a half moon, and place it over the thick matter; then pour a little hot water into the tube and hold it with your hand while rotating it completely, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the thick matter so that the hot water flows along the root of the thick matter. Wait for a short time after the application of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, as this will help eradicate the thick matter with its roots.
And thus you should approach each one that you may come upon all of which naturally in the body.
And approach the care of those pus that the roots of the nails are eradicated with those remedies which the flesh generates.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for trembling.
When you encounter any trembling due to irritation in the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then appropriate that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and at the feet of the patient, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and the health hastens to overcome the illness.
Chapter LIV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When in the body there appear accidental swellings and sores that are caused by thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is appropriate to be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended over fire; or with the long thorns of the erestologia plant; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if it does not occur as expected, the excess is disrupted by doing so, and heals from it.
However, it must be done near evacuation or phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On cauterization of blood flow caused by an accidental cut to an artery.
If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is due to the disease that caused it before, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy that.
When such a thing happens, quickly take your finger and place it over the opening of the artery, and press on it so tightly that the blood flow stops below your finger, and does not escape.
And then place in the fire some small and large cauteries made of olive wood, many of them, and blow on them until they are lit.
And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and disease in which the artery is ruptured, and place it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the blood is sealed and restricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and make sure it does not cause other harm.
Know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrain the blood at that time, especially if the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or perform ligation when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities beyond it are burned and thus the blood is restrained; or apply a bandage soaked in strong vinegar or some other binding agent; or place them on medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and strengthen this with a pillow and proper constriction.
He who administers proper restraint with bandages and compression using cloths or by placing them in positions away from burning causes and similar risks should do so carefully and slowly.
If one must act and no doctor or medicine is present, then gently press the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the strong constriction inside so that the blood stops flowing from the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over the artery until it becomes congealed and thickened; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On incisions and punctures and wind tumors and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
In the first chapter, we have already discussed all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes for it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head over the body.
In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may be praised for it, at the time concerning what he has asked.
And before I begin this, note, son, that in this chapter it is by fear what is in the first chapter about cautery.
And for that which is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times evacuation of what is harmful to life depends on the aspersio of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a foreign body or incision of a stone and things similar to these. And with all of those things accompany fear and trembling, and in the most of their danger death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall that which is despair, for some times cases depend on your methods of dealing with people and many methods of treating illnesses. And among them are some who become angry with their illness and are close to death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and this illness brings fear which signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," while their actual illness is deadly.
And therefore it is not right for you to consent to one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over that unless proper knowledge certain verifies it for you, and by which a commendable outcome succeeds.
For the treatment of all your patients, make predictions and indications about which one is likely to be cured, for in that you will have assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your minds and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that what you ask for and of which you have need may be made clear to you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often afflicts children after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it appeared to me that there was no cure for them.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move because of the size of his head, and before long the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either aggregated between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the cranium.
For when the operation is to be performed and the humidity lies between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, at that time you should make an incision in the middle part of the head along its length, and let this cleft run for about two nights where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spatum:
And if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then at this point there are two clefts made in this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head swollen all around and the fluid is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the edges but not in the middle where it is hidden. You should make three incisions in the middle part of the head according to this method:
And immediately after the incision, extract all the moisture; then dress the clefts with cloth and wool; afterwards apply ointment made of oil and wine over it from the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and herbs, and dress the head symmetrically; eat food that is dry with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to where the incision should be made according to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of fluid, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and ensure flows of blood and prolong the treatment by that flow of blood for evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When I proceed to the treatment of catarrhs or rheums in the legs or feet, and if it is ancient, and do not rely on that for the cure with medicines, then the last cure in this case is at the beginning of those two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you wish to cut those that the patient shows his head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear; and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth; and then press to find the pulse; and the locations of each near the areas which are close to the ears, and they are hidden in some people.
And then press on the artery with your finger, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel at an angle of incision penetrating to the bone, and this should be done along the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where the incisions are from above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when an artery is cut the blood comes out in a pulsating ejection, which flows out frequently.
If the artery does not appear at the incision site, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then mark with a probe, and make it enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let is a quantity of wine one uncia, and more or less according to how much appears of the patient's constitution and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the condition, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, now incise that so it does not become an abscess due to cauterization.
And then support the swelling with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then treat it with applications until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the limbs.
When it happens that someone suffers from acute migraines or sharp headaches due to excessive moisture in the body and similar qualities in the veins of the limbs, or if these conditions are very severe and do not respond to treatment with medical remedies, then we resort to bloodletting from the arteries in the limbs or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is that the patient shaves the hair where it is on the limbs; and understand the artery that appears on the limb as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in only a few people due to the strength of friction.
And if it is hidden, then tie the neck of the diseased area with some cloth; and afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until it becomes apparent to you clearly. And now take the spatum, which has this form: And then carefully peel the membrane with ease until you reach the artery; and then place it where it belongs and extract it from the parts above until you have removed it from the membrane and reveal the tunics that are beneath it, from all sides.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which the ends need to be lengthened or contracted, and there will not be any flow of blood, for if they are not cut as such, the blood will not rise properly.
And then remove one ounce of blood up to three ounces.
And if the artery is large, then make sure to tie it in two places with a double strong thread of flax or with long cords, and do not allow it to rot before the consolidation of the wound and thus cause a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the ends are cut, and this will serve as the place of that work.
And it is better if the patient has a fever or is of heated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that aid in finishing off humidity, and therefore it is better in such cases.
And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries that people prepare the place as if for an old wound, and they should be laid on decently prepared poultices, and nearby there should be ready dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and warm applications within so that it may heal.
And if during the procedure blood starts flowing from the artery, then you should act to constrict that blood, either with cautery or by filling the place as for a wound, and tighten your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then press your thumb on the place until the blood is constricted, and wrap the area with water of strong coldness until the pain subsides, and tighten it as needed.
And what is more important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you mark the two places with a tenta, and then place some fire between them until it reaches the bone and divides the vein into two places, so that you can stretch what is between its extremities, as they are not completely consolidated with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives should be exemplary. However, if you make them slightly less sharp than two knives, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two knives, they may approach each fracture too quickly and cut through the flesh too rapidly.
Thus, when there is swelling in those areas, the heat of the flame is applied to them and the flesh is quickly excised.
And this work is better than all other works and more swift.
And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects those veins which run over the top of the head, and if you do not find any cause for treatment with medicine in this matter, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and a sensation as if ants were moving is felt on their forehead, and their eyes from such pain become extremely weakened, they weep so much that even their eyelashes can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. In this kind of operation, ancient practitioners used harsh methods in treating these conditions, and did not consider this treatment to be without suffering.
And you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly behind the movement of the tears which flow through the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut into the arteries that run on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three of those adjusted.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth with which you can absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part between the plates to the second incision. Excise from that all the tissue which is between two incisions with the knife which is over the bone, and then do this for the middle incision to the second incision. And then stretch it with this spatula and insert into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp edge on the flesh adjacent to the tissue, and the flat edge within the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure, and dissect with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But let the incision continue to where it appears in the tissue, and then do this in the middle fissure to the other fissure.
And when the amount of bleeding is equal, press the places of the collected blood clots.
And then place in each fissure a piece of old wood charcoal, and place over them powders soaked in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, and bandages so that no abscess forms.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or chamomile, and then treat it with an ointment of basil and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of ascending humors from the internal parts of the head.
When you encounter acute and continuous bleeding through catharsis, and often the humors of the patient are weak and small, and their condition indicates debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and hair loss from the area, and in front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come but from veins in the internal parts.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at its midpoint, a small one lengthwise (beginning from the left temple towards the right temple; and this cut should go through the bone; extend your hand between the temples, which are slightly above the place of chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then apply between the two edges of the incision with old lint or strips of cloth. And then apply above it powders enclosed in oil to ensure that no harmful swelling or abscess occurs.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, now cover it so that it scabs over where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture to apply to these wounds until the flesh is regenerated.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant such as chaff or beans, or it is fluid-like such as water and sour wine or their equivalents, or it is some kind of animal.
And therefore, when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those causes that do not adhere but rather get stuck in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, at that moment drop some substance like violet oil or cumin into it, and shortly after administer its extraction with cold compresses, and make them sneeze by causing a runny nose due to the act of sneezing. And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards towards the sides, as moving it in this way often helps with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with an instrument called a gentle epistome, which has the following form:
And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a gentle force of several attempts.
And therefore, if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing but the tube enters. From a nearby extract of the treatise on veins with a strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a thin piece of cloth or some prepared material with which birds are usually caught, and place that small amount at the end of the vein, and then wrap that area properly paused. And then insert it into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
And if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to cut that area before it becomes an abscess, boil, or spasm.
And the method of cutting that area is to start by puncturing the vein called sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner appropriate for it, and then make a small incision between your fingers and turn the ear towards the upper parts, and make a slight cut at the edge of the ear in the place most suitable for it. And let the cut be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is located, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause within the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed accordingly, then take fine powder according to this form: and administer the removal of that growth which is lodged in the ear.
If you do not think that it has already been moistened by the vapor from the lamp, place it in several pieces, and press extracts onto them either at the incisions or with fine gloves, as we have said before, for this is a gentle way of applying the extract.
In the water that has entered into the ear, it is convenient for the patient to use sneezing as a condition at the beginning, and fill his hollowed-out ear with some old cotton, and keep this over the ear in which the water is. If it is thereby expelled, it is good; but if not, now take small stones or lead pieces according to the length of one's finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of these into the channel of his ear and jump on that side with a part of his body, and strike upon the stone inside the ear with another stone. Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled.
Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or wool, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over a fire until most of it is burned.
And place another piece of wool in it and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and stir it with a tube as was said above about the extracting stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, proceed as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with gloves and incisions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that enter the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not compromise your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with gentle movements or with fine suction tubes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow below and wide above, which has this shape: And insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that will suffice for the patient; and then suck strongly with that tube several times until all the worms are removed.
But if you do not follow this method, then plug and seal around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, which you will find described in the chapter on distillations.
And use the application with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape: And make that of silver or iron, narrow below, with a small hole, and flat above.
And it should be like a plunger that fits snugly within the hollow part of the tube where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its end neatly with cloth, then pour oil into the hollow part of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear —, then insert the reed with the wrapped end above and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the hollow part of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
Let it be soaked in oil which has already been heated over fire a little. And be careful that the reason why you will distill into the ear is not too harsh, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperfored, and this also happens in some adults, where there is an obstruction in the ear canal due to a growth or flesh; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is located outside.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, is in the majority of cases difficult to treat.
And in that case where you can see clearly, it is necessary to expose the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obstruction clearly, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
If the tip of it where it is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be double-edged so as not to cause damage to the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the flesh within.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear.
And if you feel an obstruction with what the patient finds easy to reach due to difficulty in hearing, try to force the obstruction out with what is easily accessible; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth dipped in the quantity appropriate to the size of the wound, which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the injury; or take something that can be soaked in water and powdered with finely ground herbs and use it; and if you see the ear already inflamed, then remove what was there and replace it with something wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the inflammation subsides; and afterward treat it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids are sometimes moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have those (boils) ready in small containers or jars, and then incise them with the edge of their roots, and afterward apply finely powdered herbs to the areas.
If there is pain and a flow of blood from the veins, then at that hour you should cauterize those places which are suitable for cauterization under the clavicle.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for an ailment that affects the eyelids.
Wounds that remain in the eyelids due to some cause similar to a severe condition in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called severe.
And it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the eyelid both above and below.
Therefore, the treatment for this is to consider at that moment whether the severity arises from what appears on the surface of the eyelid and affects it entirely; and the cause of this is slight.
Therefore, apply something over that area along the length of the fissure, and then carefully remove it entirely with ease until it is evacuated, and then suspend it with an ointment and bandage it.
And if the condition is severe, then you should adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is minor, no harm will come to you from that because the warmth of treatment restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should lift the surface inwardly so that the eyelid suspends the swelling and presses it from all sides; and if the eyelid because of this incision is stretched out, do not attribute this to any cause.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be healed.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment around the eye above the wound.
Axcirnath is a condition that arises in the layers of the eyelid above, and it occurs more commonly in children. It aggravates their wounds and causes them to suffer from catarrh due to death; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously collect in their eyes.
And because of this, you see them pressing their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces pressed down; and above their lower eyelids are wet eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the impending formation of acirnath is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acirnath within them.
And there is a method of operation for when the patient rests their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place it on that area and press with your fingers all around so that acernath aggregates in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the opening using spatum incident along the latitude, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in flavotomy.
In the middle of the incision which you make in the bone, proceed until you reach the marrow, for in major dislocations you will find marrow by means of a fracture according to the form of white fat.
Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloths between your said parts and roll it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to probe too deeply into the fracture so that you do not reach the brain, and avoid doing so.
But if the blood does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, then probe gently into the fracture until you encounter blood; and then extract it as we have said; and subsequently dip cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the area and sprinkle with powder.
And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the fracture so that what remains will absorb this humidity.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the brain.
When there are white patches among the eyelashes that grow below the natural lashes and become old, these affect the brain and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which can lead to brain damage known as "tactinir del huel." Treatment is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or using sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed through incision and suturing; or by means of tubes, as I will explain.
Therefore, when you place the head of the patient in such a position; turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the one which contains pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the pus from above, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where hair grows — near the hair, and draw out the pus to the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that part with the ray.
And then probe in the part inside of the eyelid below the hair towards the spatum incident to the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the pus and place below the eyelid small particles of wood or cloth, and then bandage over the eyelid with a piece of cloth, and it should be like the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
However, it must be the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, since there are those whom you need to incise from the eyelid a great quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then probe with the probe on both lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure near the natural hair is as thick as that of the king.
And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the chain, and then excoriate that completely, and then apply to the wound both lips with wool grease, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the pus on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you wish to do this, and otherwise, do not worry.
About four days after sewing up the intestines, start the cure with this liquid.
And if you wish, treat the wound without suturing it, and cure that with a liquid that dries and contracts, since the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus; but suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
However, let there be careful attention regarding the condition, and it is of good practice, and there should not be fear in it.
And there is another method for treating it, and it involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small instruments shaped according to this form:
But if it is not possible to use those instruments, take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the figure, then insert the other needle near the larger tear duct, and the second near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between these needles the eyelids evenly, and then lift your hand in an even motion, lifting the entire marked area as we have recommended.
And then align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs from your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
And sometimes you will find that the eyelid has its hairs turned back; then it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incision; but suturing in such cases is more artificial.
To make a reed needle according to this form: And when you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside as I have recounted; then by art make two reeds or two slender sticks whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which shall be slighter than the width of the pupil. And you have already cut at the extremities of each partition, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the reeds in each partition tightly, and leave it for several days, because the concretion from the constriction will die off and be discarded and will dry up until it falls off by itself.
But if it is delayed, now break it with tweezers, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Then when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the threads do not sting.
And this is the form of two reeds that you will make according to this form: and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye with a Needle When the Hair is Firmly Embedded.
When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough, that sting the eyes, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in the hair root finely and gently, and then adjust the ends of it carefully and hold each one in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be equal to the quantity of one palm.
And then prepare another fine thread below it briefly, and use the ends of that one if you wish.
And then place the malice of its head in your hand, and do it near the sun so that your work may be clear, for this is a subtle and intricate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be transplanted, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you remove it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into the recipient site, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand gently so that the hair is moved into place on the recipient site on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled on the recipient site and the hair does not move into place, pull the recipient site towards the thread that you have prepared with it, so that it moves into place from the excess trauma.
And look at it with the eye, for now you will pull the recipient site and the thread, and tie each one securely, and leave the ties for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, now you should take one long hair from among the natural hairs and place it there, or leave it so that it grows in some space near by, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When an abscess occurs in the eye, and it is contracted when the eyelid is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or cauterizations, it is called leporine. This kind of abscess can be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar malpractices.
The method of the operation is such that you should cut open that consolidation and separate its lips, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it, because if you do this, the abscess will return with pus worse than before, no matter how much time passes.
Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and apply the water in which its leaves and seeds have been boiled, or juice from dill, which should be mixed with some oil to make it liquid, then immerse the cloth in this mixture and use it for treatment.
The treasure of your treatment is that you should puncture any part that has not yet healed according to the form it had at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of an abscess that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of ehacrati which is done on the eyelid below.
This ehacrati which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly named ehacrati; and it can be either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is caused by a plague or a tear or cauterization or other similar reasons.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal bone to the right lacrimal bone, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and cut along with the needle using a broad spatula. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a rod and place it in the incised figure, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close both openings on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two openings be at two corners of the incision you have made where they meet, and let their corner form a shape when they come together.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the quantity of its width below, what shrinks the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those as we have said regarding softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if through excision, incision, or cautery you have reached the place where a fissure, suture, or cauterization is needed, then you should make a flat incision above the eyelashes as has been demonstrated previously. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of excisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as it is prepared in the form of an excision, and that one is in the form of various shapes.
And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should introduce a probe below the eyelid, elevate it with it, or extend it to the root.
And then you should incise the adherence with a fine probe, which should not be sharp at its tip, holding it bluntly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the probe gently so as not to damage the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form, and ensuring that the entire adherence is healed.
And you should put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a clean instrument, and place on the wound linen infused in egg white, and after the third day use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the nail and on the swelling of the flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, for it is either nervous, and resembles a hard transparent shell; or non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched by iron does not easily take any impression, is severed and the iron is not imbedded in it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger tear duct gradually covering the eye and preventing light and the movement of the eye.
But the method of working in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then opens his eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail with slight duplication and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or oxhair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong glue, and duplicate the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and rub against the hair the edge of the nail which covers the pupil. And so you should follow with the skin to the rear part of it.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally without which, due to that incision, it would not become subject to continuous tearing.
And sometimes apply ointment to the area that has been spread out or with honey, as we have said, and then remove it with a lion-shaped spatula, which is shaped like this:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, place a little powdered salt or clean linen made of silk in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with whatever is needed until it heals.
And if the ointment does not cause irritation and you cannot insert a needle, nor is it placed on that area, then this type of ointment is treated with medicines, and it heals in this way as mentioned and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the wound of the patient and take a fine, sharp spatula in the shape as follows: with delicacy. And if you find that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your own saliva on the wound made of silk or clean cloth or powdered salt, and dress the wound for another day.
And then proceed with the operation such that everything inside it is cleaned out, except for the opposite abscess which is on the other side; at that time you leave that one alone and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
And then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is painful in the eye to a great degree, should be suspended at once; and incise part of that one, and do not complete the incision so as not to incise the flow of tears.
And then apply a distilled liquid made of rose and sinjer (a type of oil or ointment) to the lacrimal region until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of styes and of what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
In some cases on the eyes of some people, flesh grows, and it is raised until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and severely pulls the eyelids apart in various parts and is assembled like a small turret.
The operation there is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at once appropriately, and with this use forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scissors, and be careful not to scratch the eye during your operation.
And your incision should be with the scalpel we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small tweezers with which hair is plucked, depending on the form that will come next according to this chapter.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is swollen, now fill the wound with finely crushed salt or sprinkle on red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and apply over it a white cloth to ensure protection from abscesses and cautery.
And if any cause arises to guard against bleeding and the wound is in danger of becoming cauterized, and you fear an abscess from cautery, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever remedy will cure it, and subsequently proceed with the operation once again as soon as it has healed, and similarly handle the flesh around this type of wound.
However, you should be cautious about removing all healing from the wound naturally or accidentally; use tools of iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Pus in the Wound.
Pus comes from red veins that are swollen over the wound and prohibit its healing, and the wound will become inflamed over a length of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two seconds according to your discretion; and let that pressing be gentle and gradual as follows:
or press for two ounces gradually in one action according to this method:
And bind those veins with fine ligatures, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour until you see those veins become empty and be turned back.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood pure green or red herbs because of their sharpness to dissolve what is hardened in the body.
But if this is not possible for you to do at that hour, then apply everything with what alleviates his pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of no abscess forming.
And then repeat upon him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp burning medicine as described and it has not healed, then do not let it remain unattended but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the humidity that is within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
He is called the rough head, and it is made of horn, and its head is round just like this one which is made with points by puncturing with a lime or al-iskhafat with subtle punctures (as in the following form).
Place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said tissues, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the core of the unhealthy tissue has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed or forming an abscess, and no accident occurs, then you know that it has healed.
And if not, now it is not about generating anything new but reducing the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone either with force or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you place three pieces in this form:
Let the extremity of the iron be triangular, and the shaft of the iron be gradually narrowed into the extremity just as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little, and then rotate your hand around the three pieces until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the pain because you will notice air escaping when you press it.
Now treat the area with astringent and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place become hardened, at that moment the matter which was discharged to the surroundings returns to the nose, thus it is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or diminution occurs to the vision, then it is appropriate to treat the patient, and subsequently follow them; then apply windy plasters to the head without incision and let it drain well through suction; and afterward, apply a liniment on the eye made of aloes, rose petals, myrtle berries, and sarcocolla; then strengthen the plaster over the eye using powdered substances.
And the method for making the powders is to take linen cloths made of the said substances, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make the powder from these materials.
And then apply those one over the other according to the amount the eye requires. And then apply a hard cloth with tight binding over them; and repeat the plasters and suction without incision; then remove the plasters and let the eye be tightly bandaged day and night.
But if the ligature becomes loose during this time, then it should be made tight again.
And then remove the ligature day and night as we have said.
And if you see the eye already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders, binding, and plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uvea.
When you discover disruption in the uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person as described. If you wish to incise this, then during the operation proceed as we have recounted: insert the needle at the edge of the uvea from below upwards, and subsequently place another needle where the double thread is, near the lacrimal area; allow one needle to penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position. Then, incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvea along the course of the needle, and strengthen this motion.
Then withdraw the needle and apply it to the prepared lamb’s fleece soaked in egg white, and allow it to remain there until the thread is with the uvea.
Then treat the wound with what comforts it until the injury is healed.
And sometimes it is advisable to gather from all sides with a circular piece of cloth around the wound for a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine probe that reaches the base of the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow out, and the wound will soon descend.
Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of contusions.
This illness, called alconati, is not actually water descending on the wound but rather a condition that affects the wound in a manner similar to it.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
But if the drainage to the sinus with water as we have said does not happen, now make the patient sit and take a thin spatula and apply it over the pannicular area, close to the junction of the conjunctiva and corneal tunic at the limbus, so that the pus is discharged.
Once it is discharged, now you should apply hot water in which honey has been mixed or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which are suitable for piercing, as explained earlier, now do so according to the patient's condition.
Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and pull the affected eye with gentle force.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected eye if the water is in the left eye; or use your right hand if it is the right eye.
And then with your right hand take an almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the limbus along the thickness of the white of the eye from the side of the smallest tear duct, and then press the almond gently while moving your hand around it.
And so proceed to the white of the eye, and feel that the almond is already reached because it is round.
And measure the path from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, which is the rim of the eye; for you will see that through the pupil with the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And so place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down into another area nearby, and if the fluid descends immediately, you will see the defect on which his vision depends immediately, and the almond in its eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you should pull that other area before the almond is displaced.
And when it has settled and does not descend, now you extract the almond with ease, and turn your hand little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in the fluid and wash the eye thoroughly with it; and then place over the eye a piece of cloth or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white.
But we and those of our time place over it a dressing soaked in egg white.
And if the almond does not obey and enter the instrument of the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, which has this form:
And so pierce with that the conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the track, until you make a way for the almond to move.
And here he enters the almond as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for the operation by having them sleep on their back in a dark room, and prevent any movements.
And pause in the nature of the water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to its condition on the third day.
And then untie it in that dark room and show the patient the wound, explain some causes to them, and then rebandage it on day seven.
And do not do this during the hour of healing or soon after the infusion. Handle this so that the water can flow freely and quickly due to great and strong attention.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should untie the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Now you should cover the wound and pause on its surface for several days through which the healing occurs, keeping it in a dark room.
And then gradually move them from that room and converse with them about their condition.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from observation several times, and now you should be confident about the operation.
And I have come to us from some of those among whom it is customary, and some said that they make fire in the Airac [orifice] when it has been perforated through which water flows.
But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of orifices so that those who are unaware of them may understand them:
And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are crafted with this subtlety in a triangular shape, the sharp end exactly as it is formed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that are attached, among which there is one cause that resembles a spider web of heavy threads, or a water polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a water creature. And from it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is also flesh that resembles a lion's but not of a dark color.
Therefore, for the one who has these flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is advisable to make the patient sit between your hands and place it in the sun, and starve the nostrils of them, and apply poultices occasionally to those flesh growths. And then extract that from the inner parts, and then carefully cut away what you have identified of those parts with a sharp, subtle spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason by which excision is possible, at that time remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that nothing remains. If the master decides to treat an abscess or ulcer with cautery, then pause at that which is necessary; or if it is one of malignant ulcers, then cut and cauterize that part where the blood vessels have been divided and all cavities are drained.
And if it is necessary to incise near the nose at a place where there is blood or pus. If the nose is swollen and the process of moisture extends into the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as needed, then you will know that deep within there is flesh that has remained on the surplus bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Therefore, it is necessary to insert some thick substance into the place where there is swelling, and use small pieces of cloth, placing an amount equal to the width of a finger or less between each piece, and create openings so that one end of the substance can be placed in the nose either with a probe or for another reason that is possible.
And after this has been done, draw the smell into the passages of the nose so that it settles on his sense of smell, for well-trained people perform this action as children do in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending outside the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and subsequently apply a piece of flesh over the cloth that covers the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the cloths around the substance.
From the root extract the essence, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a tube, and do this for three days or more until it consumes all that is around the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or gold, which should resemble a small tube, like a small trumpet, and the opening similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
About the veins in the extremities of the nose.
Most bruises occur in the extremities of the nose, and they are magnified and treated within a few days until such time as it is seen fit to attend to them.
And for this reason, you should address it at the beginning of its appearance and treat all of it. And then focus on the place where you cauterize or use medicinal remedies that burn, which are applied there.
But if the treatment is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, dark in color, and insensitive. At this point, do not touch it with an iron instrument, as doing so might cause severe damage to the one performing the procedure; for many injuries occur due to such careless handling of the condition.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not dark in color, and it is possible to treat it at any location without fear, then evacuate the pus and incise it without hesitation, and care for the area with remedies that dry and heal until it is fully healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is disrupted by plague or similar causes.
Know that when a disruption in continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few people are skilled in such an operation.
Therefore, when dealing with any cause of this nature, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to blood loss. Then, you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches and subsequently care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated and each one is made whole, now you must scrape each part of its apparent edge until it becomes clean. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle powder of dragon’s blood and thrice daily apply a plaster of mastic or some other consolidating plaster. Let that lie for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus has ceased to discharge, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
The method of the suture is that you add the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suture of the abdomen, or you may join the wound of continuity with thread as you see fit.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their inner parts.
Often in some men in the inner parts of their lips there appear certain hard abscesses resembling flesh of mice, and some of them are smaller and some larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and cut open each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you have made an incision, fill the place with finely shredded wool until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of flesh attached to the gums.
In many cases there appears on the gum flesh attached to which the ancients gave the name albulus; then you should suspend that part with a sponge or have in your hand a sponge and incise that area down to its base, and allow the pus to run out or the blood.
And then apply to the wound powder that is astringent or excitative.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again secondarily, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth of both jaws and between the gums closely attached there are rough, sharp edges, lumps, and some areas are blackened and appear green or yellow, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth lumpy.
And therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head on your knees, and extract the teeth in which such rough edges appear and cause grittiness so that none of them remain, and this will remove the blackness and greenish discoloration and other issues so that they are cleansed.
If this can be done at the beginning of the extraction, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final stage as you wish.
And know that teeth have need of various tools of different forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And because the razors are of the kind with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the extraction of teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with all gentleness and delay in total extraction, for there is no remedy that can replace the root once it is extracted, since it is a substance sublime within which makes excuse for the extraction of it.
But when the necessity forces you to extract that tooth, you must firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives and leads one to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, but then the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen through the operations of surgeons.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth. Once you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum entirely, and then take it out using your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
And then hold firmly with strong fingers for good traction or firm grasp, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that he is well held without discomfort, and then extract the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not dislodged, then take one of those instruments and place it there from all sides with ease and exert effort to remove it just as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you should wrap that part in cloth and secure it with a thin thread so that it does not break during your compression on that side holding it.
And you should act carefully during the incision around all parts of the gum and guard with your strength that you do not break or damage it, and return to the problem for the sake of improving it so that it is better than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and daring attempts at extraction without administering what we have recommended; for many times this leads to serious conditions in patients, which are much harder to treat, and the roots of them become completely or partially destroyed, or you may extract it along with some bones of the mandible as many times has been testified.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with cold water or warm salt water.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as it often happens, then take some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and subtle holders with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you need to operate with them.
Let them be such as you use for rough handling when straining them, that they may not be folded, but let their extremities be short.
Let them be made of Indian iron, tapering towards the ends, and at the ends let there be teeth which enter into each other and strain by strong compression, and sometimes the ends of these should have the shape of a bird’s beak called ciconia, that is, a heron, and they should be very strong for constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from broken jaws.
When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is broken for some reason, it is necessary to wait and place something over the affected area for one or two days until the site becomes softened; then use tools with ends shaped like those of a bird’s beak called ciconia or heron, which resemble the forceps:
The ends of these should be made like the teeth of a file or rasp.
And if it does not obey when you try with these forceps or pincers, then you must probe around the root and remove all the flesh, and insert an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And let it have a short thick end, and do not insert it too far so that it does not break.
Then if the root is exposed by this method, it is good; and if not, assist with these other instruments of which the forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
And here is how to use this instrument, which has two edges, whose form is as follows: and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because this tool is made specifically for that purpose, and this is its form:
of the twisted or bent triangular end, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hidden such that it cannot be grasped.
And another skill is to know the instruments for working on teeth, which are similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to the forms of different kinds.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is grasped, or if you need to extract them, then place a proper cure upon it with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the procedure whose form is as follows:
And it should have some thickness gradually increasing, and it should be tightly held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is extracted; afterwards, restore the place with suitable medicines.
But if there is a small decay in the bone, then remove that which is decayed and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and especially when they affect women, and particularly those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to file or apply any substance to it, then you must extract it. But if it is not attached to another tooth, at that time you incise it with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's tusk, and it is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
And ensure your incision is such that when you incise it, over the course of several days due to the hardness of the tooth, it does not become connected to other teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth suitable for filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this shape:
And let it be entirely made of Indian iron and grind it appropriately; it should have small pointed teeth like the file on which needles are made. With this, file the tooth little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not become connected to another tooth and cause harm. And at the end, smooth it with a linen cloth, and polish it with razors.
And if it is a tooth where part of it is broken and you touch the tongue, then you should file down the inside so that the roughness of that fragment is smoothed out and evened, and fill it in so that the tongue does not injure itself nor does speech become impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of defective teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are damaged by impact or displacement due to an accident or fall, and the patient cannot bite properly as a result, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further damage, you should restore those strong teeth with gold and not silver, because silver can tarnish over time, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of the restoration is that you take the filling and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then build up with twists of the filling material between one or more defective teeth until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth. And then continue the restoration back to the part where you started, and ensure your work is done with ease and skill so that it is not defective.
And when you place the filling, ensure that your handling of the gold or silver does not damage the roots of the teeth.
And then trim the excess filling material with forceps or scissors, and shape it carefully in each place. Convert and conceal these parts between the healthy tooth and the defective one so that they do not injure the tongue. And then file that area as smoothly as a Roman coin.
But if it is loose or broken, repair that or those parts with additional filling material in such a way at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two crooked teeth, as you will see these diagrams:
And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the placement of each in their places, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they become straight.
And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a substitute is made from some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and remains and serves for that long.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the bandage which is applied to the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which is below the tongue sometimes is natural and one is born with it, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, his head being in this position; and raise his tongue, and then cut that ligament along its length as far as it separates the tongue from its base.
But if there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should cut through it along its length until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the skin so that you do not sever the arteries and cause a flow of blood.
After washing the residue of the incision with water or vinegar or water and a cloth, place linen below the tongue; this is done so that the bad odor from under the tongue does not spread elsewhere.
If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the spot with a hot iron, which is suitable for this purpose. And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a sublingual cyst.
Sometimes, below the tongue, there appears a swelling resembling a small abscess that prevents the tongue from performing its normal function; and it often enlarges to the point of filling the mouth.
The procedure is to open the mouth wide in front of a light source and examine the swelling.
And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, to which the swelling does not respond to touch, then do not attempt to treat it forcefully.
And if it is inclined to a whitish color and appears moist, then you should proceed with the operation, cut it with a fine scalpel, and cut it completely; and if blood flows during your procedure, then place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which helps to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work once you have completed the procedure, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other remedies as needed until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the extraction of an abscess from both ears and of that which is near the cheekbone and of other abscesses.
When I find in the cheekbone a collection of glands that are somewhat assembled and appear outside, which are called the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; instead, let it remain inside until it is ripe, and then either you will extract it or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is subtle, then that one should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already begun to heal after being treated with rest or if it has diminished in any way; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head to the side, and examine the mouth of the abscess, and the assistant takes between their fingers from below an instrument made of noble material, which has the following form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as thin as a knife.
When you press with that instrument and the abscess is shown to you, place your finger carefully over it, then take some material and insert it into the opening, and pull it apart as much as you can. Other than that, if you wish to cut any cause of the tunics, and appropriately incise with the instrument which has this form:
Other than that, if you wish to cut any cause of the tunics, and appropriately incise with the instrument which has this form: and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of this one are curved, so that the opening of each of these is in line with the other, sharp, which is made of iron inside.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise with a scalpel which has this form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then the wound should be cleansed with water.
But if there is bleeding, cleanse it with water from the decoction of lemon peel or mint leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then proceed to treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes these appear in the groin or as abscesses near those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two cuts similarly.
And I once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her groin, which was dark in color and painful to the touch, causing it to close up the area of the groin, and she breathed through a narrow passage. She had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she would have been near death if I had not intervened within one day or two.
And the abscess had become so inflamed that it had formed two channels through which it discharged through two openings.
Then I cut it surgically and placed it in one of their vessels, and pulled that out, and from there the larger portion was removed, and then I incised that where I understood the other part to be joined, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the vessel in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then the woman was completely cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised as it became prolonged.
Then I applied something and cauterized the wound of it, then suddenly due to addiction; and after that I wandered around and did not know what God had done for me at that time.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
When one observes catarr in the breast, and it is abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, it is then called a bubba.
But when it is cured as we have described in the division, and your treatment does not conflict with that cure, and also sometimes there are abscesses that remain stubborn and subtle, then you should incise those that are aggregated and round. And if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt its incision because there is fear of malady in that case.
And when you see that according to the method which I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which shows its form and immediately place the incision in the new area, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two membranes.
And you must not incise it except as much as is naturally appropriate without addition, for if you incise too much, you will impair their speech.
And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use something to cauterize it without causing fear, and the method of cauterization involves only sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, then immediately press the tongue with the instrument which we have described, and subsequently take the water which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it there as a living cautery, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Let the extremity of the cautery on which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall on it due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of this falls onto it and causes harm.
And then take the instrument with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for about a quarter of an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and then leave it there until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after cauterizing, clean around the grape with cotton soaked in a bordering solution, and modify what is around it with that which is from the medicine, and wash it with water and soap, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and cure it internally according to the remedies until it is healed.
And this particular method of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting in terms of avoiding fear.
In some cases, the small grape is cured with something that cauterizes and incises more gently. It is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take wax, hyssop, thyme, rue, Arabian scammony, chamomile, and similar herbs; mix all of these or some of them in a vessel, and soak them in sour wine, then boil it. The mixture should be heated moderately, and at the bottom of the vessel place a tray, on top of which rests an instrument made of wire in this manner; it can be made of silver or wire.
And place the end in the mouth of the vessel so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
Then proceed with those incisions into where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and it is not appropriate for you to do that, but rather you should wait for the formation and maturation of the abscess.
If this instrument is not present at your disposal, now take a reed and attach to it a piece of horn at one end, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the piece of horn prevents the flame from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the gums and of other causes.
Incisions are made in what adheres to the gum or a fish bone or any other cause.
Then you should extract what is apparent from that, which catches your eye, and after pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the gum.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the gum, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the gum will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and soak it firmly in vinegar, and then let the patient swallow that, as it reaches the place where thorns are, they will be easily expelled. Take one eel and boil it in honeyed vinegar, then remove its entrails and soak it; or take a rod and soak the medicine on it.
If you do not forget the causes that we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a curve that you can insert into its throat with ease.
And hold it with its head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the body or any part of the bones or spine, or cause harm to the patient.
But if the patient that inserts it is skilled, knowing the location of the cause attached and pulling with his hands on the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity prepared within until it is removed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Removal of a Leech Attached to the Throat.
When the leech has been treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider now the throat of the patient in the sunlight, since you have retracted the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we have recommended.
Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with your fingers carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it, now take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a heated iron on the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and falls off), and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
Take a clean cloth soaked in water and wipe the mouth with it, then rinse the mouth with that water; do not swallow any of it for any reason and let the water remain in the mouth for about an hour one after another as soon as you feel the water cool.
If this is not possible according to what we have recommended, then fumigate the malodor with cyprus or asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and he will recover.
And there is another method of operation in fumigation with that substance, which is to take an earthenware pot containing burning coals and cover it with a cover having a hole in the middle through which you attach the end of the instrument; then proceed with the fumigation from above; have him place his mouth at the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, for it will fall immediately upon feeling the smoke.
And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation as many times as necessary, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and give him salty and dry foods to eat, and let him not drink water. It is also necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is treated when it is seen in the throat; and it resembles forceps as you see them, but there is some curvature to it: which is placed in the throat, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it grips something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In this chapter is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for the incision and treatment of abscesses.
Abscesses are of various species and in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And they differ in the incision and treatment of them by two methods, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and by what we learn from their humidity.
And the second method is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in fleshy parts is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by surgical operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be incised until they have reached proper maturity or completion.
There are other abscesses that should be treated when they are crosswise and not fully mature according to their completion, such as those near joints, because an abscess near a joint prolongs the substance around it, corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb; or if it is near a principal member, delaying its incision until it matures could harm the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, you should not wait for full maturity before incising it to avoid the pus spreading into deeper parts of the buttocks and forming a fistula, or failing to heal properly. You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And you should know that it is ripe when there is relief from the pain and the cessation of fever, and soon after the reduction in heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should know that the piercing should be done at a place where pus is already present, below the abscess and from where pus will come for the healing of the elevation.
And the piercing should always be done through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the areas of the limbs or chest, and in places away from the joints, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in any place where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use piercing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, the best time is to postpone the piercing until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and causes excessive putrefaction, and makes the lips of the wound hardened and its depth greater.
But some abscesses should be pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires.
And you should administer a small piercing in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a larger and wider piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary to incise and open them, when they are made as described, if done at a time when it is already suitable, just like those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
And of those which are incised with a triangular section; and among these is one that is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of the angles.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to these.
But in the case where there is none such as their superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture that with a shallow puncture, or just make it flat.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this multiple times according to its severity until it heals.
And especially if the patient is a malnourished adult, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in debility, for their vital spirit is quickly resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and the patient may die easily, so you must operate carefully.
Take great care with this chapter and the puncture you perform on these abscesses; clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or if it is a flat section, in which case you should apply some of it or attach it to antiseptic cotton; and if the abscess is large and the cracks of the puncture are many, then you should place wax on each part until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it around the circumference, then you should cover it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you treat pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed with it and care for it according to what is needed of ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then at that hour administer water mixed with vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding for several applications.
If the bleeding continues, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders that I have recommended in various places of this our book and in its division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with vinegar and heated oil, and place those on the sites.
And if it is in summer, and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be applied for no more than three days, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer whatever is necessary for its cure until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction I have already described for each type of abscess in a particular manner.
Chapter XLIV.
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck, small abscesses may occur, along with various types of nodes that contain membranes; and these types vary in many ways.
And they are soft, and those that contain moisture similar to jelly. Of those which contain humidity similar to dust, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not oppose surgery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entroba, so that you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should cut that with a section according to its length for a superficial section according to this form:
And begin in the section of the line B to the line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then you should remove that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause for inflammation, as overly observed return if anything remains from that cause.
And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply that to the wound and leave it for another day, as with this you will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
And then repeat on that piece with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard lumps, then you should incise that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and grasp once between two lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If there is opposition from you regarding archery, now do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly, treat the suppurated boil with respect to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a suppurated boil is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these boils that occur on the head in some people who do not have much moisture throughout; the cause is that I once incised a boil on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be scraped off, and if anyone were to strike it, it would hurt them.
But in other boils that occur on the head, this is not the case with this chapter; similarly, for the boils that appear on children's heads and behind their ears, the section of all these should be superficial.
And avoid piercing those in the lower part so that the contents of the boil can drain into the lower parts.
And treat those as is appropriate for their healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur on the neck.
These boils often appear on the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin areas; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And for those that occur on the neck, and often they are generated between them, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have recounted.
There are species of these scrofulas that are movable, for only some of them are lithic, and of those only the ones containing humidity, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to be well disposed upon examination, of which the color of what is manifest is proper to the color of the scrofula, and it is localized to an entire part, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard, you should incise that one superficially on the side above the side below the body at the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that one from all sides, and extend two lips of the scrofula an inch, or inches if there is a need for them, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is safer that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And let the spatum not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to make an incision unnecessarily, or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you should cut a vein or artery during your operation, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders which promote blood flow, and staunch the wound, and leave that inside where the inflammation subsides and let the swelling be mollified and begin to soften. When the blood has clotted.
Therefore, return to your operation once you have completed it.
And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, and then incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, avoid cutting into that scrofula in its vicinity. And be careful to tie very tightly a ligature above it and let the diseased part fall off by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian soap, and then treat it.
And if you cut into the entire scrofula, then make sure to bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up immediately so that there is no room for any superfluous material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the scrofula, then you should understand that you need to cut into its root, remove it, and apply sutures as described.
And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where the site of maturation appears to you, and do not pierce deeper into what would reach the pus at the bottom of the abscess, as we have said.
And then proceed with the puncture, and apply applications and remedies appropriate for such cases, so that it dissolves what remains from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then treat it with a healing poultice until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the division of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and no one has seen such an incision made in our land.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men with a tendency to hemorrhage, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as this cannot be done safely because all the veins and major vessels are located here.
In those who have boils or abscesses in the mouth, throat, or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four if it is a small section across where it lies between two circles in quantity. The section should be made in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are thin there.
And if the surgeon is cautious, it is advisable to first extend the tissue of the throat for an inch and then make a cut until he reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then cut the bone as we have recommended; this is significant regarding the section of the canal by the membrane which is of that essence and by the division of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Thus when the hour is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the seam of the wound, and cut that one alone away from the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is to see that some of these abscesses have already blocked the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and the part of it is cut off, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason, it is commanded to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, during these hours, it is commanded to keep the wound open, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut into her own airway and incised part of the cartilage of the trachea, and I was called to treat her, and I heard the moaning as if it were the groan of the dying, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood that had flowed from the wound.
Thus I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the person's complexion, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental one happens in two ways, one of which resembles fatty knots, and the other way resembles an abscess caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that case there is fear. And it does not do to make an incision with iron except in the one that is small. And you should avoid that and investigate it as mentioned, and if you find it resembling fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with knots, and extract it using water or whatever contains oil and bursericlam; and if not, then thoroughly examine its nature, and afterwards treat the area with what is needed for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the section on the kinds of knots.
There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And so I recommend that you distinguish between a knot and an ulcer as this causes doubt.
Therefore, I say that an ulcer is characterized by heat and fever and intense pain inside it, where the bubbling of excess matter subsides; it is completed by putrefaction, which at this point stops the fever, pain, and heat.
But a knot is neither hot nor feverish nor painful, and it resembles the swelling behind the ear which is in its own place.
And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple, and it develops in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two kinds of them: dry ones that contain little moisture, and moist ones whose colors indicate humidity, as I describe in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, express it and investigate its origin at the beginning, which is called an intramuscular boil, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of investigation for abscesses and all knots is to take this swelling and introduce it into the most humid part of the area you find in the abscess, and you will gently move it until you know that the swelling has penetrated the tissue.
And subsequently, according to the size of the abscess, remove the introduced swelling and observe what has remained in its place.
And if the moisture is found to be flowing out, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial cut as I have described for other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the penetration, then you know that it is greasy.
And if it is dry and has the shape of a cross according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that part and scrape the wound from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sack if possible over it and extract that pus at the node.
But if it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should leave it as it is; then you will extract it gradually so that none of it remains for any reason.
For if any of it remains for any reason, whether little or much, the node will return accordingly.
And if you see that any part of it remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and clean the wound, and place over it something that will draw out the abscess cauterized, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the node is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is involved, then you should tie it off and fill the area with vitriol three times so that the wound heals and the boiling of the blood subsides; and after two or three days return to incising what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
Of these there are forms of the probes, and they come in three kinds, which are large among those, and medium-sized from them, and small from them.
The form of the large probe is as follows:
The form of the small probe is as follows:
They should be made of iron, of aluminum, with carefully rounded ends, so that they may be easily inserted into abscesses.
And these are the forms of the forceps, and they are called albaraz, and one of them is called berid.
And they come in three kinds, which are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large forceps is as follows:
The form of the medium-sized forceps is as follows:
The form of the small forceps is as follows:
They should be used for abscesses, excretions, fistulas, and buboes, as they are effective between the bones and for other causes.
And they should be made round, thick, and sharp, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn. They are made of citron wood, or horn, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
And the forceps are made with a black feather, which allows them to be used to extract fistula reflections that are present within them, as they can be gently guided by their lightness along those reflections.
And there are three types, some of which are long, and others medium, and the rest short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the great expert of lead:
Form of the medium expert of lead:
Form of the small expert of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of one type, some of which are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three types: large, few, and medium.
And their hooks are round, and they are of three types.
And of those, their hooks have two curves, and they are of three types.
And of those, their hooks have three curves, and they are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Form of a large hook having two curves: Shape of a medium-sized hook having two curves: Shape of a small hook having two curves:
Shape of a large hook having three curves:
Shape of a medium-sized hook having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and pared, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Shape of a large knife:
Shape of the medium-sized knife:
Shape of the small knife:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, but designed in such a way that during the paring of nodes there is no fear of cutting a vein or nerve. This allows the patient to be healed and find some tranquility due to the adjustment that occurs after the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
Let there be a piece of cloth and its likeness as rays are made by which alcohol is prepared.
And it is in the outer part marked with a point hidden by a spoon and in that curve keep the parts inside and outside as you see.
The shapes of the spoons, which are hidden among the said leaves for the incision of abscesses and I do not perceive the maladies, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of cupping instruments with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Let them be made of citrus rind, round with some length, and let them be thin.
And you should have these kinds of cupping instruments: large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other immediate treatment.
However, do not use them to cut off blood from every part of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas such as the joints of the arms and legs, and the joints of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and thighs, and similarly on other fleshy joints.
And sometimes these instruments are made of other small tools resembling fish scales in this form; with which the blood is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
For some incisions they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's nipples which are similar to those of women.
Some incisions should be made in the nipples of certain men when they begin to itch due to swelling, and subsequently the nipples become swollen and resemble those of women, and we should apply plasters.
And for that which you desire to perform, cut those as in a crescent shape according to this form, from the line B into the line G, and subsequently scrape off all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-generating medicine, and subsequently sew together the two lips of the wound, and take care until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened due to its size similarly as in women, then it should be cut into two parts with excess flesh removed, each in crescent sections like this figure, each part contained within the other such that one line encompasses the other according to this form from the line B and the line G. And subsequently scrape off the unevenness between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it remain until that which is rotten from the fat is corroded, and subsequently take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Appear in the Throat.
These abscesses that appear in the throat are among the types of scrofulous nodules, which are hard and covered with a skin that can be lifted.
Of these, only some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. And once all the pus inside the abscess has been evacuated, you then fill it with wool and leave it for another day.
And afterward the wound should be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type of nodes or scrofulous nodules, then you should proceed to incise it as we have described in the section on scrofulous nodules.
And if the infection has spread to the surrounding area, then apply cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the wound around it has healed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can determine whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated near the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound in that area.
And that which is from a vein is round on the surface of the body.
And a section on this abscess is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is dangerous, therefore it should be avoided, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
For that which is due to inflammation of the artery opening, divide in the long section carefully; and near make the incision with hooks and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, which I warn you about in the extraction of two arteries, which usually occur in the thighs.
And then press the place which is between two ligaments with a probe until the blood stops there, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and then treat it with appropriate remedies so that it may be healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess with caution, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you about in the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread's ends.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert a needle under the abscess below the point of incision; and place your fingers in four places.
Approach the abscess in its middle part when it is empty of what was inside; then incise the surface of the membrane, and leave what is attached to it.
And then press on the powder which you have mixed with wine and oil, and subsequently administer the treatment made with hot cloths and herbs until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when they are subjected to percussion or overexertion, and by analogy.
And it is done for it by the hands of assistants or at the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually troubled.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is in one of its major positions when it is tight with fever, and the patient appears dazed.
And it is not an abscess that aggregates at the front of the body, and therefore it is below the membrane, and it affects all parts equally and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need to wrap it in cloth, for it will easily lead to contraction.
Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a type of surgical knife). If it is a small abscess, open it with forceps and drain it completely.
And if it is large, then suspend it with incisions, and excise that part; and close the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the lip as it would occur on the abdomen.
Therefore, some people are afflicted in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, whose cause is subtle but the manifestation is large; and often the edges of these are reddened, and it can be small or may become greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one case where there were two parts in his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white parts with their fine cause.
And the edges of those parts were inverted and they would split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
And the procedure during the incision of such abscesses is that you should consider whether the malady is humid, and if the color of the abscess is white and humid, with a fine cause; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and in your presence cauterize it over fire, because in such cases the section must expel much blood; and if the blood flows out, cauterize that area.
And if the wound is small and fearsome, guard against probing with iron; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that part in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead until it is detached and falls off by itself.
But if the wound is of thick tissue, then in probing it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you can probe half of it, and then cauterize that part so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And be careful that you do not attempt to probe a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and appears bad, for such a wound is likely cancerous.
And here I will recall something regarding this matter.
Chapter LII.
On the Treatment of Hernias of the Navel.
A hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the belly, and in such cases, membranes or intestines protrude as they do in other ruptures; or it may be due to a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on the situation, or it may be caused by trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of membranes, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it does not cause much pain, and can appear in various situations. And if it is by exit from the bowel, then at that moment the situation of that thing which we have recounted differs greatly in degree, and when you press that thing with your fingers, it hides and returns; and quickly it is there, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and hard work.
And if due to moisture, then it is soft and does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then at that moment these signs appear with the abscess turning to a declining blackness.
And if it is due to flesh lacking moisture, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it penetrates in quantity.
And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in this case is that you consider at this moment whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or from a vein, or due to gas; now it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then it behooves you to order the patient to have their belly empty and be standing extended; then examine around the entire circumference of the navel with your hand; then order them to stand facing between your hands on their belly; then encircle the area with a strip of linen about an inch wide around the circumference of the navel over the spot you marked with your finger; then extend half of the abscess above toward both sides with a thick bandage or a cloth and tie it securely.
From the side of the swelling of the abscess spread over the bandage and insert your finger into that pus and search for the bag; and if you have found it or secured it by the bandage, now extract it immediately and urge the bag to the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, now take it with force; and cut into the excesses of it.
But if it is contrary to your art or vein, now surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong places and insert two needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a cross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it is thin and let it drain, and then treat it with water as needed until it heals.
And if the swelling of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, now it is necessary for you to conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with water as needed and to consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the treatment of ulcers.
We have already said in the division about the types of ulcers and in what manner they are to be treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to avoid ulceration; we have also discussed how ulcers arise and the care and caution required for their treatment.
And the ancients would say that sometimes crabs [tumors] are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, just as with the crab that is in the breasts or in the groin and similar parts assigned to remove all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and hard, do not try to deal with it yourself, for I cannot heal any such case nor have I seen another succeed, nor has anyone else reached that point.
And the operation on it is when it is necessary, as we have said, that you precede and let the patient rest and purge from black bile for several days, and then drain that area if there is obvious swelling.
And then prepare the patient for the procedure in which the operation is to take place, and afterwards apply hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then clean thoroughly with a good bandage to ensure proper healing so that there remains no cause for recurrence. And let the blood flow, and do not apply abscesses too quickly, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among those available to you.
But if it is contrary to let the thick blood flow and you must incise a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterwards treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
We have already described in the division the types of hydrophobia caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, as well as the treatment for them with medicines.
From that which is treated with iron, there is only the specialty of wound treatment, and it is not approached with iron to the specialty of drummers nor to the specialty of underarchs, for this is lethal.
And when you have already treated this specialty of tympanitic hydrops with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the sick person has become debilitated or is suffering from another illness of hydrops, just as if it were coughs or other chest or stomach ailments similar to those. Now be cautious that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
But if you see the sick person with abundant vitality, and in them there is no other illness but hydrops alone, and neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the sick person between your hands, and the minister presses their belly with his hand, expelling the water below the navel, and then take spatum spinos in this form:
it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like spatum; but there should be some small gradual narrowing in it, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thus harm them.
And then consider if the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in your incision you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the gall, then your incision must be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie because the superfluities would run to that place and foul it.
And then pierce with the instrument all along the wound, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the wound and the siphon, and you should excise that; and if the quantity is of one almond or so.
And then pierce the siphon so that pus can reach the empty space, which is where the water will be. And then extract that and insert an instrument which has the following form: and it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on both sides three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut like a feather, as you see.
And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then immediately press on the instrument, so that you evacuate only a moderate amount of fluid at once, for if you remove too much in one go, it can quickly lead to the patient's death due to resolution of their vital spirit, or it may hasten the approach of death.
But evacuate that in accordance with the strength of the patient and as indicated by the condition of the patient, the quality of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
Here is the translation:
And after that, take the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it thus, and extract a small quantity from the water, and do this for some days out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not run out of the water before its time.
But if you fear for the patient, and allow a large quantity of water to be extracted, then bury him in fine sand, and sprinkle moisture over him in baths, and let him remain in the sun for long periods; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize the stomach and the intestines after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted regarding what should be done previously.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not pierced (or it is twisted tightly or is not in its proper place).
Therefore, you should attempt to pierce it as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterwards.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over that area will not allow this needle to stay.
May that part where the wound is tight be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for enough days until it is enlarged.
May those in which the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that he was born with the urethra at the end of the penis shaft, so that he cannot urinate properly; and it is not for generation, because thus the semen cannot reach the main channel, and this is a laghid disease.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then with your left hand you extend the head of the penis forcefully, and cut off the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel, as one would cut a feather or shave some part, so that the middle part of it resembles the head of the penis and that the wound falls in its proper place as needed.
And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause the procedure until you have stopped the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the inflammation that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This inflammation often occurs in the penis and is a soft tissue prominence.
And one of these is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle substance and cut off that which holds the entire mole; then place upon it a poultice made with Egyptian myrrh; and afterwards treat it with a cleansing agent until it is healed.
And if the mole is malignant and of a dark color, then you should administer cauterization at the base of it and around its ratio (proportion).
But if the mole is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the mole is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside as soon as it begins to heal; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, because when treating both at once with the foreskin, there is no assurance that it will not be injured.
And if similar conditions occur in the genitalia and on the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption, then you should excise everything that is already discolored and what is about to become corrupted or what is already corrupt; and afterwards apply a dressing over it with honey, which has been crushed with ground wheat bran and finely sifted.
And afterwards treat it with other methods until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
because cauterization is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the urine can pass through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and upon whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess) it should be that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the bond may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is moistened in water, so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic juice so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution like the continuity of other plagues; however, since it is part of our practice and our will, and since it properly applies to children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the easiest path leading to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a razor and scissors for circumcision and cleansing; and they use thread made of sinew and incision with the fingernail.
Thus have I described all these methods and found no better modification with scissors, thread, or nail in the modification as with the nail, since most times you avoid the cicatrix above, because the cicatrix of the foreskin has two tunics, and remove the tunic below, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain. And in the modification which is done by alphabetic means, and is digital, which surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured, since it easily enters into the groove.
But in the operation with a nail, you may easily err and corrupt your operation. And the cicatrix of a child is short by nature, and most often they are born in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
But concerning the modification that is done with scissors and thread with a needle, the goodness and experience reveals to me, since the scissors are of proportional incision, by which the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both sharpnesses, and make an incision according to a comparison at once; and it is made compression of the needle in the figure containing the cicatrix of the penis all around, with which you catch no error at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down if it is one of those whom I consider a small one, and that you bind the needle to his penis only, and leave that for another day.
And then make him cheerful in every way that is possible to you from what he can understand. Let him stand between your legs preparedly, and let it not be seen by anyone else; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them tied up, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it in so that the head of the penis is retracted, and then clean what is attached there from filth.
The shape of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of blades be unsharpened and the other sharpened, so that the tip of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
The mistake in cleaning is that you may forcefully evade the intrinsic urethra entirely or part of it during the incision.
Therefore, you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the abscessed area and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a lancet and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the testicle as an abscess, now you should lay open what is inside until the abscess discharges, and clean that which has been laid open, and incise that according to your preparation.
And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not suffer from this.
And thus cure that which is open with the plasters made from the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the cord, and you follow the instructions above, this will not harm it.
And then cure that which is open as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and the forceful cause of the ailment is established, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a reed quill, like a canula from a bird's feather with fineness and length similar to half a palm, at its end there should be a thin tube.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread and tie one end to the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any excess wool with scissors if necessary. Then insert it into the tube with force and withdraw the siringua gently.
And treat the ailment above the pubic region, and inject the bladder with a tube anointed with oil, olive oil, and aqua regia.
And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where it will be inserted; and then push the siringua inside that; and then push that into the bladder until the ailment is reached, and if this is not done in this order, but rather in the one that goes to a tortuous path.
And then pull the thread with the cloth little by little, for the urine will wet the cloth.
Here is the English translation:
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of enemas for the bladder, with the use of an enema bag and similar instruments, which are appropriate for this purpose.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when there is clotted blood or obstructed pus, and you wish to administer water and medicines into it, then an instrument called clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
but at the tip of it, it is blunt, so that it may be closed. And in that part there are three parts: two on one side, as you can see.
At the beginning, it is concave, where what is to be introduced is placed, and it should be according to the quantity that needs to be expelled, without addition, until when any cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this as well, and when it is expelled far, as the clampcedra does which has naphtha attached for naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is introduced into the side parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the tip of the clampcedra into the tube as we have recommended in the circular part; and then introduce the moisture with what you are introducing, for that moisture will reach the bladder immediately, along with the treatment.
The form of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is subtle, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or of lead, with its head being similar to a small feather, and below the thread is drawn.
And then take a bladder of an animal, and place in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it up between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystal into the arm.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it is well distributed inside so that the patient feels that the humidity has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and perforate it all around its circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then attach the circle as it should be attached, so that you place in it what you want from humidities, oils, and waters.
And then tie it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press your hand so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which the operation is performed and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And he who wishes to narrate it will do so with that clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, but there appears a kind of sand; and the patient scratches his genitals, and has frequent urges to urinate, and soon becomes erect; and with these words you will find the cause.
And it is easy to cure the children before they reach fourteen years of age; and it is a difficult treatment for older individuals. But in young people it is moderate compared to those extremes.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the cure is longer; and if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to reach the cure for that condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with a diet that excludes all foods which prevent the dissolution of the stone due to their nature.
And then let the patient lie on his back and be placed in a position that causes the stone to descend to the neck of the bladder, or move from its place, by various means.
And then make the patient lie between his thighs, well prepared, and place him with his legs apart, so that the bladder is made to slope towards the sides.
And thus he probes that and all around it.
So if you feel the stone in the space, now you should cut it immediately with a section of it.
And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now it is necessary for you to anoint with oil your index finger of the left hand, if female, or the middle finger if male, and insert that into their anus. And probe for the stone until it is within reach of your finger. And gently guide it little by little into the bladder neck.
And then press on that with your finger, and expel it outwards towards the place where the section was made.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to spread the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the section is made.
And then insert a probe that has this shape: and cut in there what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the left side; and make the incision over that stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse section so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you can extract from the stone, but no more, because it is easier for your finger to compress the stone outside the incision without difficulty.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, because of which it is difficult to polish them smoothly.
And this one resembles a lion's paw in shape, it is round, and it is made of a stone that can be polished easily.
Then adjust it in the fissure where there are angles and edges.
And if it is not inserted properly, now cover it over that area, or attach something over it decently, the end of which should be like a file with which you stroke over the stone, and do not move away from it; or insert an intricate curved instrument beneath it.
But if you cannot do that, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flowing, cauterize it with a vinegar solution of nitre.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the bladder's mouth, and then cut around it; and then slightly move it away from there; and similarly proceed if they are in groups of more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to cut it into large pieces, because this may cause one of two harmful outcomes: either death or that it leads to continuous urine leakage, since the area might not heal completely.
But administer an expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture of it with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with pieces of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. And pause over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may yield.
And apply the poultice to the affected area on the side of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when that area is unbandaged, wash the place with water and a little oil, and apply care to it with chamomile ointment and with balm ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess should occur that is hard and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood is frozen in a bladder, and because of this urination is prevented (and this is known by the mixture of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to it for healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary throughout the entire treatment that you change both the dressings and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, because many have been accused of unnecessarily proceeding to section due to this treatment; and indeed, I suggest this, which is that you take a blunt iron probe, which has the following shape:
with a triangular tip, sharp, attached to a handle.
Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Approach and insert the needle into the thread, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone. And rotate the needle with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will pierce it through so that one end can penetrate as the other enters; for the urine will immediately be released.
And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone that has come out beyond the thread, for this part is cracked and will pass with the urine, and thus the illness will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone. And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties. And then extract it. And then untie the ligature and clean the collected blood, which has formed around the stone.
And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above it, because when the wax near the swelling of the stone is untied, the cord will return to its place and reform the swelling.
And for this reason, when you tie the wax above, you need to lift the cord to the upper parts, or return it to its proper position, so that the swelling reforms as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult at that time and is prohibited by many methods.
One of these is that the woman must be strong and light.
And the second is that you often do not find a woman who will honestly reveal whether she has had sexual intercourse when chaste, or whether she is one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you often do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man.
And the fourth is that the location for the incision to reach a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deeper incision, and there is danger in this.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a skilled female assistant, and such are rarely found.
But if you lack such an assistant, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a midwife who is experienced with women, or a woman well-versed in this art.
Therefore, present such a person and command her to do everything you instruct her from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is chaste, so she should insert her finger into the woman's body to locate the stone.
Thus if you find it there, cut it below the joint, and then instruct him to incise upon that.
But if it is not soft, then instruct the midwife to insert the joint into the woman's vagina and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Thus if you find it there, then proceed to gradually extract that from the opening of the bladder towards the parts below as far as its full extent until it reaches the root of the matter.
And then incise upon that spot in the middle of the vagina at the root of the matter from whichever part it is to him and center the stone in that part, and ensure that the said member is not dislodged from the stone by cutting below it.
And let the incision be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know the types of stones as you signify according to what you wish to describe.
And if you wish to have blood flow, apply triturated vitriol to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Take note that you should prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flowing and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and bind it with powders and bandages, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has become clean, then you may return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Chapter LXII.
Of section on hernia repair.
A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin containing the intestines, and it is called a sac.
And sometimes it is in the proper fatty layer which nature has prepared for the intestines, so that it seems to be another intestine; and it is the tendon of the groin between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is not the case.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin.
And this moisture may have various colors, for its color can be leaning towards yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or black and foul, or watery and white, and the latter is better.
Here are the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is such as this: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then at that time the abscess is round, inclining slightly in length like a hen's egg, and the skin appears red, because the moisture extends from it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like an egg, and for this reason it is estimated to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the flesh of the skin and the white skin, then feel below with your finger.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe with which its form is preceded; and according to what appears in the marks of the probe, judge about what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and then apply the body of the instrument to it.
And let the patient lie supine on his back on something raised slightly, and place below him clean cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who will extend his hand from one of the two sides to the flesh of the skin and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad probe and cut the flesh of the skin at the proper place along its length near the abscess.
And the incision should be made according to the rule equally distant from the line where the hair on the genitals begins, until it reaches the white membrane.
And scrape that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your scraping of the place where you are scraping should gradually continue until it is suspended on the flesh more delicately, carefully examining the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the membrane full of water at a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the membrane in the parts above; and do not touch the part containing the genitals, and incise the membrane in that manner as is possible for you. And incise that area either entirely or in pieces, and especially the thin part carefully, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the flesh protrudes from its place at the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the genital part with stitches, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the flesh corrupted by some other illness, then you should tie off the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, remove the flesh, and then treat it as we have described.
But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you to be an operation, then you should perform it.
And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place afterwards another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both thighs and the region of the abdomen; and cover with doubled cloths and poultices, and bind those with a bandage according to this method:
And then two cloths should be pressed and filled with carded wool according to this pattern; and the ends should be made such that they are pressed against the buttocks or with wet wool, and should be attached to the structure in the belt of the breeches, and one end should reach into the cleft between the buttocks, and the second should reach to the part above the genitals, and two ends on each side over both thighs, and all attachments should be adjusted in the belt of the breeches.
And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery at the section of the groin; and it is that you take a thin knife-like cautery and insert it along the line between the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white fatty tissue containing the fluid becomes visible, and then you take a cautery in this shape: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that fatty tissue, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the fatty tissue with hooks, and strip it off with hooks, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut away that part as much as possible until you have removed all of it; and be careful that your hands are not burned by the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting in stopping blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
If there is opposition to you in the form of an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterization, or blood flow, then choose the method that suits your situation from what has been described, and opt for the treatment that seems most appropriate to you based on what has been said.
But if the patient is small and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and you should be certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid-filled.
Now you should have the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, making the puncture as long as the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the fluid to drain out.
And then apply pressure to the area and bandage it so that the remaining fluid can drain out. And then treat it until the wound is healed.
But if there is opposition to the flow of fluid when you puncture it: this happens only because the white membrane in the wound opening resists and prevents the outflow of fluid. Then you should place a small cup or instrument used to extract water from cysts into the wound, as described; or apply pressure around the wound with something small.
And know that the water returns, and it is waited for about five months or so then; and when it has been absorbed, then it should be punctured according to that method, because in this way the patient will have passed his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of death in severe cases; therefore, in my view, it is best to avoid it and be saved by that better option.
And I am now recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and harsh excess, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and it is not relieved by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And when the abscess is calcified, its color is dark, and it does not respond to treatment.
And in some cases, it is caused by the entanglement of arteries, and by the inflammation of those that are already perceived upon reflection, or by the inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
He who is treated by inflating a vein is not dispersed for any cause owing to the compression thereof.
And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area as well as on other flesh; and that you should incise the tendon of the groin muscles, and immediately there will be the membrane above, and extract the white fat, and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensory ligaments after you have freed it from all parts.
Then if the membrane has already united with those flesh parts, now you should extract the membrane and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion between any part of the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should free all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, now you should incise all that there is and extract the membrane as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and immediately treat it with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve viscera.
A vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of membrane similar to that around the softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the condition.
In the treatment of this disease, one must be cautious because it is preceded by a certain memory or recollection.
However, it is necessary to call it an operation as they did in the beginning.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised stool; then pull up the scrotum with your fingers; and then tie the cords of the genitalia to the parts below; and have another assistant do this while you extend them forcefully.
Then incise with a sharp and broad knife across the veins so that the veins are exposed.
Then carefully remove it completely as we have described in the extraction of arteries, which is done on the surface.
Then place a needle with double fine thread in it, and tie one end at the first location where you act, and tie the other end at the last of them. Then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you want healing to take place, so that the veins that cause one of the testicles to darken do not become an issue, for it is not harmful if done properly.
But if you act on all the veins, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to bind them with the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or to bind them in such a way that it does not harm them.
Chapter Sixty-Five.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs when the caphac is extended over the front part of the sides of the abdominal cavity, because through this rupture some of the bowels enter.
And this rupture is either of the caphac or near it, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the caphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal in size to what the caphac compresses within the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the caphac, because at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it appears as an abscess different from what is normally seen near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the bowel, and the body of it beyond the caphac.
And in some cases, the membrane is detached along with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in other cases the bowel forms a fissure where it is trapped, and this causes great pain to the patient, and often causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid any risk in such cases.
Here is the translation:
From the side cut the fold by which the covering of the testicles is attached above, and incise the covering of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert hooks into both sides of the section as you deem necessary to hold it open.
And if you make the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove of that part.
And then peel away the fatty tissue which lies beneath the covering of the testicles until the hard white membrane of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger in the place where the testicle is attached, between the white membrane that lies beneath the covering of the testicle, and between the subsequent membranes, and loosen any adhesions that are present behind the testicle.
And then use your left hand to pull the covering of the testicles away from the parts, and with this extend the white membrane upwards with your hand, and lift the testicle with the membrane towards the section; and instruct an assistant to raise the testicle upwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind it with a solution.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for concern with the bowel wrapped in the hard white membrane. But if you find any cause for concern, then place it back into the abdomen below.
And then incise in the part below the scrotal cord where the section will bleed and discharge as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the plague; and apply the ligature as we have recommended (and sometimes the skin is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent bleeding, for some times this happens) and leave the ligature so that it does not fall.
But if the dressing of it is delayed, hot water should be applied and placed on that so that it does not fall as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
The first surgeons said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia that is on the abdomen; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where you have made it easy for yourself; and near there dry up in the middle place with regard to the abscess, so that the vessels fall.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the division that is made in the glands.
In some cases, there is rupture in the glands as we have said, and examine the area.
And they do not assign any cause for the pouch to the genitalia; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns to this in all cases.
But if the time is prolonged with this, a narrow opening in the duct through which the pouch descends into the duct; and it happens that due to the extension of the duct, which is in the glands as we have said, because the duct is stretched, and then becomes softened, the area becomes abscessed and must be examined.
And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narration.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by examining and sectioning horizontally according to the length mentioned.
And then stretch the white duct that is below the groin until it is exposed.
Take the knife and place it above the prominent part of the navel, and press it onto the belly button.
And then apply the two prominent points at the end of the line of the navel, and join them to each other with a suture.
And then extract the end of the knife, and do not incise the navel completely, nor extend the wound, nor for any other reason as I will teach you in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat it as you would treat other wounds, and when you incise the area, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; for the navel is contracted and the prominence of rupture has not been adjusted.
And cautery is better in this location, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Often the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie on his side, and incise the entire cord that is softened onto the natural cord; and then join the two edges with a suture.
And if you wish, apply the excess of the softened cord to three or four stitches and with a firm suture.
Here is the translation:
Chapter lxix.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, yet for cause it is read to me that I should remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it, a physician knows how to cure it when it occurs; and the other way is that we have sometimes need to castrate certain animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting.
But in the one that is performed by crushing, the method of the operation is that we should immerse the animal in warm water until the testicles become softened and descend. And then take those [testicles] in your hand until they resolve and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration performed by cutting and sectioning, hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lift the scrotum, and make an incision on each side until you proceed with both sides.
And then cut those parts that you will have separated. And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but ensure the wound is clean and proper so that it heals over the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by inversion, because inversion leaves some cause of the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
And properly treat the illness until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodozia in men is according to two methods: one is when there appears in the space between the testicles a figure of female parts, where hair also develops.
And sometimes there appears a passage for urine in the space between the testicles.
In women, there is one type: it is that the female organ above the pubis appears as two testicles of a man slightly towards the inside, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women. And it is that you should cut away those tight tissues until the excess flesh is removed, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
And in the second type for men, where there is urine passing through a passage between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery to address it.
Chapter 21.
On the treatment of protrusions and raised flesh due to causes related to women.
The spot is often light in color and is adjusted according to natural causes within which it is situated and is made with regard; and in some women, it is magnified so much that it spreads just as in men and prevails even into intercourse.
Then take the superfluity of linting with your hand or with one piece and incise it.
And do not delay in incising, especially at the beginning of the swelling, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
And immediately treat her with the cure for such wounds so that she may be healed.
Malignant flesh that arises from the ulceration of the mother within which it fills that area and is easily spread to other parts like a tail (and for this reason some of the earliest called it "tail disease"); therefore, we should incise it as we would linting, and treat her so that she may be healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Ulcers.
Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or the opening is small. And it can be either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to illness that preceded it, and that is caused either by flesh poorly adjusted or by a subtle or thick obstruction.
And it occurs either at the beginning of the swelling, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and you should prohibit intercourse and pregnancy, and easily prohibit menstruation.
Of that knowledge is made by observation of the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed promptly; but if it is not apparent, then wait around there with your fingers or with light.
But if the obstruction is due to a small cicatrix and it has opened between the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that.
And it is that you place upon the two lips poultices, and then place your fingers carefully between both of them.
And the woman should lie on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread both lips forcefully so that the small cicatrix is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
And then take linen and dip it in oil and place that on the spot, and let a man hold it there for a day so that the cut area does not heal too quickly.
But if the cicatrix is thick and hard, then it is necessary for you to cut that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that for a moment, and incise it.
And prepare the medicines that stop blood flow without causing harm, such as helleborus, dragon's blood, and cerate, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry heat.
And this should be treated along with the other treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
And in some cases accidents occur during the major formation of other tissues, and at these times it is necessary to incise according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the main part should not be treated contrary to it in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as swellings of the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form tumors.
And now I have mentioned in the division the kinds of these and the signs of them, and to say which of them receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the area of the main part and do not appear to the senses, at this time treatment should not be applied forcefully.
But those that are in the opening of the main part and which can be felt, these are the ones that can be treated.
And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tumor with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those that need it with scissors.
And then powder should be applied to those that bleed from one of the powders used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar substances.
Soak the pieces of flesh in cold water for an hour, and then lay it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then place it in a decoction of sumac, orange peel, walnuts, and similar substances.
And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and sour wine, and apply a plaster made from this mixture to the back.
And if the blood is clotted, that is good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses to it, and perform incisions at the sites of the mammary glands.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of cilantro or aniseed or wild garlic in sour wine, and apply it to the affected area; and afterwards treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the piercing of the bladder in an accidental injury to the abdomen.
Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as cancerous, stone-like, ulcerative, hemorrhoidal, herpetic, phlegmonous, and fistulous abscesses, as well as piles and other abscesses. And I have already described these illnesses and their types and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
Here is the translation:
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp due to percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it turns red and there is a sensation over it, do not attempt to puncture it then, but treat it with what aids maturation until the acuity of these symptoms ceases.
And then have the woman lie on a cushion with two cushions; let her recline on her back and adjust her legs so that they are raised below the belly, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms above her head, and bind certain parts with bandages as is appropriate.
And then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is prepared, the form of which will be described in those cases that are about to be discussed.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted into the birth canal from the instrument should not exceed its natural diameter, and observe the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the diameter of the birth canal, then you should place pillows around the woman's abdomen to prevent any further insertion of instruments into the birth canal.
And place the lubricant that flows from the instrument on the side below and let the practitioner hold the instrument and rotate it so that the opening of the birth canal is prepared.
And when the prolapse appears and is touched by hand and is red and moist, then you should dry that part of it with a dry sponge or cloth.
And when the sanies is evacuated, then you should place upon the wound a medicated cotton soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some styptic quality; and apply the compress to the section just above the wound.
And apply above the wound and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until you find the method that is suitable for this healing.
And in some cases, the wound and the affected area should be washed with water, and then cleansed with water and honey, and afterwards with water in which lily root or long-leaved artemisia has been boiled, and then return to the method.
And if the wound is deep in a wounded area, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, except treat it as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To instruct midwives in how to treat male embryos when there is an unnatural condition as shown in the figure.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman press below and desire to smell the air, and she is troubled by what is above her, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the first is over her head, and the second either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend over their head, they come out of it on the second one, and this stripping from those excesses must be done with proper cleansing.
This is another unnatural and unsuitable birth because when the embryo is born on its buttocks and the body of the child is born in front of its head and its feet, with one hand or foot before it, or its head and hand or foot to the side, and very easily turned over its own neck, resembling the figures of unsuitable births.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those births, and which kind of birth each one is so that its meaning may be understood by them and they may stand upon it.
When the fetus is born over its head by natural effort, and this is difficult for the woman and labor is strenuous, and sometimes her strength has already been weakened, then prepare that mixture, or let the women have it, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek seeds and moist oils.
And immediately the midwife should insert her fingers and make an incision with those scissors, or dry that area with her fingernail until it stops being moist. And press the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be sprinkled with powdered rue and powdered fenugreek mixed with honey.
Then command the patient to blow his nose and sneeze while in a supine position; and place his mouth and nose over a vessel for one hour, because the matter will be discharged immediately.
And if both parts of the discharge come out at the beginning, then afterwards you must reduce them gradually with ease. But if the woman does not obey the instrument, then have her lie on a cushion and lift her up slightly, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall from the impact.
And if the mucus is not returned and the discharge stops, then incise those areas and extract the remaining matter of the discharge or tie the body part with a cloth and extract it evenly, because this will be discharged immediately.
When the discharge is on its membranes, then you must push them upwards, and then turn the discharge gently, and then even it out, and then take some of it and gradually spread it.
But when it is expelled into the cavity, then you command the patient to strain himself, and have him sneeze with conditions, because it will be discharged if God wills it.
And if it is not discharged as we have recommended, then you return the discharge gradually until you place it back to its normal position, because it will be expelled quickly at that time.
And if it is prevented from being expelled by everything we have recommended, then take mastic and dissolved gum, and mix them thoroughly in a mortar with good pounding, and then apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen. And after cutting the hair in the area with clean water, enter until you reach the hypochondria.
And when the upper parts of the body are inflamed, then perform a smoke inhalation therapy with myrtle and apply that to it. And when the smoke inhalation therapy has lasted for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and afterwards let them sneeze and open their mouth wide, and take that out, and press the lower part of their belly lightly with compression, because the phlegm will soon be expelled.
Collect the phlegm laterally by placing it between one of their hands. Here is the translation:
And if it cannot be done by hand, then place the patient on his back and strike the things to be dislodged with strong percussion, and afterwards apply dressings made of mucilage.
And if childbirth has begun, then place the woman in that position and proceed with the reduction of the fetus, bringing it into alignment according to its natural figure, and cause her to sneeze and instruct someone to apply pressure inward until it is expelled.
Examine the fetus on its back with its limbs extended and the bandage around it at the level of its navel. Let the midwife hold the fetus and then gradually turn that little one, so that it becomes easier to deliver.
And when it is done and the proper time has passed, then place a poultice over that area made of oil and mucilage as recommended.
And then instruct them to press gently little by little, and when you have done this, place the woman on her back and instruct her to lean on her right side, and then instruct someone to apply pressure; and cause her to sneeze as needed. The delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
When you see the horror of the mother according to this method, consider it carefully, and then you incise the second area with your fingernail until it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then you incise that area near the pubis, so that it is not retained and dies.
Here is the translation:
The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born at once, but sometimes three or four [are born], though this is rare and difficult to occur; however, these causes are due to nature, not will.
And among those, whether they are multiple or not, a second birth sometimes occurs, and they are separated by the cleft, distinguishing them entirely through the umbilical cord of each one. And sometimes they come out together as if it were one fetus due to natural swiftness, but at other times they come out together in an unworthy manner, as we have recounted.
And if some are difficult in their delivery and reach what we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should with both ease and skill, whether it be promptness or delay, and uses her ingenuity according to every figure as needed for the safe delivery of the child.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes up to ten; and it has been verified that a woman miscarried at six months, and another carried them all fully formed, which cause was determined by the measurement of the wise scholars.
And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is easy to mistake one for another, and therefore she should know what is needed in each case.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it does not come out otherwise, then you must use an operation. At that time, you should consider whether the woman is healthy and free from any of the conditions for which she is feared to suffer loss.
At that time, the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
And the attendant should hold both of her legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and mastic of hartwort and fenugreek and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mastications, and then insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks are in the fetus.
And the appropriate places for this are as follows: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and at that time you place the hooks in its hands, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in the proper areas of its ribs, or under its armpits.
But if the descent is foot first, then in the navel area, or in the middle of its ribs.
Take the needle in your right hand, and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it easily into one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the diseased area.
And place and insert another needle next to it, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And do this to all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased in the same way as is done for the painless removal of teeth.
And in the area where extension should be softened; and if any part is resistant, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and rotate there what is resistant.
Then if the part of the fetus is dislocated, now the needles should be moved to the place that hurts more; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then wrap a cloth around that one; and subsequently extract that one until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or constriction occurs during extraction, or it is in the head of the tightly fitted water bag, then you should insert between the fingers and cut open the head to remove the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will be among the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And it should appear as if the task is of great head by nature: and now it is necessary to incise that tumor which is bound, or to take that tumor out in this way as we have said; and then extract from the bones that which is there with the forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted below the clavicle, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the sinews may effuse.
But if it is not complicated, nor swollen in appearance, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that area through which flows the moisture that is there.
But if the tumor is on the upper thighs, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction of it towards the mouth of the urethra is remote.
But if it is constricted below the abdomen and the thighs, then it is necessary for you to extract that tumor wrapped in a cloth which you have enveloped around your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the thighs so that the fluid that is there may flow out.
But if the other members remain still and turn the head, then place your left hand in between; but if the mouth of the urethra is open, then insert your hand into the prepuce, and search for the head there, and pull it together with those mentioned into the mouth of the urethra, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull them along with that.
And if the mouth of the urethra is constricted by an abscess which has occurred, then it should not be pressed upon; instead, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty applications. Apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the condition is on the side, then at that time, if possible, puncture it; and apply what we have said about the living condition.
And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And it is necessary not to leave any cause inside for the second time.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment for boils or abscesses that may occur as a result.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and proceed with the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and the other fetus was also lifeless. It happened to one who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became swollen internally with a fetus, and began to expel water.
And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days, extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the belly.
Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, when treating the wound, remove the bones that are present in its various positions, and if it has already been treated for a long time in such a manner, correct it with a small piece of wood.
And it is not strange for this to be so, because in this lies the science and aid for what the surgeon uses his hand to administer in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of a spiral in which the largest is used:
This is the form of a clamp with which it equalizes the leaves, to this clamping there are two spirals at the two ends of two branches. However, this spiral should be finer than the string, and it should be made of reed or wood.
And the width of each branch should be about two fingers and the margin of each side about one finger, and the length of each is half a palm plus a little; and in the middle of the two branches there are two adjustments made from the same material as the branches which are fixed, their length being half a palm plus a bit more, and the width of each being about two fingers, or a bit more.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the larger one so that they are opened when you rotate the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form, but finer and lighter:
It should be made of reed or wood according to the appearance of forceps. However, at the end of the side of the wound make additions in this way as often as necessary, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two of these.
And when you want to open the largest of them, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, which is between the thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument in this way as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want from the size of the largest opening until the speculum does what you want.
The form of dizziness which the ancients described:
Form of propulsion with which the feces is expelled:
Form of connection where the large intestine is connected to the stomach
And it is similar to forceps at the ends of which there are teeth, as often as necessary, and some versions are made long like forceps according to this form, as often as necessary, with teeth like those of a reed with which it is incised and connected. Form of connection in a few cases:
Form of one having a spine:
Form of one having two spines:
Form of a speculum having two ends at which the head is divided:
Form of two spatulas:
With those instruments so exercised, and when their kinds are multiplied and prepared, the artisans should do so in a quicker manner for their operation and better serve people according to their quantity.
And you should prepare those instruments, whichever they may be, because the necessity of them is unavoidable.
Of the extraction of the second [incision or procedure].
When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you should command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if it causes expulsion by this method, that is good.
And if not, then take a vessel and pierce its cover with a hole and place it under the mouth of the mother, along with herbs such as mugwort, chamomile, anise, camomilla, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and place it over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the concavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second birth will be quickly expelled.
But if this treatment delays and is not expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or malt jelly, and then insert it into the womb and search for the second birth with it. When you find it, pull it out little by little. If it is stuck to the mother's placenta, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second birth, extract it bit by bit so that the mother does not suffer from excessive traction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the opening of the mother is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment through sneezing and the medication of the ulcer with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then guard against fatiguing it through repeated attempts at extraction, but rather ensure that what has come out of it and lies in the opening of the mother be attached to the woman's cervix, and subsequently treat it with cauterization; for this will cause it to contract over a few days and it will dissolve and be expelled.
But when you contract it, it causes severe pain in the head and stomach, and this aggravates the illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer sublimations and appropriate treatments for this.
But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitrated tartar and dried figs.
Form of the instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and secondary conditions:
It should be made of wood or horn.
And the thin end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the embers of the fire.
And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Of the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which must be carefully and skillfully opened. Then it is the midwife's duty to pierce with her finger that said orifice; and if not, she should use a sharp spatula to pierce it, being careful not to touch the rectum.
And then apply poultices made of flour mixed with vinegar and oil; and afterwards, treat that orifice until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child wants to pass gas.
And it happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and afterwards treat it as we have described for treatment with lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region near the anus are usually small and thick, which often appear near the outside of the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is one fistula or multiple.
And as that small swelling becomes old and discharges watery or pus-like white fluids, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
And these deep-seated fistulas are known by what comes out of them through discharge and flatulence; sometimes the discharge is bad, and it easily indicates the nature of these conditions.
Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the rectum and a non-penetrating one, it is when you insert your finger into the rectum, and introduce a fine thread of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that one, then introduce a fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of that and there is no sign of any cause of evacuation such as pus, worms, or gas, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you can proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of that is similar to urine from it and the prohibition is for that which the place requires to be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain around the area, then the sign of that is that the probe goes through here if there is no tortuosity into the bone, and there is pain around the affected area; and you will have a continuous discharge from it; and medication does not work in that case, nor does it consolidate on its own.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment for those is the labor and futility of many physicians, upon which such cases depend.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I shall tell you, and this is what I and my predecessors have done.
And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with his buttocks raised and his hips within reach, the objects being inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead probe or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
And if that is the case with the patient around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment in which help is expected, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as was previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula are sealed tightly, resembling the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those sealed tissues heal, and then treat it with medicines that promote flesh growth and consolidation. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further in, you tell which is inside the anus, and between that and the probe there lies a thin layer of flesh or cicatrix, and sometimes the fistula runs into that part where it lies on the surface of the buttock. Then the region around the beginning of the fistula dries up, and you see that drying extend along with the probe until its tip reaches the place to which the end of the probe extends, and through this the passage is freed and cured.
And then clean those parts of the flesh that are affected by fistulas, which resemble the hollow part of a goose quill and do not tear any part of them for any reason.
But if blood flows out when you are operating on those parts of the flesh, then either the mildest or the pus-filled area should be cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: it tightens the adjusted flesh and stops the bleeding by drying out the moisture.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth or soft linen until the area gets better, and afterward cure the wound with hard flesh-growing dressings that generate and strengthen new tissue.
And use medicines that have styptic and drying properties; when the area is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already extends inside the base of the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore, if you find that the probe and between it there is only a thin layer of cicatrix or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then do not proceed with the operation but wait according to faith and hope.
The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the contraction necessary for you to introduce what is proper and suitable for healing; do not proceed with drying if it does not allow access to the cavity containing the pus, and ensure that this is done without causing discomfort to the patient; then treat it as we have said to make it heal easily; or lengthen that flap and clean that pus which you dried within near the anus, as we have mentioned, or by trying with another sharp instrument, and then clean those ulcerated tissues which appear in the drying process through incision; and then strive to restore the whole wound through drying, and if the upper opening of the pus is not healed, and if the fistula remains open at the anal part, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it passes around the anus on the surface of the body along the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a sharp-tipped probe, which is like a needle for preparing the core according to this method:
and introduce it into that faithful wrapping of three layers or around them; then insert the probe into the pus-filled fistula until you achieve the necessary contraction.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the pus from that tract as though you were inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the pus and tie both ends tightly, and keep it like this for one or two days, and when you incise the pus in the flesh, secure it well so that those tissues between the two ends of the pus are divided and can heal.
Regarding the treatment of the wound, until it is healed and strengthened.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its position, because you should not do this so as to not injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with spines with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal pieces, or they appear like grape clusters. And these can be small or large, and the pus flows continuously from them, and they are single, and appear inside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that appear outside the anus are due to less humidity, from which flows yellow water or a little blood mixed continuously, and their appearance depends on the skin color.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you cover yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have them with your fingernail, and then incise those along their roots.
If the hooks do not adhere to them because of their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or a cudgel or a flaxen pad, and extract them with these tools. Then immediately incise around them and sprinkle some powder suitable for after the incision upon them, so that it serves as a cauterant; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization. And afterward treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the pus does not come out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and neat, and wash it with water from the well which facilitates prompt evacuation when the pus is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterward treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for one who requires stitching, you should administer the suture in this manner: take fine thread wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and let that penetrate with the needle into the incision on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; and secure the hemorrhoid tightly with strong binding, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
And do this for all of them, and leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
Place a pad on the wound soaked in rose oil or in cerate; place that on the wound and instruct the patient to lie still. Place that in a container; when it is prepared, apply those or another treatment until it is healed.
And when they become old and do not respond to that medicine, you should scrape those with the point of a scalpel or your fingernail until they are made moist and pus is discharged from them, which prevents their consolidation; then treat them until they are healed.
Now you should scrape those with more vigorous pus removal than the first time until blood appears and they are sufficiently scraped; then treat them until they are healed.
Know that hemisection, which is a key condition, appears as small round spots according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in the lower parts below the waist and in those areas, causing pain throughout the body.
Then it is necessary to incise what is within the circumference of the spot, and grasp it with forceps or fingers, and eradicate it from its root; then treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the surrounding area after treating the spot itself.
A mole is a small raised rough and round fistula on the surface of the body, and spots appear in most children.
The treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or apply within it some fat or grease that is in a container. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with acute medication.
A mole called an ant's nest is a small fluffy or thickly fistulated elevation on the surface of the body with threads running into it. When it is scratched, it feels like being bitten by an ant, and it forms around the body.
The treatment for it is to take a needle of hawk's feather or eagle's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant's nest so that it contains the circle within the circumference of the needle; then revolve your hand with the needle so that you incise what is around the ant's nest, and place that in the thread running into the flesh, so that you eradicate the ant's nest from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
The upper part of the needle should be thin, blunt (that is, not perforated), wrapped so that when held by the finger it is comfortable and its rotation is easy.
And if you wish to cauterize the ant's nest, do so as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
On the form of the instruments which are administered to castrate.
Sometimes castrations are performed with silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are done with instruments large and small according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose testicles are soft or painful, their castrations should be smaller.
The form of a large and simple castration:
The head of the cannula above, where the sac is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at the point where the sac is tied as you see.
And the lower end of the cannula, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, tapering slightly; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays and somewhat larger.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is rolled; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong honey from raw honey, or around them; and tightly fit the bag to them; and when you place the bag in it, it should be tight at the head of the castration between two distinct constrictions, and immediately castrate each thread. But the quality of castrating with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under him, such as a cushion or a folded cloth; then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with fenugreek mucilage or something similar. Then gently introduce it into the anus, and the assistant takes the bag and presses it vigorously until everything that is in the rectum is evacuated. Then remove the probe from the rectum and let the patient lower his buttocks to the side.
And if the medicine induces purging, let him endure it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for his recovery.
It is better if you treat him for abdominal diseases and purging with the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then the enema should be light and fine, like those used for children.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with the disease using medicines according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are varied depending on how the plagues are caused and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes for which plagues often occur are things like stone formation, or cuts from a sword or knife, or blows from a lance, or a staff, or an arrow, or similar such causes.
Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones affecting the limbs.
And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, for which you should pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object and has caused only a slight bruise but is a serious swelling and you fear that an abscess may form, at this moment you should examine carefully and perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay in doing so; extract blood according to the quantity of the strength of it unless there is some cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming from the wound is scanty.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
But if any cause prohibits even this minor intervention, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or rich foods.
And pause on the treatment of the plague if an abscess forms, and apply it to the affected area in rose oil alone or in a poultice that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause in treating the plague if it is recent and the blood has not yet clotted, and also if the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply slightly.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to a puncture and does not allow the lips of the wound to be approximated, then approximate those with stitches as I will explain regarding the stitching of such wounds.
But if the wound is already uncovered near the bone and skin, and does not require extensive suturing but only a small suspensorium, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitches, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are light: such as eggs, young animals, and similar items until he is recovered.
And if you find that the dressing is putrid and does not adhere to the wound, then incise all that is necrotic and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then you should incise it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not comfort the situation, then you should cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; therefore, you can powder them with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sieve it, then fill the wound with this powder, and bind it tightly so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
From above tie tightly the bandages with powder and leave it tied until such time as it is not inflamed, for medicine does not reach it to heal while it remains untied.
And sometimes this cure is done alone, when it is not in your presence with the gall of a dragon.
And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them in a position and make them tight, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then do not apply this powder immediately, but instead treat them as we have said, by placing some cooling substances on them, or placing poultices made of flour mixed with water and honey until they begin to show signs of putrefaction; and then proceed with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with a probe.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no cooling applied but rather treatment to stop bleeding with strong styptic agents, such as zinc oxide and cerate which adhere to the nerves and constrict that area. Do not pause on any cause of pain whatsoever, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues all through to the brain, which is the source of power for all the members.
And if it is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes immersed in scented or unscented oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, along with other mineral preparations applied according to this method, and afterwards moistened.
But if the wound is severe, then apply stitches, or close its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or reaches to the lowest part where there is pus, then pierce it at the deepest part.
But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if the situation requires such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures near the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural position, and afterwards strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; then treat it with applications that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes pus-filled, and the swelling subsides.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its chapter.
If it is a thrust with a spear or knife, and you feel the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; now you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should apply powder, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain trapped within the depth of the wound and return to the heart and injure the patient, but instead apply a drawing agent, and leave it open for two days.
And if the application is not within your immediate presence, then place on the wound opening a piece of cloth to absorb what you want from the moisture; and have the patient lie down with the wound so that it can drain what is contained within.
But if three days or more have already passed since the wound appeared and no spasms, trembling of the heart, or constriction of breath has occurred to the patient, and you see other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with poultices and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is unnecessary and all the time has been open, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a piercing with a knife or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the flesh or skin, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
And if there has already been an attempt to treat it by piercing into the bone, and some of the fragments are still inside, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. And if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal would be easier.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment is as we have described.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small disruption is difficult to treat by other means, and it is important that reducing them back to their proper place is more difficult if you do not promptly intervene to return them to their location, as they will swell and become enlarged, making instruments difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, nor is it as difficult as in the two previously mentioned cases.
And you should know that there are four methods of suturing the abdomen, but two of these methods are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds on the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more so in the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Thus I say that when the wound is small and it has occurred due to some cause of the bowel for that reason, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the bowel has become inflamed by the coldness of the air.
And thus when that is so, then it is necessary for you to warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth wet with lukewarm water alone, or soak it in scented water, and cyperus, and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I do this in cases where there is styptic quality, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And thus when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which chamomile and mallows are infused, for by this the instrument is alleviated somewhat.
But if the instrument is irritated near this treatment, then divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and it should not be necessary to dry out near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of the sharp side of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip subtle, yet not as delicate as a scalpel, but rather slightly blunt.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the belly, now it is necessary that its reduction follow the shape of the natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that, for better is it.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, now you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms closer to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the lower parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, now you must focus your attention and consideration entirely on this so that the part where the wound is lies higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this for large wounds as well as for medium-sized wounds.
And for small wounds, place what is at hand, and then have the one most skilled among you perform it, who holds the wound entirely in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it from that point to another as needed.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a quantity of needles according to the extent of the wound; then hold from the end of the dissection with your ring finger, and tighten the needle one, but do not place thread at both ends of the suture, at both ends of the internal part behind the edge of the wound, until you have penetrated that part; and now you have joined both ends of the suture and both ends of the inner part, thus making four orders.
Take a needle and double thread around it, and make several loops on both sides, then bring the two lips together and close the wound decently; then take the thickness of your finger and place another needle in that, and tie that with the same method as you tied the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary for the needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
And the needles should be medium between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles pierce the flesh quickly; and coarse ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, so it is desirable that they be medium in both fineness and thickness.
And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the wound simultaneously, because the flesh should be pierced quickly and the wound should close before its consolidation.
And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place powders spread out around the sutures, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has already healed.
And this type of suture using needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it often takes only one or two needles or around that number.
But the second type of suture is more common: it involves managing the four ends, two from the wound and two from the thread, at once, with a needle that is appropriately wrapped in fineness and thickness.
When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, retract the needle from that midpoint from which you started, so that the thread withdraws to the most superior part of the wound, so that the suture may be a cloth-like suture along which the edges are tightly drawn.
And pause between each stitch by the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to be for humans.
And in such a suture, I would close the wound of a person who was injured in their abdomen by a knife, where the wound’s disruption was larger than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the stomach area on both sides; and then I would reduce that after the bowel had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated within the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated him, and he recovered; and afterwards he walked for some time without difficulty, and returned to his usual activities.
And other physicians had judged that he could not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine or means available in the place where he was, but rather placed a piece of cloth over the wound twice a day and washed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Text.
And that is where you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place makes a cut according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound in the part inside, all of it penetrates.
And then start from this side and bring it to the suture at the extremity on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the bone that penetrates, and then return it to that bone and bring the extremity of the suture that is on the other side to this extremity of the wound; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
And do this once and then again, and do this one time after another until you sew up everything that is on the outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew along the suture of the membranes as you would skin the pelts, so that you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it on another occasion until you have completed it.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at the end of the wound closest to you, and make it penetrate inside the wound through one point, then cut off both ends of the thread; and turn the needle around so that it penetrates from outside to inside at both ends of the thread.
And then turn each of them around so that they penetrate from inside the wound to outside at both ends of another point on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suturing, and it is the type of suture for which I have previously mentioned the procedure.
This is the speech of Walia.
And if someone says that the suturing of the abdomen is done with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each needle and begin by piercing one side according to the suture technique used for stitching together equal sides.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment of treatment for wounds is the same as for other wounds.
The reason is that when you treat a recent wound with its own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the swelling and sew it properly, then apply powder to it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and ensure that the thread and needle are sterilized; and subsequently treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not at hand, then wait for a short time, because it begins to gather pus and forms a crust, and changes that twice in the day as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal limbs, then cover it with a cloth made of linen soaked in high-quality oil, or in olive oil, and place that over the area between the joints and dress them accordingly.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the body cavities, since this often happens, then apply styptic black thyme to it, and especially if the putrid matter has reached the cavity and an incision is made penetrating into the depth of it.
And know that what affects the large cavity is harder to heal than what affects the small cavities.
And it is difficult to heal when the cavity called “gugun” does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the cavities.
But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply medicine over the area that is discolored, so that blood flows, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
Here is the translation:
Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, it is possible to restore it in some people, because I saw one who was afflicted in his abdomen by a lance wound, and the affliction was on the right side of the stomach, and the affliction was old and had formed a fistula, and there was discharge and gas.
Then I dressed the wound, not being confident in its healing, but sought to stimulate that part which was healthy and where the area had healed.
And when I saw the area already healed, I feared the complications that might arise from this bad event in his abdomen; and none suffered any harm from such an unfortunate accident by moderating their food intake and drink, and soon they were taking baths and exercising as mentioned.
And some experienced individuals have said that when there is a small affliction in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, whose mouth is open, on the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing them one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and close the wound; and let those heads remain attached within the bowel until the bowel is healed; and no harm will come to the patient.
It is possible that the ligature be made with a fine thread which is made from animal gut, because it can pass through a needle; and you take the end of this thin gut thread, make it bare, and then tie it to the end of the ligature material, wrapped around, and then pass that gut into needles and bind it to the ligature, and reduce it at the disruption.
And this method of suturing with maggots is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine vessels, then at that time there can be only a slight healing, and not complete recovery.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continues to discharge over time without being excised, whether in any part of the body, is generally called a fistula, and we refer to it as such an abscess.
And truly, a fistula is a soft, hard, white swelling in which there is no pain, but rather itching as with the itching of bird pox; and for this reason it is called a feathered sore, that is, an itch.
And in some people, it is moist, which discharges fluid; and in many cases, this moisture can be excised within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick, and it is scanty, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery with my hands.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for among them are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints composed in such a way as those of the hand and foot; and among them are those that reach near the main member and are similar.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not respond to treatment, and dealing with them requires labor and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that cannot be reached by the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows a straight path, investigate it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, for the lightness of lead's nature causes it to float and bend around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has openings that are horrifying, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that one will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire very carefully according to the method by which you can know whether here there is a bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings that lies above all within your strength, within your examination, within which you examine the malady, and the cause of the pain lies beneath your compression upon the place, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess.
And when you have stood upon all those causes with true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and that is that you now consider whether it is a fistula that is apparent nearby or in a salt place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have told you about.
Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or of similar nature, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, it is necessary to incise that as far inward as you are able, and then remove all corrupted flesh from it; and then apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with a probe.
And do this several times so that the sharp medicine may dissolve all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must ascertain this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause involving a vein or nerve or principal limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed to you and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should scrape that away until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption; and then you should uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it with the utmost care, and then treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and thus in that case you should only dress the wound.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is possible for you to extract that, then you extract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of those, and do not leave any of them due to your strength.
But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles as necessary, and release the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at that moment, then apply what can alleviate the condition to the wound, and leave it as it is until such a time when there is flesh and ligaments around those bones, and protect the wound so that it does not become hardened, and ensure that the section which you have incised in your operation remains uninhibited.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply to the wound a cloth submerged in hot oil or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when those ligaments will heal, and the bones are separated from each other by ablation, and their adhesion is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape that away with a rasp only until the corruption and blackness are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
Here is what is recommended to you concerning what happens when you attend to a person in their condition so that you may use it as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man around xxx years old came to me with pain in his abdomen. The discomfort is located internally within the body, and the material causing this has reached the abdominal area, forming a large abscess, and it does not appear to be due to an external cause.
Then time was wasted due to the error of the physicians when the abscess became inflamed, and pus formed within it. The patient's treatment was delayed until an opening for a fistula had to be made, through which all the foul matter and moisture from the body were discharged.
Then many doctors attended to the patient for two years, and none of them had knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
I saw the opening that had formed and the matter flowing from those openings in great quantity; and already the patient's body was entirely weakened, and his complexion was yellow.
Then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
Then I promptly examined all the openings and found that they extended from all parts of the opening.
Then I decided to incise one of the openings and exposed part of the bone, finding it corrupted; it was already turning to dust and was blackened and decayed. Part of the abscess had penetrated into the marrow.
And I used what was shown and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I recognized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had already eradicated and treated.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I reopened and exposed the bone secondarily over the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
And I treated what appeared from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another way and did not stop excising the bone bit by bit specifically, and attempted to restore it, but it was not restored until I excised around one palm's width of it, along with its medulla, and then restored that part with medicines, and it healed quickly and became healthy.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the condition of its inflammation and for its poor tolerance and fear of death, because it suffered at all times due to excess of syncope evacuation.
And thus it healed completely, and there is no flesh instead of the bone; and its condition in its body has improved, and its function has returned; and it has resumed its normal activities without any contrary effects during movement or injury.
But if it is an elevated bone in a place where the body has already been treated, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it; pause tying this thicker thread after the first one; then apply the thread over the flesh near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh away from the sides, thus exposing the skin where you want to suture so that the stitches do not damage the flesh.
Place a cloth or towel beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw over the slightly corrupted area bit by bit, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, then you must saw from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you must expose the flesh from all sides; then place a cloth beneath, and saw off the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption slightly, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw off the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in proportion but originates elsewhere.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and expose that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and correct each origin as best you can, without coming into conflict with veins or nerves.
And you must know which incision tools and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you according to the kind of instrument of which you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of methods of diseases, now you have them yourself with what is suitable for the instruments for every disease.
And I say to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will place as simples among which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experiment upon the others. Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be in the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be in the form of the points of a needle.
And it is not suitable unless you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another well-made saw: let it be made with a sturdy bow and the sharpness of iron, and the handle of wood well-made. Shape of the liver:
Shape of the razor, which has a curvature:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Shape of another smaller cutter:
Shape of another cutter; this resembles a rod, and its tip is like pincers, and it is exhibited in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a rod that is appropriate in proportion to what is being pierced through the bones:
And its tip is triangular and sharp:
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is appropriate for all the purposes we have mentioned regarding razors, cutters, and saws.
For cutting edges and锯骨的切割：
The extremities may become diseased either from an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you treat that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not take effect, sometimes the corruption will leave the member which is not being affected by any cause; then it must be that you incise that member into where the corruption approaches, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm which is a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of that which affects him is that the member becomes blackened as if it were burnt by fire, or it may approach the corruption such that the putrefaction enters into that member and spreads throughout his body. Therefore, you must proceed with incision at that point.
And similarly, it is the cause of the corruption due to the bite or sting of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or Russell's viper and the like.
And if the corruption or the bite is on the extremity of a finger, then you must incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you must incise at the joint of the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread into the elbow joint of the arm.
And if it spreads further, then you must incise the arm at the shoulder joint in its junction.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and reaches around the shoulder, then it is death for the patient; and to administer any other cause for this cure depends on the amount of efficacy.
And so it seems with the foot when corruption invades the said foot, then you incise it into one of the nodes.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. But if it penetrates to the bone, then you incise the swelling into the joint of the bone.
And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
And the method of incising the member or of tying it is that you bind a ligature below the part where you wish to incise, and bind another ligature above the site; and extend the assistant one ligature below, and have the assistant extend another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures by about a span so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is incised or tied.
And it is necessary that a piece of cloth be placed around all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the patient receive appropriate treatment for abscesses.
But if blood flows when you are working, then you should cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then bind the affected member with bandages at the appropriate places, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, the incident which I and you have recommended, which is that this accident turned black in his foot with discoloration similar to combustion by fire.
From that corruption arising first in its place inside, it tends to affect all the body.
And then that person prepares himself by applying poultices more than ten days before the healing of the member is hindered by the vehemence of what causes intense pain and burning, and incision is made in that part at the joint, and the heat subsides.
Long time ago this kind of corruption occurred in the finger of the hand according to that method.
And then it comes to me, and so I perforate to expel that excess through what I apply on the hand with medicines, near the purification of the body from it; and the excess is not expelled and begins to go to another finger before going out of the hand.
And he asked me to incise the hand from it, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and rather feared that the incision of the hand might lead to death, because the power of the disease was very strong.
And after he departed from me, he returned to his homeland and it was reported to me that the man prepared himself and had his entire hand incised, and he recovered.
And I have added this narrative only so that it may be assistance regarding the nature of this disease, and to indicate its significance according to which it is described and acted upon.
Regarding the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged inside, forming a collection of pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, without reaching advanced corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged within so that corruption takes hold in some member, it is then called a fistula and not a carbuncle.
And the treatment for this is to incise that wound entirely as it revolves, and especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the wound will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus present in the wound, then your treatment should include enemas.
And you must consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you are treating has a foul odor, then administer an enema with Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and raisins in equal parts, mixed together until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; administer the mixture as an enema to the sinus, plug the opening of the wound, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
And then remove that medicine after its use; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is eliminated.
And sometimes an enema is given with ash water when you do not have this medicine available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water; then strain it and administer the enema with it until you are confident that the sinus is cleaned.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with honey and water mixed with raisins three times; also give an enema with vinegar and honey mixed, as honey has cleansing properties and vinegar helps the sinus to adhere, especially when the vinegar is rich in astringency and dryness.
And when you have washed certain areas and convince yourself that the sinus is already cleaned out, then wash it with water that helps new flesh to grow.
And it is that you take a decoction of myrtle and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar; or wash it with certain medicines and other decoctions which have the properties already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not admit the nozzle of the syringe, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place cotton soaked in Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction inside until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then sew together the edges with stitches and leave them in such a way that they do not interfere with the insertion of the syringe.
And if the opening from which the pus flows is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where the pus can flow downward, for when the arm is constricted at the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the lower bone as you wish, then make an opening so that the limb can be prepared in such a way that the pus flows freely according to your arrangement and without any hindrance to the arm.
Move the one who is above the opening of the sinus, which you should drain at all times so that what is inside the arm exits. And so that you know whether what flows from the arm is thin or thick, or is undigested or not undigested.
And for this you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter placed over the opening of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you should loosen it or change it every third day. When you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth for another one and renew the application.
But if from the sinus there is space for subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because healing will soon follow. For some people in whom flesh generation in their wounds takes a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for several days there is undigested matter coming out of the arm, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to a drying effect of the medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied, especially when there is an excess of moisture to be removed.
And the most important thing for curing is to take a powder and dissolve it in rose oil, and mix it with another ointment that has been previously prepared in its substance, and apply it to the area as needed.
In that situation, when there is no bandage available, find a piece of cloth and honey; if the honey has been boiled to thicken it, use that. Or take myrrh, aloes, and mastic, grind them all together, sprinkle the powder over honey which is on the fire, and pour this mixture onto a cloth and stretch it over the wound; and pour the thickened honey with the powder into the wound and sprinkle some of it on a cloth and apply that to the wound.
In some cases, administer with the juice of longleaf aristle and root of celestial lily (and it is a celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use those simple substances or mixtures, grind them together, sieve them, sprinkle the powder over the honey which has been recommended; and use that.
And if the wound has become prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its root, and it affects the bones or other hard parts of the body or the ligaments; now treat it with a fistula cure, as mentioned above.
On the treatment of blisters and worn nails, and the cutting of an additional finger and division.
A blister is an abscess that arises under the nail of a toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When prolonged, its treatment is less valued, or it is an abscess from a cautery burn, or it becomes corrupted, and it secretes pus that corrodes the nail root, often corrupting the entire nail, and sometimes spreading corruption to the bone, causing a foul odor, and making the extremity of the finger or toe darkened in color.
Therefore, when you have applied the treatment as we have said in the division and do not complete your cure, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound near there, for cauterization is helpful in this.
But if the bone is exposed and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have already drawn the flesh inward, and begin to pinch and irritate that area, then you should place a thin blade below the angle of the nail that pinches the flesh, and lift it up and incise that flesh easily, and apply upon what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and then cure that with remedies until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone there and extract it, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of the joints according to where the inflammation is located, and then treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a bruise or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatum in a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and it will lead to the formation of excessive tightened tissue in that place; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
This may be adjusted, which is natural in most people: it is thin and fleshy there, or thin and hollow where the bones are, or it is thin at the nails.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birthplace of the one in question is in some of the bones of the said joints. But the one that is born in some of the bones of the finger does not suffer much, and the one that is thin at the joints suffers greatly.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easy, and you should cut it where its root is with a broad scalpel.
But for the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful not to cut it.
But in the one that is born between the bones, it is necessary to cut into the flesh of its beginning with a round scalpel down to the bone, and then use one of the appropriate saws, and afterward treat what is inside until it heals.
But for consolidation that occurs between the bones either by their movement or due to the birth of the person in such a state, or due to healing from an injury or burning by fire, or similarly, then it is necessary to cut this consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
And then place between the flaps of the wound in oiled linen so that they do not heal too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is necessary for them to be healed as needed.
And so it seems that consolidation occurs in some of the said bones in the palm. At that time, you should dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the figure of the member.
Of the formation of veins, these are their types.
Veins are of these types, and there are veins wrapped thickly, full of melancholic superfluities that move through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times for strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment for them with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and completely extracted.
The sectioning of it is according to this method: bandage the leg with hot water for a time until the thick blood becomes resolved, which is sediment in the leg, and then strain the patient's leg at the most prominent part of the swelling below the knee with a cloth, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide sectioning, and then extract the black blood with the right hand from below the bandaged part upwards through it until the quantity of blood is drawn out that you want and that suffices for the patient's endurance and tolerance.
And then dress that area, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And then comes the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and at that night for the patient.
The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: you shave the area of the patient's body where hair is present, and then place them in a bath or wrap the affected part in hot water until it turns red and the veins are distended; or if a bath is not available, have the limb exercised vigorously until it becomes heated.
And then dry the bandage on the side of the vein by section either at the front or where the finger is, or lower down where the heel is.
And then apply the bandage with hooks and expose the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent, and you should notice its appearance as it turns to a darker shade.
And thus when you expose it, from the bandage you should see that white one which is a cord.
And then place the ligature below that white one so that it is elevated and suspended from the bandage, and suspend it with hooks like a lion's claw.
And then make another section near that section for three fingers' width, and then expose the bandage from above the vein until it becomes apparent.
And then elevate that one and incise it at the rear section near the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it comes out through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or furthest from all the sections, until it is completely out; and then incise it.
And if he does not obey to have it extracted and raised, then insert a strong double-pointed needle with thread and extract it, or insert below the nail and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise that part and it has become troublesome for the patient because of this injury.
And when you have completely removed it, then place on the site of the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted having twists to which there is an envelope in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the twist and at the places of its envelope, and then lift it with hooks until you raise it completely.
And be careful in your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in this.
Shape of the instrument with which the vessel is cut:
It is not sharpened like hooks nor does it have a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; and it is made of thick flexibility, like leather, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; however, it should be unnecessarily thick as we have said.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the camels in hot lands, just as in Africa and in the hot and dry lands of India with little vegetation and where no grass or crops grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body apart from the camels.
And its gestation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as venom develops inside the bodies of snakes and worms, generating between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this condition is that this vein causes inflammation in the camel; and near the location, it becomes vesiculated; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of that vesication, which seems like a plant rash.
And when the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and attach that to the camel and let the lead hang from it.
And each time it happens that any cause affects the parts outside, wrap it with lead and attach that to it. And if it is prolonged, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not incise that which appears like a rash until it has come out, for if you incise it while it is contracted, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulceration.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it, so that no cause remains in the body.
And from this vein it is issued in some men who are in its length of five palms and it has come to me that one reached twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, introduce the blade into the tract and perforate so that everything contained in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it emerges from several openings, and is branched from each opening.
And thus treat it as we have said in the division and according to what is mentioned above.
On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because often among cattle there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it shows itself through the sensation beyond its animated movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and goes out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and larvae and ascarids occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its mischief, for when it moves in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it easily enters and destroys the brain, and this happens sometimes.
Then when you wish to treat that and extract it, at that time it is not done except by means of the sling movement and appearance of it to the sense, and then you should tighten what is above it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and immediately dry over it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then pause and cauterize with fire above the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which the place is also corrupted as we have said.
If you see that it has reached near the eye, then tighten above the eyebrow with strong constriction, and immediately dry over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use cleansing of their body with medicines evacuating foul humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
On the treatment of nasal afflictions.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then it changes from one limb to another.
And I have already seen that as I will now tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and uncovering her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after resting for an hour, I saw that inflammation spreading as if it were wax moving from one place to another, but more quickly than could be expected, like living silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
And with this, it reaches in the other body until it enters the other arm.
And then it retreated to me, spinning throughout the entire body as I saw; and I was greatly amazed by the permutation of its movement and the speed from one member to another. And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that manner, but I have now seen words which show pain being transferred from one member to another. But I did not see this in my eyes as I did in the woman.
And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of a different nature, one of dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this way she exhibited the sensation of the air being transferred.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and soft, with moist bodies and hidden veins.
And when you want to treat it, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears in the eye as we have said, then you should press firmly on that area and quickly direct your treatment into where that trapped air has come out, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it in your eyes, then you should treat that by inducing the body to expel wind and air, and apply ointments for foul-smelling pills and for senna and similar remedies.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are varied according to their types, and according to the parts of the body where they strike, as their diversity includes those with large tips, small tips, concave tips, blunt tips, solid ones; and those with three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are shafts.
Of the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone, and exits at the vertex which is above the brain, there occur severe headaches, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo, stiffness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion and vomiting of bile, and very quickly speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. From the wound site comes a white moist substance like flour, and the face appears to have an abundance of moisture.
And so if these signs appear to you, then you must abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, which is near the left breast, are such that one can tell whether it has penetrated a hard or soft area; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the pulse movement, and blood from the wound is black, and coldness seizes the extremities, and cold sweat appears; therefore you will know that death descends soon.
Here are the signs when the arrow has struck the lung: bloody frothy fluid flows from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe out great sighs, and seek fresh air eagerly.
And if the arrow hits the membrane in the groin area, and the pain is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no movement at all of the limbs' muscles.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then immediately after the wound is inflicted, any undigested food causes great pain.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is embedded in it, causing some tear of the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and it causes some damage to the parts outside, and immediately there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
But the other limbs as well as the face, the neck, and the jaw, and the shoulders and the arm pits, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the chest and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the best practices when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may be significant for your own treatment.
The cause is that when an arrow struck a man in the lacrimal bone at the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind only the gray matter of his ear, and he healed without any injury to his eye.
From extracting another arrow from a Jew’s eye, the case being that the arrowhead was embedded in his eyeball, after lifting the eyelid up and down, and the arrowhead was hidden and could not be reached except for a small part to which it adhered with its shaft, and it was a large sharp arrow of those used by the Turks, armed with a lion’s tooth in which there were no barbs.
The senator was the Jew, and no harm came to his eye despite the accident.
From extracting another arrow from a Christian man, which was embedded in his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, the kind that has barbs; then I incised around it between two fingers, and it was submerged in his throat; then I carefully worked on it, and promptly removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
From extracting another arrow from a man’s abdomen, which he was thought to die from; and thus, after passing xxx days without any change in his condition due to its effects, I incised around the arrow and acted upon it, and he recovered, and no harm came to him despite the accident.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between his two shoulder blades, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years had passed, I extracted the arrow from its place.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, and there was no change in her condition as a result, and the woman did not suffer any harm from any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed over it, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases were like this.
About extracting the arrow from the man of the king's chief who was wounded in the middle part of his nose, and it had already deviated slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And he was called for the treatment of him after the embedding of the arrow within three days.
Then I discovered the track of the arrow as narrow; then I examined it carefully, and did not feel it there; but he felt a pain just below his right ear, and then I presumed that this pain was from the tip of the arrow.
Then I applied a plaster to the place that has attracting and digestive properties, hoping that it would cause an abscess so that the location of the arrowhead would appear to me from there.
And no significant incident occurred at the site that would indicate that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident occurring. Meanwhile, the wound healed, and on one day after about three weeks, I felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to him.
Then I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it softened, and upon examination with a probe, I discovered the tip of the arrow slightly adhering to the shaft.
Then I continued to open the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me about four months to reach this point.
Then when the wound had softened further and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and remove it, but I did not succeed at that time. Therefore, I continued to carefully consider and devise ways to extract it, until one day I began to use specially made forceps in a manner described later in this chapter, which allowed me to extract it; and then I treated the wound accordingly.
And some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I have restored it, and the wound has been consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there was no need for anything else.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you apply this rule and significance to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not comprehensible in narration nor do I comprehend those from the book.
And the wise craftsmen compare with few words; and with what is present about what is absent; and when new operations and new instruments are developed, they should explore the causes of such innovations in the art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are placed except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
And that which is removed by the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location and is drawn out.
And if you do not observe the time at which you catch it, sometimes it is better that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it heals and reduces the attraction of it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is placed in bone and you do not observe the proper method, then leave it for several days and gently move it according to its attraction each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not observe the proper method for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in that bone gently with a thin awl until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is out of reach, then you should probe around there, and if you feel it, then grasp it with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have instruments with which to do so, then remove the flesh in which it is embedded entirely with all the skill that you can muster; and proceed with this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the flesh over a fracture of the bones or twisting them until you are able to do so.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any place, then you use both a twist with your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and delicately with great delicacy that the arrow is not broken and that it is made difficult for you and its extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become less swollen, and then try again when the situation has improved. But if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about the treatment in the respective chapter.
And guard your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cord, and administer care in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And thus when you make the arrow contract so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should determine the removal of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But arrows that are ejected in the opposite direction from another part, or if you have already moved some part towards the external parts, or if the extremity of the arrow causes hardness due to the flesh above the shoulder blade and lifts it up; then you should cut on that point; and let the section be according to the amount at which the forceps take hold; and then pull it out, for it is made light by this method.
If it is held in the bone, then turn it so that the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it thus, and then extract that.
And if not, leave it there for several days, and then attempt to extract it when the flesh has healed.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to apply force, then insert and push it, if it is blunt, use a hollow instrument so that it fits between the curvature of it and the arrowhead, and then push it out from there.
But if the arrow is curved, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow will be dislodged by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure to cut away all the flesh in which it is embedded, if that is possible for you, and then treat it as is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and guard against injuring any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as is necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the ends of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which acts as a clamp when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip.
Of those are made various types of incisions, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the sinew, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
like a rod so that the instrument may be guided into the concave arrow and is pushed by it.
On the incision of veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at xxx points, of which sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on each temple; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts, called aspicientz; one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; two veins that are on the neck; two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; these are called algelic veins; and there are two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms total five. Among them is one cephalic vein, which they call "the vein of the head"; it is a small vein and is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein; they name this one "the vein of the whole body." The basilic vein is placed on the domestic arm and is called "citillar," and the common people call it "the vein of the abdomen"; the brachial vein, which is situated over the elbow, is the one that is phlebotomized, and it appears above the wrist with clear manifestation; and the salvatella vein, which is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and this one branches into two parts.
And in the thigh and the groin there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the horn of the wild goat; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the groin of the wild goat; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic diseases, purgatives, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are, using a large cloth with good friction; then hold the patient's hair tightly with a bandage so that the two veins appear near their respective ears in two places on the back of the head; and search for those veins with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where to attempt the bleeding.
Then take the lancet, and it should be sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers fitted together or around that amount; and let as much blood out as you wish.
And then apply pressure with a poultice and leave it there until it heals.
And there is mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision and also their cautery.
But the two veins, arteries that are for the practitioners of phlebotomy are to remove ancient and sudden evil and continuous ophthalmia and swelling from acute excesses poured into the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient sit and place your hand under their arm so that the two veins appear clearly by sight, and feel for their pulse below with your fingers; then you may proceed to attempt it.
And then raise the tourniquet above the vein toward the upper part with your indicated finger, and insert the phlebotomy instrument below, and lift the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient’s restraint, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on the wound and powder it and tightly bandage it above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And there is mentioned the recall of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the practice of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and to alleviate headache, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their arm with a cloth so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a lancet, whose form is as follows:
Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the furrow above that vein, and strike it with a slant or for some other reason in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then untie the patient's perforation and apply something inside until it is healed.
And in some cases it is necessary to use a flebotomy lancet, but it does not need to be sharp like other lancets; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and cut across that area since the bone is close to the surface and would easily break if the flebotomy were too fine.
May the treatment of the two veins near the tear ducts of both eyes be for treating itchy eyes due to force and grease in the eyes, and also for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the patient should hold their arm with a bandage, and then perform the flebotomy on them, while you stand above their head.
And the flebotomy should be performed across the length a little to one side with a lancet, a little less in that location since there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, the tip could easily break.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those points, and tie those areas for one night, and then untie them.
And the flebotomy of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet sharp long and fix it in the middle place of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and for the blood begins to flow immediately.
Push your hand with the small phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy on those is that the patient strains each one below his neck with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet slightly at a time; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you find necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and compress both veins moderately with a pad so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave it for the night as the plague is healed.
And the harm of phlebotomy on thick veins concerns small abscesses and pimples in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that you face the patient before you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then unfold the lips of him and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those small veins there are black ones; and then incise each with an incision of incising.
If doubt is before you and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of those, and from the most apparent of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
However, the two veins that are below are more helpful for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in preference to those in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you place the patient between your hands facing towards the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to use too much force in phlebotomizing those, for behind those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend are usually common to all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either apply to the phlebotomy a small mirror or an olive branch with subtlety inclined; or use a fleam for phlebotomy and feel if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
Tie the ligatures in the same way as described, and it is suitable to open concave full veins with obvious thick roots, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
And this veinotomy is of lesser width and has a more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for veinotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Moreover, the benefit of veinotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that affect the lower abdomen and the groin, and from what affects the legs and the belly.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, when performing veinotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and to have great fear of it, because near it there is an artery. If he makes a mistake and hits the artery during the puncture of the veinotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flood of blood. Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on that with a sharp instrument but rather should section it as with scissors.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly by obvious inspection, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or search for some branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is clear, and section that with a scissors-like phlebotomy as we have said.
If you want the phlebotomy of the middle vein, then place your hand above the constriction of the arm where you touch the place between the wrists, and slightly bend your thumb; then hold the arm tightly and section the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery in any part of the location.
And when you see it, as you tighten the ligature, inflammation in the place where you marked with your thumb, then that inflammation is arterial inflammation, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as clear as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you should stop and pause your hand there for some time; and after that remove your hand, and if the bleeding stops, wait a few moments, then tie the arm there.
And keep the patient away from moisture, and let them be free of fear and do not allow them to use that arm for some days until they are healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and you must act without medical assistance present, then incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood is spurting; or take a piece of cloth, and tear it, and use one part to tie it over the location of the vein with a descending ligature and with powders on the other day.
And if the blood has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what precedes for remembering the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
The removal of the bone in many cases is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
For the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; this is composed of branches of the basilica and of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is important for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during the phlebotomy because below that area lies a nerve; if you puncture it while performing the phlebotomy and injure the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing from this condition is difficult, and rarely does one recover completely. This nerve is visible in many cases but sometimes hidden and subtle, not revealed to everyone; therefore, when you perform phlebotomy on a section where there is such a possibility, avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves ailments of the eyes.
And it is appropriate here to ensure that when you perform phlebotomy, you do so at the olive vein or the myrtus vein; for this is the safest of all veins, as it is neither near an artery nor a nerve.
However, sometimes a boil appears on some people, when it is not bloodletting in the first attack, we do not know how to deal with that boil.
The first of these is about which you should know that bloodletting is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope for its improvement and caution against the onset of diseases, and that bloodletting should be performed on one of the veins found in the neck, namely: cephalic, jugular, and basilic; and that bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at the first hour of the morning, after three hours have passed.
However, bloodletting that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that a child not be bloodletted until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodletted except from the fourth month to the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be bloodletted.
And when someone wants to be bloodletted in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before bloodletting with a laxative, if there is retained feces in them, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids during the bloodletting of the cleansed bowels, and so that they do not affect the main limbs.
Let not venesection be performed on patients suffering from sea sickness or drunkenness, nor during the onset of illness or drunkenness when their blood is disturbed, nor in cases of dropsy. Moreover, avoid it if there is fear of colic, vomiting, or abdominal issues, and also if there has been excessive coition, labor, exercise after meals or prolonged wakefulness, or any cause that dissolves strength, whether physical or animal.
And also consider the subtlety of the vapors before determining if the blood is thick, in foods and drinks, and in medicines if that is possible to do.
And also bathe if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood finer.
And avoid venesection at the height of the day, which is around the third hour, as we have said.
And ensure that the patient avoids all harmful animal incidents on that day, such as distress, anger, fear, and all physical exertions, such as excessive work, unnecessary labor, sexual activity, and similar activities.
And at the time of seating, have present the causes for which men usually use aromatics and odors, as well as balms and similar substances according to quantity and possibility.
And the one performing venesection should stand on higher ground than the patient who needs to be bled.
And then extend his arm, and clean it with his own hand the veins two or three times; and then wrap the limb with a strap and wind it around twice.
And let the ligature be timely placed, for if the ligature is not equal or if it is excessive, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is too slack, then prohibit the coagulation of the blood similarly.
And regarding the ligature, it should be such that he who is to have phlebotomy should rub his arms thoroughly beforehand until the veins are swollen and become apparent.
And regarding the phlebotomist, he anoints his phlebotomy instrument with a little old oil properly. And then places his finger of the left hand on that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein slightly recedes and the percussion is set since of the veins it is one which flees as if a cord were fleeing from the phlebotomy, and these are full of air, and when he places the phlebotomy instrument on those, they contract around it, and the phlebotomist understands; and the phlebotomy instrument does not open the vein, and if it opens it, that one is narrow.
And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious and diligent in all these matters.
And then place the phlebotomy instrument, but if the vein is open in one spot, that is good; and if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or above it if there is inflammation, if the area is not abscessed.
And if the area is abscessed, or the patient becomes weak, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it will quickly draw out the abscess, nor should the patient enter a bath.
About the vein-cutting let it be said if you love it.
And if the aperture is small and lets blood finely, and you fear that it will not yield the quantity of blood that you wish, then repeat the venesection in that spot according to straightness and adjust the aperture a bit, and do this with haste before the place becomes abscessed, for the place becomes abscessed in most men after little aperture.
But if you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat it there, for it will serve you no purpose; and apply some part of the poultice of oil, for it disperses the blood. And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, apply a poultice of olive oil to every venesection where you cut the veins beyond the prohibition of blood flow, and do this with turpentine al-fadhak and sage when applied over the spot, for the blood is refined and becomes thin when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated in the place of the venesection, which happens sometimes, especially to those who have not been bled before except that time, or where there was little aperture of the vein, and then you should incise it, and apply over the spot a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and press that for one hour, for it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do this near the discharge of blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the spot for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply some preparation of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or plaster or something similar.
And from swellings there arise abscesses and elevations which require phlebotomy at the base.
And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find it soft, apply pressure to that spot; then that elevation is evil and bad. And be careful not to place anything there for any of the reasons mentioned, as blood will flow strongly from an artery.
And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the spot becomes hardened, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone in proportion to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is acute, until its sharpness is abated.
And for one who is strong and healthy and has a need for bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy from the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract blood in small quantities, and let the procedure be done quickly.
And the best method to use in venous phlebotomy is the cross-section cut, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
For those to whom it is accustomed to suffer fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in vinegar of raisins or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the artery in three or four stages.
And if the patient is of a melancholic temperament, then before phlebotomy give bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and sweetened syrup.
And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of sweet blood, then give them to drink watered sweet syrup and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with sugar, and let them hold their nose with it.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to dissolve their blood a second time, it is suitable for them that the phlebotomy is for gentle evacuation, and its effect is to evacuate the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of strength over continuous days.
But for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to reduce their blood a second time, and if their body is strong, then do this about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side to which it declines, it is suitable that they be bled on the second or third day.
Place that body in which the blood has become heated and excited and causes fever in such a way that the blood is let from it in one vein, and there should be a large quantity removed until fainting occurs, so that you maintain all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the side from which the blood is being let, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are now closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, for this is very harmful.
Handle the wound carefully so that phlebotomy can be performed a second time; or remove it with the inflammation caused by coagulation of the blood in the vein's orifice; or apply on it some turpentine, or sage, and press it gently until the blood has been fully evacuated.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave that wound and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed from that site on the other location or in another vein of the other arm.
And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fossa or the basilica, when they are not obstructed or hidden, for it consists of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Here is the translation:
And let the incision be wide and let your phlebotomy on it, which you perform over the joint of the hand, be small.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, now you immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, now you are exempt from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and similarly the flow of blood is paused in hot water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
And the phlebotomy of the right hand's vein is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the observer; then make the incision transversely across it; and if you do not perform this correctly, none of this will be known.
And be careful not to leave your hand exposed after the phlebotomy, because there are nerves among the aforementioned areas stripped of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the venous opening, and the flow will be hindered.
And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, now apply oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from healing too quickly; similarly, you should do this in all cases.
Here is the translation:
And so it seems in the phlebotomy of the artery as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the vena cephalica in phlebotomy is for diseases that are below the waist, such as diseases of the legs, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar ailments.
And the procedure for phlebotomy of the artery is that the patient immerses his foot in hot water and then rubs it until the veins become visible; and he places a cord around the joint of the foot; and the location of the vein is on the front part of the foot, and from there it branches out over the surface of the foot in several places.
And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the joint in front of the ankle, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and stop your phlebotomy when you reach a point where you would otherwise cut across.
And so the phlebotomy is complete.
But if the release of blood is prohibited; then immerse the foot in hot water again and allow the blood to flow naturally until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly above it, for that location is effective; and do not fear making a small error, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And in the same way I apply the scalpel to the other part equally.
And for the sciatic vein, you should locate it as we have said, below the heel behind the cavity of the sole.
And the procedure for phlebotomy on him is behind the hip when it is for therapeutic bleeding.
And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that the patient should enter a bath, and quickly and tightly wrap his leg from the waist to below the heel with four fingers in a thin strip of cloth, so that it does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, now you should perform phlebotomy on that spot according to each angle that is possible for you and according to the transverse position; or incise that area by incision or cut it by section, as the location of it is suitable.
And it is in the words of men somewhat hidden; and if you find that spot, and it does not appear to full sensation, now phlebotomize some branch of it, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger on the back of the hand.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
And then loosen the binding and place a pad over the phlebotomy site, securing it tightly, for healing occurs quickly.
Of venesection and of the qualities of using those methods.
Venesections should be done with horns, or ivory, or wood.
Of bloodletting there are two methods: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
And this bloodletting which is without incision is done in two ways, as it can be with heat or without heat.
And for bloodlettings that are administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, of which one is where phlebotomies are performed in al-nocrati, which is at the very back of the head; another location is just below both sides of the neck; phlebotomies of the chin below the jaw near the mouth; phlebotomies of the two cheekbones; phlebotomies of alohoster, which is above the collarbone; phlebotomies of two armpits; and phlebotomies of two thighs.
And bloodletting that does not extract the blood but rather affects the small veins spread in the flesh, and by this it does not capture the virtue as it would with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done with heat or without heat in any disease caused by repletion, so that the entire body may be evacuated.
But if necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at whatever times may be appropriate.
Therefore, when you encounter any such case among those mentioned, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that ventilation be made after two or three hours have passed since midday.
And the benefit of ventilation from the neck is that when it relieves gravity in the head and what has settled in the temples; but it should be done in such a way that it also aids in the evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventilation is at the site of the phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not advisable to use it on one who has a complete fever, or in one who has a cold, for it can cause great harm to them.
And because of this, it should not be used on the elderly, and those whose heads are often diseased.
But for one who is continuously lying on it, forgetfulness may occur; and because of this, you should command the person performing the ventilation to pause their work briefly by lifting the cup away from the area to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventilation of the forehead is at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and because of this, it relieves asthma, constriction of the chest, splitting of the sternum, coughing, and congestion.
And it is necessary to apply the forehead cupping lightly, for if it is left too long, it can cause weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of the temples relieves pain in the head, ophthalmia, headache, nasal congestion, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And you should order the barber-surgeon not to press too hard with his hand during incision so as not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
And in suction, place the chin to confer with the palate in the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and for the appearance of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand as a substitute for phlebotomy between the two lips.
But the suction that is performed on the two spatulas corresponds to capitation, which is made by an accumulation of heat.
And the suction of both parts inside the fingers corresponds to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those larger veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And order the barber-surgeon not to proceed too much in incision, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave it lest you injure nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction that is performed on the thighs and corresponds to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers that are nearby.
And you should order the barber-surgeon to use a large suction cup, and let it be made of horn, for the area requires strong drying; and apply strong suctions followed by subtle ones and let it be incised during incision.
But small suction cups should be used with meticulous care, for they draw blood from the entire body, and correspond to chronic pains in the loins and lower back, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and correspond to bothor (boil) and ademil (pustule); and stand as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphena veins, alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
However, these weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some men.
And of the windy ones, apply the dressing to the wound from the side opposite the windy ones of two sides.
And the quality of the position of the dressings is that you place the dressing at the beginning dry and then change it according to the season, and do not prolong the position of the dressings, but place them lightly, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the site appropriately. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the rigor of the blood appears.
Now you should incise and change the dressing little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For the man who has tender flesh with few pores should be incised once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the dresser to enlarge the incision slightly and proceed with the dressing with ease and promptness.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise twice, because on the first incision the way for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened. But on the second incision, it is for the thorough extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very impure, then a third incision should be made so that it achieves the desired result.
In conclusion, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, a scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract more blood, we perform two scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a deeper incision.
And the term "scarification" refers to the depth of the incision being only superficial.
And if the skin of the person to be scarified is thick, hard, dark, and has small pores, it is necessary to anoint the areas for cupping with soothing, penetrating, and resolving oils; in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or oil of daisies, or chickweed oil; and in winter, narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be henna oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, or similar.
But if the cupping vessel has wide pores and is applied to soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and before the application of cupping, the areas where the cups will be placed should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or chickweed water, or betony water, or similar.
And for the person whose blood has much moisture, wash their cupping areas with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, or similar.
And for the person whose excesses are thick, wash their cupping areas with old vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, or similar.
Therefore, ensure that the suction is preserved before bathing; handle it so that it is administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and make sure they sleep near the suction.
What is needed to be done to regulate the use of suction or bloodletting before suction therapy.
At the beginning, if the one who is to perform suction or the one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and there is wind in the sharp blood with inflammation, then it is necessary for them to take cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, saffron, julep, and similar things.
And let them pause from their foods such as pork, and meat of beneficial birds, and seasoned foods with acids, and similar things.
And for the one whose constitution is weak, let them drink rose syrup, or saffron syrup made from seeds, and sumac, and something fragrant midway between morning and noon; and advise them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods such as pork, fish, poultry, small birds, and dove.
And on the day of suction and phlebotomy, let their drinking be more than their food.
And let it be given to them to drink at certain times ambergris alcohol or medicine of musk, such as muscat, or alepheta before suction or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those heating substances.
Here are the veins that should be used for venesection: those located in the region of the neck, on the sole and ankle, on the navel, at the joints, and in the hollow of the armpit, because these members cannot endure incisions upon them.
And they are not sought for any other purpose than to attract blood from a member, just as we apply cupping to the breast in cases of excessive bleeding from the nose; and they use it where there is need to dissolve solidified congestion in a member, just as we apply it to the abdomen and navel; for this rarifies the member, heats it up, and alleviates the pain by resolving the congestion.
And cupping should be applied to the nostrils when they are blocked or stuffy, for by the power of attraction it raises the obstructed matter and eliminates the phlegm from its location.
And similarly, it does the same when applied to the chest and sole due to congestion, as it releases what is enclosed there.
And these cuppings should be administered only with suction; some are also applied over fire.
And some cuppings should be administered filled with hot water in cases of ailments affecting the sole.
And this is because the cupping vessel should be full and larger; it can be hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of a cupping vessel applied with fire: the diameter of its opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the interior space should be half a palm; and in its middle, at the place that is in the circuit, it should be half as well, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside a needle.
Make a pad of egg whites or citrus peel, of thick margins, linen, bands and clean so that it does not lead to the limb being placed upon it.
And place above it a crossbar of wood or iron, on which is placed a candle for the light.
And this suction cup should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the size of it according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
And the suction cups for children and weakened individuals should be smaller than those for young adults and people with larger frames.
And the quality of placing this suction cup over the fire on the limb is that it should extend the skin over the fire properly in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it above the crossbar in the proper location of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
And it should be placed directly on the limb of the patient, and the hand should be on the area we have mentioned, so that when we use the suction cups and do not need to hold the hand while steam is applied over that area, the suction cup will dissolve quickly.
And gently apply heat to the skin according to its manner, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
But in the suction cup that is administered for pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or area mentioned, and it is not applied except when it is filled with water and placed on the limb.
And this is its form: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter xcviij.
Bloodletting should not be administered in movable members but in those members where the application of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters below, clean and free from corruption.
And then they should be left in the water below for a day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and suction cup application; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and swollen.
And if suction can be applied to the area with a cup, it is better for recovery.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the blood extends from the site of the leech bites and there is residual blood, then place a piece of cloth on cold water, and apply it until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or similar astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply masticated fava beans to the site, and leave them there until they adhere to the area, at which point the bleeding will be stopped.
In circumcision, if it is necessary, repeat the application of bloodletting strips, when it is possible to change those.
And if the bloodletting strips are prohibited from suspension, then at that time it should be washed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the places between which there is blood; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will quickly heal.
And when you want to stop bleeding, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash over it, and the bleeding will quickly cease.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh, son, be aware that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the vulgar, as well as those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it for any length of time at all; and I have not applied what follows, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, until I extracted the science from them.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience is based; now I abbreviate it for you and free it from the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate it to the point of brevity; and demonstrate it at the end of clarification; and form many forms of the instruments used therein, as added by explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of fractures of the bones, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin to recall the parts of fractures and their various types. Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter to summarize the discourse; and the chapters that are essential for understanding at the beginning are necessary for the craftsman and to stand on the truth of those things; it is for you and others like you who wish to know or learn this noble art.
And so I say that when it happens to someone to have a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to bandage them, or any other immediate treatment, if there are no prohibitive causes, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to an infant, or an elderly person in decline, or during a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
And you should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and foods that fill the body excessively, and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of an abscess being cured, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And now return the patient to their original regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef tripe, eggs, fresh fish, and similar foods, and with this regimen, healing of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the bones in those who are old and in young children, as well as in the elderly, cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the members.
However, nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from all parts for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they congeal together until the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning does not prevent it from performing its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to avoid giving the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and gross, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And you will find a description of every type of fracture, expanded in its own separate chapter.
Consider the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diverse within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft and splinters and complete and incomplete, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, there is a fracture due to impact and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, as will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Consider the signs of a bone fracture. And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and what happens when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the location or sound, and when you touch the bone with pressure and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there may be twisting or a small crack. In this case, do not press on it with your hand and compress it entirely; instead, wait and apply the medicines of which mention will be made shortly at the moment when it is appropriate to do so; and it may also be narrow due to subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or another part where it does not suffer from swelling, you should begin from your hour to correct the condition of the affected area where an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterwards bandage it according to each method that you can of lightness and of support.
And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is easier than with the bone in which swelling has occurred.
And afterwards strengthen it according to what will come to mind regarding it.
But if the bone is swollen, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a bandage according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it forces you to return those addictions with support and according to each way that you can in their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes from your operation either by injury or damage; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any diverse cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
And from an incorrect and excessive extension or compression, so do false physicians cause an abscess to occur through their operation, or they cause a contraction in the limb as we have seen this happen due to their improper manipulations.
And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; because you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of each one.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and similar ones, the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with hard bandages, because these bandages connect and secure the large limb firmly from all sides in an equal restriction, so that no dirt enters.
And when you begin, after the proper equalization of the limb, pause conveniently for that, on the site of the fracture with three or four layers of bandages depending on the limb; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
And apply to it the most sovereign poultice for the place of the fracture, and tighten moderately that bandage with which you have bound the place of the fracture. And then lengthen the bandage around the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the binding gradually, until you take off most of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken place with a binding, and afterwards apply to it the bindings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the binding and in the loosening of that one as we have said about the first binding above.
And then place between the bandages a piece of soft linen or cloth on which the unevenness of the fracture is padded, if there is any unevenness; and if not, do not place anything there for this reason.
And then place on the other bandage, and afterwards apply plasters properly made soon if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and now place on that which cures the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave this for several days; and then you tighten over it the bandages.
And let the plasters be half a cubit wide in length, and well formed wisely; or let them be made of willow wood; or from strips of palm; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; and then tighten over the plasters another bandage as your first binding; and afterwards bind above with wax moderately as we have said about binding, and it is that your binding should be tighter near the fracture, and as much as it is distant from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes of twisted hemp for their threads, it is a great mistake, when one considers the equality of tension.
And likewise, very fine threads are not appropriate, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be not less than one digit between knot and knot.
And if the patient is injured at the ends of the bones near the sutures in such places, then pause and use threads of lion’s sinew or matted wool until it does not cause harm to him.
Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow, and there is a disruption in the chain, and I recall this particular case in the second chapter.
And know that not all broken members should be set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it should not be placed on splints immediately but after about five or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over injuries.
Method of a plaster for the quick restoration of fractures, suitable for delicate conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour powder, which is the residue from the grinding process that sticks to the walls of the mill.
And confine it as it is, but sieve it with white cloth, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method for plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lead danum, of acacia, of inula, and migrauch, which is the rind of wild millet, of each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each a drachm v; aloe chil each a drachm xx; all are to be ground and sieved together and mixed with water or with white cloth if the preparation is warm; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health upon men.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migrauch (rind of wild millet) and met of white lead each a drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each a drachm v; of acacia a drachm vi; of Armenian bole a drachm xx.
All should be triturated in a mortar with a pounding motion, and then sieved, and compounded with water or with white cloth if the mixture is warm, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil and apply it to the area.
Note that this plaster is not for restoration, but for abscesses and properly expelling pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of applying a shortened plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take rhizomes of elder, chamomile flowers, and violets, and flour of spelt, of each one part; mix all finely and cook in wine, if the member is not burned.
But if it is burned, now confect that in cold cilantro water or in water and use it.
Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rhizomes of elder and seeds of linseed, and buckthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; all should be finely mixed and cooked in savory water or warm water or in wine, whichever is appropriate according to the quality of the limb and the condition indicated by its appearance.
However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration other than cerot made of wax and oil, and he recommends that it be midway between thickness and fineness.
However, Galen is seen to have them applied on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes in which there is drying with a little heat as well as substances like myrrh, saffron, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster to relieve injury and pain: take linseed, sesame seeds, human hair cut or bird's feather, elder rhizome, and salt, in equal parts; mix them finely and sieve them and cook them, then make a plaster.
The amount according to which it is necessary that the dressing remain and should then be removed, is that you consider whether there is no pain or swelling or the bone is not displaced from its place; otherwise, do not remove it for several more days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should be cautious or remove that dressing at once, and remove the plaster as well.
And take a piece of cloth and a sponge soaked in lemon juice, and dip it into boiled water, and with this wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for one hour; afterwards apply on it pure wool submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it over it for one night until you are sure of no abscess formation, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it has been relieved.
And then repeat that gentle wrapping and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first one, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and wrapping, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs to the limb, then do not remove it but leave it for three days or four or five or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days, as seems appropriate by removing the dressing, as we said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
At this point adjust more strictly than in your first stricture completely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was mentioned previously.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and wasting more than is appropriate, then you will know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it; therefore, apply a poultice to it with tepid water whenever you do so; and do this for three days in total; then slightly loosen the bandage, and through this operation direct nourishment to the member, and it will be quickly healed.
But what foolish restorers of the fractured member do otherwise when it is not restored at the proper time and in a straight manner, according to their procedure, is an error and great fear, and if this were true, the Ancients would have enlarged on this in their books and warned against it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that they do not do so.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, and the impact removes part of the bone internally, just as it would in wood, and for this reason this type is called a splinter. Or the object may cut some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating entirely through; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures may be great or slight, and there is also a fracture known as comminuted or crushed; and the cause of this is an impact with something weak or falling onto a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is either penetrating that is approaching the panniculus which is below the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the danger of these two fractures is great or little.
And of the fracture that is in the bone, in the subtlety of the small fibers, and by this it is named this species of fracture capillary.
And it is the fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar things, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its partitions, and it is made in the place of concavity as happens with the bones of the arm when they occur due to their impact, and it is the parting of their entry into the inner parts.
And this is mostly made in the bones of living beings, as with the heads of children.
And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, such as pads and plasters separated. And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
And you shall know all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is known by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is cleaned, it appears black on the surface.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by these symptoms that it signifies by evident signs fear, such as vomiting with anger, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar conditions along with their rigor, and if they resemble the symptoms in major dispositions, doubt whether he can be healed.
And if for uncommon cases you hope for a cure, then you begin the treatment of them.
The cause of which is that if a person comes to you with the illness at its beginning as it is an illness, and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to study the condition of the bone until the day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, because what is above the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small fragments and attrition, then you must excise the fragmented and abraded part, as I will recount to you.
And you should shave the head of the patient who is ill, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the illness, so that it is easy for you to work on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, deal with blood flow or an abscess by cauterization, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to cover the area with cloths infused in vinegar and rose oil, and allow the illness to rest until the abscess is subdued and there is no more bleeding; then begin circumferential treatment around the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you excise the bone with sharp scissors, and this is the form of it: And then use another scissor slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
And then apply some of the pus to the second incision.
And it is necessary that you have various incisions at your disposal, some of which are used for pus longer than others; and some of them are quicker in their effects than the others, and they range from sharpness to dullness, and they may be made of iron or leather.
And use them with ease in tapping on the incisions so that you do not injure the head and cause harm to it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it before you apply the incisions, using shallow grooves, which are called non-deep trenches.
And they are not called this only because those do not reach the end of the skull bone to what is nearby; therefore, at the groove there is a rounded edge or margin above it near the head, similar to a small border or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient that you take many of these grooves, each of which suits the sharpness of each bone, so that there are present throughout the entire skull edges that are sharp, with quantities in length and shortness according to the amount of sharpness of this bone.
And this is the form of three types of grooves: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and rotate it with your tools until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the groove to another location, and proceed in this manner throughout the entire area according to the quantity of its thickness or around it.
Here is the translation:
And see that you keep such careful watch that the incisor does not touch any part of the thigh.
And when you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and it is separated from the thigh if it is continuous with it, and you will extract that part, shave and equalize that in roughness to what is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but make sure it is more blunt and finer than other incisors.
And if any part of the small and delicate bones remains, now take that with ease with what is appropriate to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have said.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac greatly praises; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start revealing the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the tip of this slow and joyful incisor, which has this form:
And it is that the lens-shaped part should be left intact and you should not incise any part of it, while the sharp-edged part should be divided into two flaps longitudinally, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part fits against the thigh with its sharp edge fitting into the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small mallet until you incise all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure to protect the panniculus so that no accident happens in any way that you fear, even if the practitioner were the most timid of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
If there is any cause associated with the bone of the neck in some places of the bone, cut that part where the lens-shaped part [of the instrument] reaches, and deliver that part from it easily, since it can be delivered without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the neck, and that which is abscised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in the roughness and small particles, then you should scrape away that roughness and eradicate those particles with fine razors for which you have prepared various quantities so that you may administer the most suitable ones wherever necessary during your operation on the broken bone and use them correctly according to how you proceed.
And you should administer in your proportion at which you scrape the bone initially with the broadest of those razors, and gradually use finer ones as you proceed, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and most delicate of all of them.
In each of the other small, delicate fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for the correction of the bone.
And it is because they are not afraid or hesitant about all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written regarding major fractures.
And if the neck is swollen when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in warm oil, and place that over the wound opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in vinegar and warm oil, and place that over the first cloth, doing this as lightly as possible so as not to press on the cicatrix; then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not tighten it more than necessary for the wound.
If you are sure that there is no danger of an abscess after one or two days, then untie it and apply medicines which are too drying, such as lint strips and flour paste, and powder of onions and arishta, and similar things.
And it is that you should make of these medicines powder which is finely ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, apply any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let it not become infected or inflamed; nor allow its virulence to increase. For when it is situated over the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that part and poisons it, and thus you will bring about a serious illness due to this malice.
And it affects the brain, as when the bone is penetrated and especially when there is pressure on the wound, and there is discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider these signs if you see the symptoms of illness that we have mentioned, for then you know it to be dangerous without doubt.
And if the discoloration is not from the wound itself but from the medicine applied above it, and it is due to the property of that medicine causing the discoloration, then take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and soak a piece of linen in these, and apply that over the brain; and thereafter treat it with appropriate healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is severed.
Know that the nose is not broken except into two main parts, or sometimes one of those lesser divisions, because in it there are two bones, for the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bruised, swollen, and distorted.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and reduce that fracture from within with your index finger, and with your thumb without, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a probe that has some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And when you restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then after seven or ten days, you should wait until the swelling subsides.
And afterwards insert into the end of the nose a pad of linen if the fracture is in one part, or two pads if the fracture is in two parts, and let each pad have enough thickness to fill the cavity of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in butter, and changed every day, but I have not seen this practiced; however, it is necessary that the pad be soaked in almond oil mixed with powder of flowers; and afterwards leave the pad until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, insert in the nose, instead of cotton, a piece of wool wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that already the fracture of the nose is so severe and that the patient not be prevented from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, use cotton.
And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or honey mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with myrrh.
But if no swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, then you should apply a plaster over it with sesame flour and powdered eggshell mixed in albumen of egg; and afterwards place it on the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with anything.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you should incise above them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and afterwards close the fissure, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this.
And if there is an injury inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound on the surface, examine whether the fracture is only on the outside and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, then you should insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, then at that time insert your said finger from the right hand; and push it so as to bring together the fractured bone from within with ease to the parts outside, with your other hand from the outside part of the bone; in this way properly equalize it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts as straight as possible so that the equalization may be feasible.
And if there is concussion of the teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately place on the broken jaw a piece of cloth, and immediately place on it a double layer of cloth, and place on the large cloth a properly made bandage or a piece of soft material equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as you are accustomed to binding it and as is convenient for application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
And if you find that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; and then correct what has already been altered from it and plaster it with powder of flour, egg albumen, or flaxseed meal, after you have removed the cloth from it, and place a thin layer of linen over the plaster.
And then as it stands attached and adjusted that plaster to it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for this fracture usually becomes strong in about three weeks.
And if another abscess appears which requires cauterization, then administer what we have said about similar cases during the process to ensure it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
And if the fracture is a splinter, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced. At this point, use your skill to remove those splinters with what is necessary for their removal using the appropriate instruments.
And if the opening of the splinter is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel as much as your need dictates.
And when you have removed those splinters and none remain to be treated, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this and promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 5
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
There are various ways the collarbone can be fractured when broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it may be fractured, separated, or broken into two parts without displacement; and this is easy to restore. Or it happens with displacement, making restoration difficult. Or the fracture occurs with a splinter, making it complicated.
And the procedure when the fracture occurs with a splinter is that you should have two assistants present; one to hold the displaced collarbone and assist in stabilizing it, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
In adjusting the splints for the fracture, make sure to shape them as is appropriate, and ensure there are neither too many elevations nor depressions.
And if you need more extension, then place below the armpit of the injured side a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the pad with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as is appropriate.
And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper position, then have the patient lie supine on their neck, and place a pad over the muscle, about midway in size.
And the assistant should press the muscle from below so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated to its proper place, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the splints mentioned.
But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and small pieces, then it is necessary to cut around them and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you must devise an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after having placed below the collarbone the instrument used by the scribe; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:
And it is similar to the curve of a bowl, whose shape is concave; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Make the length of the tool as suitable as you can for the operation; it should have two ends, and one end should be broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you should now approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will not form an abscess, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
And if an abscess forms, then apply a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over that area.
And so that the splint is not loosened over the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, and when the bandaging is loose or you see that the splint has already been moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandage.
And place the patient's pillow at the back of his neck, and put something underneath to raise it so that during sleep the head is slightly elevated; thus raising the helper (scapula) on one side, and therefore elevating the fracture of the collarbone with the muscle; or have the arm bound to the side of the neck.
And do not loosen the bandaging unless you find an abscess in the vicinity, within twelve days.
And then replace the plaster if you see that it needs to be done, and adjust it in the joint and restore it so that it remains there until the fracture of the collarbone is healed and has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken in the middle and not shattered but with its edges cracked.
And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the figure of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way you can manage.
And then put on the place powder of ground egg whites and lion's fat; and then put on powder of double cloth; and then put on the plate lint very finely according to the quantity of the spoon all or at most a little.
And if you leave the plate concave in some parts of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then press the plate according to equality.
And then bind it above with linen strips with moderate tension and fix the plate in place so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandaging each day; and every time it is softened, apply another layer and tighten it, and adjust the plate if it has moved from its position.
And place the dressing on its proper side.
And the spoon is restored in xx days or in xx.v days.
And when this number of days is completed, then you remove the bandaging, and be sure that these are bones for which there was no initial fear nor dissolution.
And if pus appears in the bone area and you place a bandage there, then you cut into it, remove it, and proceed as we have said for the fracture of the clavicle or for the suppuration of an abscess, should that occur here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of foot fractures.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains relatively simple; however, its extremities often move, causing cicatricization and comminution.
Of the accidents when the bone is broken are that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and spitting blood; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back, and a bolster is placed between the shoulders; then press the muscles, and adjust the ribs with two or more ribs, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the figure of the bone returns as necessary.
And then place the plaster and cotton over thin laths of wood or reeds or similar light materials, as you wrap it in cloth; then carefully bind that over the broken bone without pressing too hard; and go around the binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that with moderate strength; then observe the bandage at all times, and when it softens, tighten it again.
And if necessity requires the removal of that due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or abscess which occurs in the area, then you must cut and loosen that and remove the plaster and rectify what has occurred according to the method of treatment; and then reapply the plaster, if it is necessary for this purpose; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick parts where they lie next to each other; and at the extremities of them in front, such contusions do not happen there because they are cartilaginous. And concerning the nerve, there is no deception regarding its sensation; you must investigate it as mentioned.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture as mentioned by the possible method, within which it is aligned as necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if you deem it necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, it often causes severe pain and piercing sensations, like those that occur when one weeps, and because of this the bone puts on a covering; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients were skilled in that which involves generating terms.
And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
But we should be cautious with this to avoid it being a light cause for generating an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it does occur, then it helps in dealing with that.
And some of them say that it should be paused above the application of gas relief and then suck out with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the gas might draw the excesses to the site due to weakness.
And some of them say: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs so that it is filled, making the bandaging even as you wrap it according to its roundness; then treat the injury as one would for pleurisy with food therapy and medicine.
And if the patient is very constrained by pain which they cannot endure, and the bone has penetrated through the dressing with a puncture wound, we fear for the patient; at that time it is necessary to cut above the location, expose the broken part, and immediately apply an instrument to secure the fracture, the memory of which precedes, and that we easily cut the bone and extract it.
And immediately adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then carefully incise it and apply powder in boiled oil on the site, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
And let them be reclined on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly in their healing, as well as in the spine of the back. And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider this: if the veins are already softened, numb, and dead, and cannot be moved or stretched, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no pain in them, then you know that they will not recover, and in such conditions it is mortal.
And if they respond and there is constriction when you press on them and pierce them with a needle, then you know that the bone in the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then look at its condition.
Now if you see that someone has become weak, and it happens in the way that usually happens to most people, and shortly after lying on their back they feel windiness and involuntary evacuation, and sometimes they are bent backward and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and at that point do not strive for a cure for them.
But if none of those causes occur, then the condition is better and farther removed from danger.
And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the abscess after placing over the affected vertebra olive oil that has been slightly heated, or two eggs that are boiled; place this on it several times during the day until the abscess is reduced.
And now apply one of the soothing and restorative plasters, and wrap it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to use rest and calm, and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is disjointed or any cause that has separated it, then you should reduce it and set the bone; and afterwards approximate the two lips of the wound, stitching if it is large; and then treat it with some flesh-forming ointment until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken at the joint and it is the tip of the bone, then you should insert your finger into the buttock with the left hand, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second intention; and then apply a plaster and splint to it, if needed, and wrap it.
And if you find wounds with broken bones in them, then immediately attend to that area, remove what is necessary, and treat the injury with the method described previously until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad area (likely referring to the abdomen or a specific anatomical region).
The bones of the broad area when they are broken do not simply communicate at their ends but are split along their length and deviate to the sides; and pain and swelling occur in the location where the fracture has occurred, and movement is impaired when there is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand upon it so that it extends over the fracture until it assumes the shape it should have.
And if the fracture is at the end of it only, then you must immobilize that part as seems appropriate to you by means of equal binding until it assumes its natural shape.
But if the fracture is along the length or has deviated to the sides, then you make the injured person lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have immobilized that part, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane next to it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no risk of fracture movement or displacement.
And fill the cavity with something that will keep it in place until the bandaging is even and symmetrical, and instruct the injured person to lie on their back or side.
If an inflamed abscess is cauterized, then immediately you should cease the extension of it and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and pause on what precedes that; and subsequently return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as is appropriate.
And if you encounter bones that are injured or broken, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist.
The adjutori is what is between the forearm and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness in this form:
And let them be attached at both ends with two bandages, and then it should be suspended from an elevated location.
And let the patient lie on a mattress; and then place the injured arm, which is fractured, onto the splint until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then place some heavy object on it, or let the patient extend that arm downward; and then the physician should secure the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspend the arm at the neck with bandages; and then instruct two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds what is below it; and each of them pulls in their respective directions.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap one bandage around the fracture and another bandage over that, and each of the two assistants should pull on their respective ends.
And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then wrap half of the bandage over the pad and the other half below the fracture, pulling it tight.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then wrap the bandage over that area and around that joint.
And do the same with ease and care. As soon as it is properly adjusted and applied correctly, then tighten that bandage if no swelling occurs.
But if swelling occurs, then loosen the bandage within seven days, and wrap it with wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the swelling subsides, and then tighten that bandage.
And the method of tightening that bandage is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth strip around the plaster; and then adjust the arm using that support, and place your hand on their muscle.
And wrap the cloth and tighten around the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits it.
And now use splints.
And place on the fracture that splint which is the strongest and largest of the other splints; and place between each splint a width equal to the breadth of a finger, and let the length of the splints follow the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And then place a bandage over the stitches which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture be even tighter. And the farther apart the fracture is, the bandage should be looser.
And therefore, when you place the splints and apply the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
And then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site; or it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to excessive bandaging; and therefore, correct all of this as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for three days or longer.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be above their stomach.
And apply a pad filled with evenly distributed wool over the splint, and at all times of the day or night ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandage has become loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at first until bandaging begins; and then gradually make the food heavier.
It is customary for the stitches to remain in place for forty days; and at this time they should be removed, a bath should be given, and medicine should be applied with remedies that correct it.
And if the fracture is comminuted, then you should not remove the bandage and stitches for one day or even up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is that which lies towards the thumb, and the other is larger and is that which is placed below the smaller one, towards the outer side.
And if the fracture is of the larger bone only, or of the smaller one, or both together.
And when the smaller bone is fractured above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the bone is fractured below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a slight extension with ease until it is set.
But if the larger bone is the one that is fractured, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
And if both bones are broken, now it is necessary for you to make the incision more strongly.
And it is necessary to place the hand in a position for restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist above all parts, so that all other fingers are properly aligned, and the thumb be lower than the others, and the patient lie seated on a chair.
And let there be a cushion in front of him at the height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And let the assistant extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or a bandage, and another assistant extend it similarly from above.
And then the doctor should align the bone so that it is reduced into its best position as possible.
And if you encounter difficulty in setting the bone, now you must reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if there appears a separate difficulty that impedes the joint and is not within your hope for restoration, now you should act on it and remove that according to the method we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is due to inflammation, I have already made a separate chapter on this, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, now you should line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be midway between thickness and fineness, and place a finely strained cloth over it so that the abscess is reduced; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered herbs mixed with egg whites, and afterwards place bandages; and let the bandage placed over that fracture be wider and firmer.
And know that the number of stars on the arm can be seen in major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones simultaneously.
And then pause your traction on the site of the fracture as firmly and vigorously, and when you want to perform the traction above or below the fracture, pause the traction a little more gently according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging after some days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until the inflammation subsides.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then resume the traction.
And if the traction has already been relaxed and the bone is already displaced as it seems, then you should correct all of this with your skill.
And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive traction, for then you should relax it slightly and let it rest for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And so the hand of the patient is suspended by being tied to something above, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or at the lightest it is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the tissues and the strength thereof.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Know that to the thumb of the hand and to the joints of the said bones, when they suffer fracture, no other injury occurs except slight damage.
And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, it is necessary that the patient remain lying flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the hand extended upon that.
And then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should adjust them so that they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess has occurred, in which case cauterization may be needed; then place a splint above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that with cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make it appear as a sphere with cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
And let the splint be of wood wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the wood is applied to the palm; and bind that as needed.
If the fracture is in the bones of the forearm, you should place a splint above and another below the affected part, so that the hand may be open and straight; and immediately apply bandages, as if wrapping the hand around a bowl with the mentioned bandages.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones mentioned, you should adjust the finger as necessary and immediately straighten it on the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint to raise the fracture and prevent it from being compressed.
But if the fracture is in any of the others mentioned, such as in the middle bone, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, you should adjust and bandage it to the corresponding finger; or bind them all together in continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on that one, as we have said for the fingers.
And consider, in your restoration and immediately after that, the disposition of abscesses and opposing treatments — during the operation — according to what is necessary when any cause of those conditions arises, as it is repeatedly described in the text.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone, which is often broken, is revealed by sensation according to how it has shifted in the affected area and the most prominent part.
And the restoration is done in such a way that one bandage is tightly wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
And so the attendant should extend the bandage according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
And if it extends towards the root of the spine, then the bandage should be applied to the back at the part above the fracture, so that the extension falls on it, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture extends towards the back, then the bandage should be applied to the back, and the extension should be to the parts below.
And so the physician should equalize the bone on both sides but within such that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and strapping, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The strapping should be done as follows: you should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the spine.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the spine and the limb near the back at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the most prominent part of both sides, and then wrap around the limb and the spine any excess bandage.
And then place strips of cloth over the spine at the location of the fracture, and place one strip directly over the bone of the limb.
And fill the empty space between the bowl and the container with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be coagulated.
And then begin the firm bandaging from above on the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you distance yourself with the binding from the place of the fracture, your bandaging should be smaller, lighter, and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides below until it reaches the nail of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandages from the other side so that the binding does not be moved from its place.
And then place the bandage in such a way that corrosion, pus, swelling, or similar conditions do not occur on the limb; and if any cause of these should arise, cut it off immediately and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before.
But if there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed in the bone where it belongs, then you should try to fit it there as best as possible; and if not, fix it and move it, and treat it according to what precedes until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the bone is tightened with another bandage, as we have said regarding the helper and the arm.
But during the restoration of the limb in such a manner done, no lameness should occur to the patient; and if it is restored alone or with another bandage applied, then it is necessary that the person will limp permanently.
And know that the swelling lasts for forty days or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the lower jawbone.
Know that the fracture of the lower jawbone usually occurs in this manner, but injuries also happen from blows coming from above.
But if the fracture happens, it is often merely a crack or contusion in its parts, and this is due to one or several injuries, and all of this affects the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts must be equalized, and what is separated must be brought together and joined as much as possible by adjustment, ease, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round bandage if you need one; and wrap it tightly above the fracture as is appropriate.
And then consider all the precautions we have recommended for other fractures, just as with abscesses and similar conditions, to prevent any accidents that might oppose healing until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the chin.
Know that in the chin there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the chin bone; the other is slender and is called the mental bone.
And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to both bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made just as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if you break both bones together, the curvature is distributed to all parts.
And if the more delicate bone is broken, the curvature is transferred to the forward parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is from those causes that you are not at fault.
And promptly administer extension and alignment and fixation of the fragments according to that manner.
But it is necessary, if the fracture of the curvature is jagged with multiple fragments, that the extension be gentle and slower, and exercise caution with your approach.
And when there is any cause for operation on the arm regarding the curvature, and when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure, at that time you will take pieces of wood from a tree that grows below the causes which are set in water, and made similarly from palm branches; choose those with slight roughness, and not too thick, and their length according to the length of the curvature, and place them so that they are closest to the bottom.
And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one at the side of the curvature on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be from the bottom to the lowest part of the body.
Place the two struts in three places at both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the arch is prohibited from tilting to the right and left, and it stands in good position.
And now a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the arch; and let it be placed in such a way that the arch can maintain its mobility.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of such an injury.
And every day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous studies, and guard it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then you must act accordingly until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and of the bones of the foot and of the ones mentioned.
A complete fracture does not usually occur in the talus; but fractures can happen occasionally to the bones of the foot; and to those bones of the foot, few suffer fractures, and instead they mostly experience strains due to their disposition.
And if the bones of the foot sustain a fracture and the bones are raised above their normal position, then the injured person should place their foot on prepared ground as described.
And then place the foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then step on them, press, and bandage them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and bandage above it, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two padded ends.
From around the wound take the flesh which is attached to the descending structure, since you have wrapped that area in cloths and other materials for which you need.
And when three or four days have passed, you then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones either united, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those cases is as you know.
But if anyone says they are broken, then you should reset them and unite them as I recommend to you in the resetting of the bones of the hand. And then place the broken finger on a splint according to the length of the finger, and leave some space beyond it; and afterwards attach this board, which I recommend to you, to the descending structure.
But if what is broken are two or three or more bones, then you place a splint of appropriate length wrapped in linen over each finger, and attach the board at the base of the foot, and let it rest on one end of the board so that it provides good support for the foot.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every eventuality with this knowledge.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the pubic bone in women and of the bone of the penis and the shaft of the penis in men.
When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then perform the surgery in a reclined position, and afterwards incline her slightly to one side, and have her held securely behind.
Let the midwife fill the basin with cotton wool, and let it be done in the basin as described; then let the woman be placed on her back, and raise the buttocks little by little, for all of this is to ensure that everything is expelled from within, including the remains after delivery as described and the broken bone returns.
Then place poultices on his back, and when he wants to urinate, raise the cotton to facilitate it, and after urination reduce them and return them according to the method by which they were mixed at the beginning, and then return to his first poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for he will be restored then.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie one end of a reed to it; then insert the entire bladder into his body through an opening, and blow air into the reed until the bladder is inflated inside the body, for this will help the fracture to heal.
And then fill it with cotton and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until he is healed.
And when the bone of the hip joint in a man or woman is fractured, proceed with its restoration and alignment as we have recommended for the fracture of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and few discover it; mostly for the one who has studied and used this book of mine well; for that fracture signifies to you in the major positions the correct way in restoration and in constraining it, and therefore you understand well.
Take linen bandages when the penis is grasped, and put the penis in them; then press upon its wrapping of cloth, and it should be wrapped up, and thereafter left for three days or about that time, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when there is swelling.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with swelling, especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to them, that you cauterize and incise it immediately if the conditions for cauterization and incision indicate this, as we have said above.
And if the swelling discharges blood, then it is appropriate to apply something to arrest this, such as powdering over it powdered turpentine, unless some other cause prevents you from doing so.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess forms, then you should postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for doing so would cause harmful complications.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then it is appropriate to reduce and equalize it with your fingers as easily and with minimal extension as possible.
But if extension is not prepared and equalization with your fingers is not possible, then you should reduce it using this instrument; the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the swelling. It is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such instruments in different sizes for use in all types of fractures.
And let it be round, and let there be little grooves in it so that it is not doubled up; press it upon him during the operation.
And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in its extremities; and let the upper part be thick tending, and from the middle to the parts divided.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntas atelarem," which means a small palette.
So that the extremity of it may be placed on the elevated part of the bone.
And press it in one place where the bone should return, and let it be balanced with some equation.
And thus strive to balance the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is slender, and does not take that tool as a good instrument, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with that which is suitable among the knives of which we have spoken; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will be of great benefit to the patient.
When you have completed the restoration that you perform on the bone, and now you should dip a cloth in black styptic wine, and properly if it is summer, and do not apply cerot or any other cause which may contain oil over the wound, so that corruption and putrefaction does not occur there.
And immediately after you administer plates at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can excise the bruised tissue with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful not to leave the wound on the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or a corrosive illness or sepsis in their patients. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not use plates over that wound, but make a bandage of hard cloths instead of plates and apply it to the wound.
And after one day or two, the wound will begin to form granulation tissue, at which point you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and then administer medicines, such as those we commonly use to treat wounds, including tetramericon and similar remedies.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and consolidated, and it should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can run off from it to the lower parts with ease.
If after several days the swelling has not subsided and it is not separated from the bone, then you should know that here you are dealing with small ones because you inquire about the swelling in this way. And of those small swellings, those that can be separated and removed and extracted, those that cannot be separated and are left in the limb causing pain, pierce them as you incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the swelling becomes inflamed or pus-filled, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you pause to choose one of those methods according to what is suitable for the treatment, as preceded in its narrative chapter.
And regarding the matter in which my speech should be focused and you present your effort: when a bone is fractured, it protrudes from the limb as does the bone of the wing and the helper bones and similar to those of larger limbs, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction, for after many attempts this may lead to death; leave that inside so it can heal, for it will likely fall out naturally within about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the swelling if visible, otherwise leave it as is.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knots that occur in the aftermath of some fracture.
This knot often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it disfigures the shape of the limb; and frequently prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines that are astringent such as aloes, myrrh, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; take some of those or all of them, and confess them with either stiptic wine or white hawthorn wine or sweet wine, and apply this over the swelling in lint, and compress it tightly over it.
And let the bandaging be such that you do not loosen it for several days; and then loosen it and replace it with another one until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, because lead has the property of reducing all that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hardened mass and is causing severe pain requiring immediate removal, then cut it at its highest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some remedies until it is reduced; and continue treating it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently but improperly, this is done for various reasons: one of which is too much loosening of the bandages and ligatures not as required; or excessive compression of the bandages preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or excessive use of poultices; or improper movement outside its appropriate time; or lack of sufficient blood in the patient's body and weakness.
For treatment, give the patient food to eat so that the body becomes soft inside where blood may multiply therein; and administer baths; and apply poultices and linen bandages upon it.
And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment; or continue rubbing with water-based unguents until nutrition flows and returns it to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed improperly and prohibit their operation in such a way as is necessary.
When it happens to a limb that has already been restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence in the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then there is no need for you to heed the words of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
But such stand the words of foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible practice leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with water-based unguents in which soothing herbs are mixed, such as mallows, linseed, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be applied that has a softening effect, well prepared as such; or take mucilage of linseed and mix it with flour of chicken or olive oil, then apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and grind them with dove fat, and similarly use medicines that are mentioned for strengthening.
And in some cases it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most fluid parts, and movement of the member should be administered to all parts at all times.
If tortuosity has already occurred and it is made strong and converted into bone and there is a need for treatment with iron, then pus must be evacuated and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and what is superfluous from the nodes of that tissue near the bone should be cut with fine instruments, and ease should be provided in this regard with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, thereby prohibiting movement, and it distorts the figure of the member, causing severe pain and great injury.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately attempt its reduction and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and strong adhesions form, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stand during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasm and severe pain.
But when this occurs, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and then allow rest until the inflammation subsides; afterward, the member should be bathed in hot water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
And the entire member should be treated with what will help its memory to return to its proper place.
Here are the bones set in order according to what was mentioned before about fractures; now I enter into the part concerning lesser wounds.
Chapter XXIIIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated and not locked; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their positions slightly and then relaxed a little, or they are completely dislocated and fully separated until they become relaxed at the joint where saliva flows, and the person cannot hold anything nor close their mouth, and the tongue is wrapped within the cheek.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then prompt reduction must be administered and should not be delayed.
And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and the physician insert one thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or if the dislocation is on both sides, he should place his thumbs together in both roots, while the other fingers remain outside symmetrically; and he instructs the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move apart from each side; and the physician gently guides the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer warm water and oil for evaporation, until gentle reduction can be performed on both sides and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
And so when returning to these bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed but not softened, then sprinkle over those powders from linen dipped in wax, and it should be made of wax and fine oil; and afterwards it should be applied with ease using soft cloths.
And let the patient sleep on their side, and their head be positioned between their two ears, so that it does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food be cut up fine until such time as when the pains are relieved and the jaws are loosened, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and speech until such time as the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their proper places is difficult, then fevers and constant sweats often occur, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and vomiting pure bile frequently happens.
And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Clavicle and the Extremity of the Muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inward towards the hands; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident by sensation.
For the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply the poultice and powder to it.
But the extremity of the collarbone that is connected to it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your preparation.
And then apply the poultice, powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it does not dislocate at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it does not dislocate at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated outward at the lower parts below the joint, and more frequently in those whose flesh is thin, it easily becomes dislocated; but in those with thick muscles, it remains dislocated with difficulty.
If it happens that someone is struck or falls and a muscle becomes swollen with inflammation and is cauterized because it has already been dislocated.
Then you should proceed with what is necessary for treating it, and now you can begin the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is in the lower parts near the tendons; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for you notice a clear difference among them; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity and below the tendon the touch of the head of the muscle as if by a man's hand, and the injured person cannot return his hand to its proper place, nor can he move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you immediately notice a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner lifts the hand of the injured person to the upper parts; then places his fingers below the tendon and raises the joint firmly back into its place, and the practitioner lifts the hand of the injured person and extends it out straight; then waits until it returns easily.
But if it does not return as we have said, even after some days from the beginning of the dislocation, then the injured person should be bathed in warm water and a poultice administered to soften and relax it as if for old contusions, using raisin stones, fenugreek, and melilot in water, which should be applied.
Let the patient lie on their back with their buttocks just below the tip of the leather cylinder that is balanced between levity and strictness, and then the surgeon places his hand on the sphere, raises the muscle upwards, and pulls the patient's arm so that it is not harmed by the parts behind, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not injured by the parts behind, for it immediately returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second method in this manner: that is to have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side of that flank, and insert his hand below the tumor of the patient and raise the tumor towards above so that the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's arm from behind the patient’s stomach. But if the patient is lighter, it is necessary to have something else that can be used for suspending him, so that he may be weighed down by it, because the dislocation immediately returns.
And it is similarly reduced to another method: that is to fix in the ground a long pole with its top being round like a mortar head, neither thick nor thin, and then place it below the patient; once you have placed over the top of the pole strong cloths, let the patient stand along the length of the pole, and then extend his arm towards behind on one side; and extend his body from the other side with strength, for the joint immediately returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width be four fingers, and the thickness of it should be tapered at the tip according to this form:
And above the round head place linen cloths so that the skull does not come into contact with the diseased area.
And let it be paused below the armpit of the patient, and let the arm or hand be extended over the ribcage towards the lower parts, and let the body be wrapped around the helper's arms and hands.
Let the arm be placed on a ladder step according to the latitude, and let the hand be extended towards the lower parts, and let the other side of the body be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon follow.
And when the instrument is completed as it is possible for you to do, now place below the armpit a pad of sheep's wool of equal thickness; then place an adhesive prepared from powdered moly and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and afterwards tightly bandage below the armpit with proper tension. The bandaging should be wound around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and left alone, without moving the hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to give the patient little food until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier for them to recover in this way.
And then food should be given more freely after seven or five days, and at this point one movement can be exercised; and thus when it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery applied in three tracts, as was said earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not healed, and the plaster and strapping are reapplied several times, and it does not heal and cannot be raised to a higher position, then you know that the nerves of it, which run at the head of the muscle, have either been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the mamilla or the parts behind them, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as needed, until it returns to its place.
And let the other strapping be applied, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur near the time of healing, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation of it is not concealed from you as when lying down after a fall or according to some figure it has been dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated neck, this is manifestly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle.
And you should treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed, reduction is difficult, and even if healed, it will not be fully restored; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is such that it can be reduced, is that the hand of it should be extended at two fingers, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the fingers of the physician should be above the joint and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingertips together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus that he bends the hand with his hand, until he strikes the joint with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it in such a way that it is not retracted due to the extension.
And then the arm should be rotated from all sides, since it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil so that this helps in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then he presses the joint vigorously until it returns.
And after the reduction, it is necessary that he rest on a splint in which there is firmness and stability with linen bandages, and be restrained with moderate compression, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then now apply the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is healed; and afterward untie that.
And if it happens that there is severe pain near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer hydration by bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is calmed; or place on the joint something oily, which is an agent of smooth motion; and afterward bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And afterward remove that, and place it in a bath; and when dry, then you should rub the joint with gentle friction, and afterward apply something oily over it, which is an agent of smooth motion, once, and the second time, and the third time, in the bath instrument, until it is finished.
And if you wish, place on that humid and heated cow's hide over it; and do this for several times, since that is moist and helps to return it to its proper position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
The dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and the reduction of such a dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it is dislocated, before swelling or inflammation sets in.
Here is the translation:
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand. If it is diseased, place the back of the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be directly on the table so that the doctor’s hand can act upon that proximity of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen that area with a bandage over the abscess and leave it be; and do not repeat this action, for otherwise, it will neither endure nor allow you to reduce the pus that passes each day.
However, the joint moves according to its tortuousness; and if you notice in the patient no cause for this, except that the hand is weakened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you will know that the nerves are injured or severed, and therefore it should not be treated by strengthening but rather with cauterization near the location of the injury and fortifying what remains without attributing it to a specific cause.
When the treatment has been properly applied and returned as expected, then place on the bandage which we have recommended, and leave it in place and strengthen it for five days; after that, remove it and allow the hand to be exercised.
However, if the movement of the hand is restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then apply that area with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joints.
In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
When a finger is dislocated either towards the thumb or towards the palm, straightaway hold the finger and gently push it back into place.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising its movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
And do the same for this if it is dislocated toward the palm of the hand, and wrap it in that part as you would for the first operation until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs to any of the spinal vertebrae in the back or neck and they move out of their proper places, then there is no cure for this, as death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion occurs without their will and they cannot control it; often, certain parts of the body become numb, such as one or both sides of the body or one or both arms; or a vertebra has moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and sometimes there is a displacement in four directions.
Thus it is exposed at the posterior parts and is named gelbozitat.
The treatment for this is to consider whether the gelbozitation occurs due to pus, because in that case there is no cure and there is no remedy for it.
But in the case where it comes from trauma or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I will summarize for brevity; but little excuses me from excess due to my closeness to understanding and explanation, with which I have explained and formulated this out of instruments different from those with which I would show this and explain that.
And those are not cured except for the one that occurs precisely as I recount.
And it is that the patient lie on their back near a wall, extended below a padded support so that the feet are not pressed.
And place a straight pole, planted in the ground at the end near the head, and another pole around the feet at the other end of the bed.
And the attendant holds one pole, and it is not fixed in a pit; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap a bandage around the head of the patient and under the armpits tightly; extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is behind the head, and secure it there; and then stretch another bandage over the hips near the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is behind the feet.
And so the minister shall extend the bandages at the part of the stump, and let not the two stumps and their respective bandages be moved from the places in which they are fixed, but rather let them not be fastened as we have said.
And the physician shall place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or he should place upon that one table and then adjust upon the table his own weight until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can be inserted. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places his weight on the other end, and gently pulls until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open the ring which is revolved on the hand; and place yourself on the ground with the patient's head at the end of two poles, the length of each being one arm's length, and behind his head place two similar poles in the same manner. The distance between each pole should be a palm's length, and ensure that each ring is firmly attached to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be one round pole in which is the ring, and it should be revolved in the two rings at the ends of the two poles.
And at the end of it is a ring in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it revolves; and on the two other poles there is something similar to that.
Unbind the bandages that you have tightly applied to the patient’s feet at the time when you were supposed to remove his head covering, and the bandages that you have tightly applied to his armpits at the time when you were supposed to remove his foot coverings.
At each turn, there should be a minister who holds the turn with his hand, and the surgeon should straighten the spine as we have said.
And once the spine is returned to its proper position and the area has been straightened, now it is necessary to apply an inflammatory plaster on a cloth of henbane, and then stoppered; and afterwards place over the plaster strips of wood whose width should be three fingers or around that size, and the length should cover the area affected by inflammation, and above the part of the spine.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, now it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe over a long period, as we have recommended; and a piece of lead may also be applied to that location.
And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the vertebrae in the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone is one for which caution must be exercised when applying this medicine, because it could easily lead to fatal consequences.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the attachment of the muscle are involved only in dislocation and not in what affects other joints with slight movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocation towards the interior parts, or towards the exterior parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the rear parts.
And it is most commonly dislocated towards the interior parts, and rarely towards the front parts or towards the rear parts.
And the sign of dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the leg of the patient on the affected side compared to the healthy side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their leg behind the neck, and this location is where an abscess would be cauterized, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms of it are contrary to these symptoms.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the front parts is that when raising the leg according to its completion, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so towards the front; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is difficult, and they must walk on their heels.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs towards the rear parts is that they cannot raise the heel, nor can they bend the part in front that bends the throat, and their leg is shorter than the other, and swallowing is difficult, and the head of the bone is at that location.
The final reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been there for some time, then you administer reduction according to its position; now it is not in that cure entirely; and thus no hope should be placed in it.
In the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, now you should consider turning the joint and extending it to both sides within and without, and move it from side to side, for it easily returns to its place and does not require other treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, now you should prepare strong assistants and extend the limb of the patient from below or at its base, or use a bandage that lies above the limb near the root; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so as to place their hands below the joints; and then apply a lion's bandage tightly over the joint, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And this extension of the limb or the part inside towards the angle of the shoulder, or from behind to the side.
And this extension of all these should be done at once while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all types what I will say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, the patient should be placed on their back; then place the bandages over the armpit in the spot between the head of the humerus and the position below the clavicle; then extend the bandage from under the axilla to as far out as possible along the collarbone.
And then another strong minister should take hold of his arms, and firmly grasp the large part of the dislocated shoulder and pull outward forcefully, for that causes it to return to its place.
And this particular type is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other types.
But if it is excused upon you and you do not obey the exercise regimen for this type of treatment at all, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient with a strong, light bandage on both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each be four fingers, and let the diseased shoulder be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended above the top of the post and held by the hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arm lengths.
And then command a strong young man to pull on the head of the humerus, and let another young man hold the patient, while the other young man pulls the arm with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated towards the outer part, the patient should lie on his back as we have recommended for treating injuries; and the bandage should be tightly wrapped around the affected shoulder properly and over the feet.
Place the poles as follows: one at the feet and the other at the head; then place adjusted poles on each side of the ridge that has been set up, covered with moist cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among the objects beneath him, for you must prevent the extension from being pulled down in the lower parts.
And each attendant should extend to his side, and the surgeon, with his hand, will adjust the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the board should be extended quickly, and it follows this described narration about the ridge; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's side, and with that compression uses the other hand to extend it to the rear part towards the back.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it does not need for the patient to be extended to the rear parts and raised off the ground; rather, they should be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when the hip joint is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about positioning the body between two boards; and it is on their back with the limbs extended, as we have said, for there is no harm.
And it is necessary to administer compression with the board at the location of the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the bone is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's limb and when you see those equalities and the patient extends his or her good limb and expands this for an excuse, then you know that the member as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause with bandaging and extend a bandage so that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
Now, if you see those equalities honestly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and dress that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
And then loosen that area, and have the patient delay in walking on it for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and downward toward the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their limb to the body; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all kinds of this is that you should cut open the patient correctly; thus spread out his thigh or leg if possible. Stick your hand to his face and place your foot between his thighs, and then attach the end of his penis with your palms, and hold those firmly over the end of his penis with strength, and another assistant stretches his leg so that the penis returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery for him is that his leg adheres to the body without laborious effort.
And then apply a plaster to that and make the leg adhere to the body, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it by you is unnecessary, now administer strong extension with the instruments of which in the treatment of the hip preceding narration.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it is done either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of the slight displacement is easy restoration, and it should be extended with ease by pressure and should be bandaged so that it returns to its place.
In the treatment of the hand when it is dislocated for the second time, make sure to have the patient lie straight, and let there be a strong and capable attendant behind him at his mid-side.
And place yourself with your right hand on the uppermost part of his foot, and with your left hand on the lower part of his foot at the location of the joint.
And pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and grasp it with your left hand for two moments, and then extend your left hand; and press the bones of the foot with your right hand gently but firmly.
And do this two times as we have described.
And then press the bones of the foot gently but firmly for the third time, and you should be at the joint.
If the hand returns to its proper position in one attempt or two following this method, and if the movement of the hand is equalized, it is good; otherwise, immediately repeat the operation, as it has not returned.
But if you are prevented from reducing it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and set a strong roller firmly in place between his shoulders, and let him rest against it, and you should wrap a cloth around him so that he does not move.
And the attendant holding the patient’s body, and another attendant extends the foot with his hands or with a strap that lies across the heel of the foot; and then each attendant pulls against the extension on their side, and the roller should be positioned between the patient's sides restraining him, so that his body is not drawn towards the parts behind during the extension.
Here is the translation:
And so when the dislocation is returned and the health of its reduction is declared to you, pause the plaster and wrap it very tightly, and tie the limb to the bench.
And be careful to avoid or protect the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
And then leave that for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, wrap it again.
And then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and become corrupted, and after that it will not receive proper treatment.
And if an abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then you should administer according to the guidelines of our narration in another place concerning treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Said Ankle Bones.
Ensure that the one who is dislocated lies with little extension without working; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some bones of either foot, then you should have the patient lie on the ground or on a table in a position as if they were sitting.
And then you stand on one foot, and place your weight over the area where the joints are, and then press with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, and ensure that it appears level and does not protrude in an elevated location.
After the pause, place the foot on a board that will span the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen that with proper structure and firmness for three days; then untie that and allow it to rest with movement for ten days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
About the kinds of dislocation that are made by injury or fracture or any combination thereof.
When some cause of those occurs, and you persevere in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death results.
And because of this, one should not trust in the treatment of it unless it is a wise person in the art, with long practice, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that only reduce swellings, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but to him whom you hope will bring salvation from perdition, or relief from illness, and in whom appears some hope. And then strive to perform the reduction for him at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we want, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in bones that are separated, then you should manage their stabilization, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries, dealing with them in the places where they occurred.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as I have preceded my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more healthful will be your true body which you shall see in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
