O, my sons, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the sciences of medicine, by its conclusion and through its explanations and clarifications, in my view, I fulfill my duty to you in presenting this treatise, which is part of the practice known as surgery.
For surgical practice has been almost entirely abandoned in our region and time, except that the science of it still exists and its traces remain; yet we find only small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much and led to errors and hesitation due to their obscure statements and weakened understanding of the art.
And it seems to me that I should revive this art through the organization of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes in the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as is necessary through addition of explanation, and preparation for it, which cause is essential.
But the reason why a good craftsman is not found in this field in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and it requires the practitioner to be well-trained in anatomy, which involves knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, along with their number and arrangement; and understanding the pulsating veins and the static ones, and their points of emergence.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much talk, but in practice little, and even less in the art of the hand.
This is what we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy cannot be excused from falling into error through which men die, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that without knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad physician who had incised an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died as a result.
And I saw another physician who tried to remove a stone from a man who was in poor condition, and the stone was large. He came to him and pulled out that stone along with part of the bladder, so that on the third day, the man died.
And I had already called upon God to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was paid wages by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his chest; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture above the wound with splints and strong bandages, but did not leave room for respiration.
And he loosened it according to his desires, and then he bound it again, and after some days, he commanded us to loosen the bandage. And thus, between loosening and binding, the chest and the lung became abscessed, and he reached a state of ruin.
This is from a medieval Latin translation and it translates to:
However, once the corruption was confirmed in the limb, since it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated near the armpit, until the malignancy increased greatly in the house of its lord.
The reason for this is that cancerous tumors are free of melancholic humors; therefore, it does not need to spread throughout the entire body, but rather it can be confined to a limb which can tolerate being its host.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work involving significant risks.
And I have already stated this in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and avoid that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak ill and dishonor you.
And so take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and approach your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and remain armed against what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not betray you: for more remains for your glory, and even more on earth and forever for your sanctity.
Walaia (or possibly "Gualia") already says in some religious contexts: Do not treat a sick person badly, for bad doctors are not called to treat them.
And I have dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head and neck, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about drainage and puncture, and about cupping, and plasters, and extraction of arrows and similar procedures, fully chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered about the head and neck, and in the forms of instruments.
I will describe the quality of the actions of that cautery and its effects, and in which condition cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the action of cautery and its effects is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on this matter. It suffices for me to mention briefly some of their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
Therefore, I say that cauteries are applied to all complete parts universally, whether they have substance or not, except for two parts, which are tailless parts.
In the tail and dry part that has substance, it dries out; for some say that cautery is helpful for that, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a tail and dry part with something that is hot and dry be healed.
And those who say the opposite, that cautery is beneficial for every tail and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, are correct, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is fragile.
And I say according to the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But it does not suit someone who has already been trained and exercised in the chapter of cauteries through previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human constitutions and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, as well as their causes and accidents, and the duration of them.
But in other parts, there is no need for fear on your part, especially in fragile and humid diseases, since all physicians are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree regarding the benefit of cautery in them.
And you know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in how fire is simple, its action affecting only the part being cauterized and not other parts nearby except for a slight injury.
Here is the English translation:
Keep the fire, by its height and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluify [sic] and already it is known to us through experiment and through length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech And if not that it were read in my book in this pause would you secrets hidden with the fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your ears.
And know, children, that those who neglect the time in which it is proper to perform cautery miss the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from the cautery, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, fortifications and fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay due to fear of those where mischief may occur, as it is better to endure minor harm entering through the time.
And this does not enter your ears, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the illness which is cured by cautery there is not always an appropriate time, and they miss that opportunity.
And the reason is not as such because they think it is so, for cautery is merely a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pains.
But still, cautery is superior to medicine due to the rapidity of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of the illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of excesses in it, and what has come to him through its acquisition from food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery was administered is a subtle illness in a member with little excess and moisture, such as cautery of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that this pain will not return, but this happens rarely.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause before cautery, but it signifies its use as a final measure.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it benefits in such cases. And here from the perspective that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding that I perceive in the common misconceptions and exaggerated practices of foolish physicians.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its superiority in substance.
And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have experienced otherwise and found that it works differently on different bodies; in such cases, cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they say. However, when you perform cautery using fire with gold, it is not clearly defined to you, for the hardness of gold determines its quantity, and it prepares itself to receive friction; if you apply heat over it, the gold melts due to the fire, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can shape them according to their use.
And thus it is done that cautery is made of iron, and you should remove the pus lightly and properly according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery after the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the questioning of him who asks for what he wants.
The first chapter.
This cautery applies to the humidity and coldness affecting the head as an accidental condition caused by these two causes, which are the cause of stiffness and many traumatic fluxes, called herpes, from the head to the parts of the arms and ears with fluid, and much sleeping, and toothache and throat pain, and generally to all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to evacuate with a laxative medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, depending on what the strength of the patient requires and their age and usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit between the sheets on a padded bench and place his head on his hands.
And then place the palm of your hand near the spot above the shaved nose, between the eyebrows. But when the heat of your hand has reached that spot, mark that place with ink, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
And then pause there upon the marked spot with the probe, in such a way that it descends, by which the wall of the place may be gradually pressed back, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of the head bone uncovered, as much as the amount of a grain of wheat, now raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can feel the bone which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it be for three days.
And then pause on the inner edge and let it be inside until the fire scar is destroyed. And then treat the place with a quadrifarmaceutical ointment until it is healed.
And it is said that when the wound has become clean and uncovered, the sooner the arm is removed, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be applied until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach the deepest part, until it presses strongly against the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpechini (cauterization in small increments): And they believe that vapor from the head is expelled from that place.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cautery used generally on everyone out of fear; and leave that, I think, it is better for the health to avoid them, when possible; for the brain is easily injured by breaking the continuity of the skull just as we have testified in other parts of the body, and especially when the constitution of the patient is weak.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that one can act more safely for health.
Chapter Second.
On Cautery of the Head.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head, and this condition persists despite using herbs, cloths, caps, plasters, poultices, cats, hens, and similar treatments, especially if cautery has already been applied but without success for any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's constitution is strong and not weak or delicate. If it is robust and there is no great risk, proceed with another form of cautery below that one slightly. And then cauterize that area over the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut open the pain and expose the bone in the amount we have described, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the vein is located. And be cautious in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will experience great pain from this, different from the pain of other head cauteries.
Here is the cautery in its proper place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is finer than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery for non-ancient inflammation.
When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or persistent pain within the eye, it should be treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and the other cure which I have mentioned for diseases should be administered; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization is done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
But the cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a piece of cloth, soak it in oil, and then hold both ends of it. And then you should cut the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet until it is done properly below the hairline, so that it is hidden.
And then press on it with a cloth for about three hours; and afterwards untie it and remove the oil, and leave the wound open for two or three days; and then apply pressure to it submerged in butter until the area becomes red.
And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Here is the cautery according to this method: fire for the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a key cautery, because the head of it is in the shape of a clove, in which there is some curvature, and at its middle part there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is below is not adhered to — and turn the iron slightly by slight degrees with speed.
And if the amount that adheres due to the nature of the tissue is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then moisten a piece of cloth in salt water and place it on the site, and leave it for three days; and then place a piece of cloth with borther (possibly referring to a type of poultice or bandage), and then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the ulna according to the cautery method, and guard against cutting the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of an ancient ulcer.
When you treat an ulcer as we have said in the previous treatment and as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve with that treatment, and at times due to the disease what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the ulnar cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the site of the pain along a line the length of which is half the width of your finger, or slightly more; and then move your hand once and forcefully so that it cuts the artery and reaches into the bone.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is damaged due to chewing, and that the muscle attached to it and the nerve which moves it are not affected, so that spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, because there is fear in its severing, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not diligent and experienced; and leave the operation to someone at the beginning.
And here I will come to the reminder of the management of blood flow from an artery according to the usual method, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to these cauteries and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize at the appropriate place on the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you do so, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of an artery using a cautery with two edges, and this is a better cautery and more effective.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for ear pain.
When pain in the ear occurs due to irritation and is treated with laxative causes and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, now apply the cautery, and this one has the name puncta, and here is its form:
And bring the puncta close to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each affected area if the pain is localized there. Lengthen the cautery of the earlobe bit by bit until you have marked the place with it.
And if you cauterize those points throughout the entire earlobe, and wherever it is necessary, and then treat the places until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the Cauterization of the Turtle.
The tumor which is cured without cautery is nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the kind that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with scarifications and capillary purgatives and gargles, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little distance from there in the temple area, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the upper part of the ear, then a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple area another, whose length should be according to the length of your thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the tumor is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific for the cutler's tool, the form of which is set forth below. However, it is even more subtle that you should see it slightly like this; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness, just a little.
And then treat the area with what was previously described until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on top of all the temples of their head; one cauterization at the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one cauterization in the nape. And the method of the cauterizations is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and soon it will be cured as you proceed.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for oblivion done with flame.
Give the patient large doses at the beginning and pills to purify the mind.
And then shave the patient's head completely and place on their nape the plaster described in the chapter on plasters.
And place it several times, for this is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order I have already mentioned.
And if this treatment is effective; otherwise, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of their head, which should be positioned from the most upper part of the head down to the part closest to the neck. And place about the thickness of a finger between each cauterization, and then treat the cauterizations as described.
If you want to apply it for the lesser harm, then now make the cautery in the middle location; and if you wish to apply more intense treatment, now cauterize that over both horns.
Apply the treatment inside where it will heal; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed as you would in the cleansing of the head with scissors and according to what has been said; then shave the head of the patient, and subsequently cauterize that in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all parts of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to apply that and the patient can tolerate it when the illness is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where it will be covered by the skin, and increase the heat gradually. Then apply the treatment inside where it will heal, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized except when the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, you should cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with scissors and according to the other treatment that has been mentioned in the division when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot endure the medicines, at that time administer guar gum and masticatory substances to cleanse the mouth, for several days, with purification of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize one with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization at the back of the head, and on each side of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and can endure it, then cauterize with the cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive cauterization as was described previously.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization for Melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted and flaccid humidity, then cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned while inducing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a well-made poultice over the circle, and subsequently place it in the middle part of the head.
Let the wound be sixty days old, and let it be treated from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more suitable to use the grease of sheep. And warm that over the fire with moderate heat prepared according to measure, which the patient can endure when it is applied. And then place it in the proper location on the head in a circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this once a week for the wound, following another regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that with small points as needed, but have your hand with a cautery so arranged: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
And then apply that powder soaked in grease or in chicken fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending in the stomach.
When it has been determined for you the beginning of water in the stomach by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and protect him from all humidity.
And have him sweat in a warm bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the proper location on the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of water rising in both sides of the stomach, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Cut away all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cautery at a distance in the region of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, remove the cautery and use some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come to the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two cauteries placed rearward to produce the effect.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old wounds.
When there are tears from the eyes that are old and constantly flow through veins and arteries which are in obvious places on the head, and it is verified that this is a superfluity of cold phlegm, then one cauterizes that place with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on how water collects in the eyes, and one cautery in the middle part of the head and two cauteries at the base of the skull below the temples, and two cauteries at the base of the skull below the bones. And if you need an addition [correction: addition likely refers to a medicinal or surgical adjunct], then cauterize that area along the entire side of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On Cauterization for Nasal Odor.
When you treat that which we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give to the sick person cock's blood to drink for three nights; and afterwards shave his head, and cauterize that place with a moderate cautery using an olive cautery. And afterwards cauterize that place with a clove cautery, and use two cauteries above the two eyebrows behind the hair a little bit.
And be careful that you do not burn that area with the cautery.
And this is the form of the clove cautery.
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauteries, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pinch the eye.
When the hairs of the eye turn inward such that they pinch the eye, the cautery for them is according to two methods: either it is done with a cautery or with combustible medicine.
If you use a cautery with fire, command the patient before that to shave off their hairs as those of the world are shaved, such that they are extended and equalized; and if they pinch near their origin, then you should bandage the eyes tightly so that nothing enters until the hair has grown back.
When they have grown back and are equalized, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and gently apply a tent over the eyelids using a sign similar to the shape of a maple leaf, with the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And after this pause, cut it open and insert into an eggshell or into a poultice of bran on the wound.
And then apply fire to the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure that is marked, little by little, in small strokes, until the surface of the skin, which resembles a myrtle leaf, is completely burned through properly.
And the sign of health in this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs raised above the puncture of the wound.
And then raise your hand and lay it still for three days, and after that pause over the cut until the scar is reddened. And then care for it with dressing until it is healed.
But if the hairs return due to some cause after their removal and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery on that area again as you did initially.
But if the hairs grow back on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and dressed so that the hairs do not irritate the wound.
But the cautery with a burning medicine should be such that you instruct the patient to pull out the hairs until they are elongated and then dressed, and afterwards make the shape of a myrtle leaf from paper or cloth.
And then take known soap and one ounce of live herbs, or something similar, and mix these ingredients well, applying it quickly so that it is not left on too long; then spread this mixture over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on both eyes; and put an eggshell under the wound cut open, and have the patient’s head covered with your hand.
Here is the translation:
And so, when the biting pain continues, leave off the medicine and put on what you have said before; when the biting stops, then replace the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now look to see if the eyelid is raised as it should be washed; and then do constriction with fire or incision, for this is good. And if not, return to the medicine in the place where you did not apply the medicine before until your operation is evened out and the swelling subsides.
And then pause on the wound at the border until the cause of the injury is eradicated, and then treat it with defined care or another method until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to carry out your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after some days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause of hair in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and around until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And you should know that the wounds of people vary in size and magnitude, and therefore your treatment is adjusted accordingly.
And the path to becoming proficient in this art will not be hidden from one who studies it.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat fistula with the water we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not confine your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head or thigh in your hand, and hold the head of a cautery between your hands in such a way that it is neither too much nor agitated with respect to the head.
And place cotton in the wound or on the skin above it.
And then light the cautery, which has this form:
which is hollow, just as it has the shape of a reed or the quill of a bird, with one end through which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be as thin as a thread.
But the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the putrid matter from it.
And then place the cautery, which should be well heated, over it. Hold it at a distance from the patient's face so that your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery on the skin around the wound and cauterize it.
And if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary. Then leave it like that for three days, and afterwards place cotton around it and apply a drying ointment until it heals.
If after eleven days it has not healed, then apply acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: enter into the location of the fistula and make it open; then apply in that fissure finely powdered material, whose form matches its shape. And put into it about one ounce of molten lead; and hold with your hand gently but firmly so that not much pus is lost because otherwise the molten lead will reach the flesh of that area; and you should place over the surface of the fistula cloth infused in egg white or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer traction through the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose as it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterization of the Fissure of the Teeth.
Fissures often occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be shown:
And the sharpness of it should be according to the fineness of the blade.
Apply the cautery carefully into those fissures so that it reaches the base of the fissures.
And then apply the cerotz carefully so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and it bursts, and if it is old and running pus, and a fistula forms, and you treat that fistula but it does not improve in its healing, now is the time to use cauterization according to the quantity received by the fistula. Then place the heated cautery into the depth of the fistula so that the hot iron reaches the base of it; do this once or twice at the end. And then treat it with what we have mentioned for its healing until it is healed.
And if the wound is cleanly divided and heals, that is good; but if not, now it is necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but see no improvement, now place the head of the cautery in the fire, and then ignite the cautery which will be described shortly. Place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
Then take your hand, and then repeat the cauterizations as often as you wish.
Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, and then spit it out, because the rotten tooth is weakened and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is rot or worms, and you do not wish to treat it with medicine, then the cautery should be applied in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
To cauterize with a horn, you should take a cow's horn and boil it in iron rust water, then take cotton and wrap it at the tip of the horn. Then immerse the horn in the boiled solution and place it quickly on the painful tooth while still warm.
Then repeat this several times until the effect of the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn solution and place it on the painful tooth, then apply heated iron to it until the heat reaches the source of the pain in the tooth.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should attend to the thickness of the tube made of clay or iron so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
From the coals take the cautery, of which the form will be described, and place it on the tooth so that you may rub it with your hand until the cautery is rubbed; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated either on that day or on the next day.
And it happens that by the pressure of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good saliva and should keep this for one hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hernias.
When hernias are full of phlegm and humors that resist digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those gently, then take the cautery whose form is described below. It should have two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place the ignited part on the swelling once, or again if necessary, until it reaches the base of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days, and then apply some ointment on top of what the fire has burned so that it may be alleviated.
And afterwards care for it with dressings and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cauterizing a hoarse voice and constricting the throat.
When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness in temperament, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part near the root of the throat.
And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the windpipe.
And cauterize that area with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And let the cautery be screw-shaped according to the previous method.
And then treat that area with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterizing the disease of the lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity without fever or consumption and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the clavicles in the places slightly below the hollows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be screw-shaped according to the previous form.
And if you wish, your cauterization can be punctate using the cautery called a puncta, the form of which is described in the section on piercing ear pain.
Let there be incisions into the places where they are needed; and afterward treat that part with the method which precedes until it is healed.
And there should be three stages of cautery for that part which requires it: in one instance, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization of the smallpox pustules which are on the head.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humid and lubricating causes and does not return to its proper place after its displacement because it is accustomed to remaining in that position, and subsequently becomes displaced again due to slight movement as we have testified, at such times you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; and then lift the part where the pustule is above the joints with your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
And then use fire for cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the part until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will appear when you have performed four cauterizations.
And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this method, and there will be eight cauteries.
And then place the cautery over the area for some time with salt, and afterward keep the patient calm, and do not move the limb much for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize above the muscle with a cautery pin or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dissipated and the malady is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is blood in the stomach, apply and move moist substances inside to extract it according to its composition and let them multiply in that area. And if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming success, then the disease may have retreated to its base; extend its mass and its effects, and subsequently cauterize with three cauteries: place one cauterization below the feet by the length of a finger, and two cauteries below on both sides of the central cauterization, forming a triangular pattern; space them out so that they do not touch each other to avoid infection.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the rib.
And let the figure of the cauterization be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle location of the stomach in this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
And let the stomach be cauterized with points for one who is afraid of this cautery: mark points on the stomach in the quantity you wish with a needle, and then cauterize those points; and subsequently treat it with the prescribed treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cautery of the inflamed testicle.
When pain arises in the testicle due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence, which causes an excess of fluid beyond its normal composition, and if it is treated with the methods we have described and does not improve, then the patient should be positioned on his back with his head raised. At this point, apply three cauteries in this manner and quantity over the testicle below the hypochondria, as a person lies supine.
And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the length of the cauteries should be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not press your thumb on the cautery site.
And if the quantity of water retained is half the length of the spine, and it is not more precise than that; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then have him sit with his affairs arranged, and raise his arms.
And if you possess the skill and prudence, you can perform these cauteries using a knife-cautery.
And be careful not to press too hard during the cautery, and ensure that the length of the entire spine is retained so that the whole body is supported and reaches into the cavities, as the spine here is delicate; understand this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of an Abscess of the Testicle with Caustics.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the testicle or in the tunica, if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the patient will experience heaviness and pain with acute intensity.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, the pain will be extremely severe and often exhausts the efforts of physicians to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be positioned on his back; then feel the location of the abscess carefully; and immediately apply the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the diseased tissue is consumed, until it reaches the cicatrix, and until there is healthy flesh.
And then treat it as you would any other abscess until it is healed.
And one should use this form of cautery only if the practitioner has extensive study and experience in the art of medicine and has recognized many diseases; but it is better to experiment cautiously with such an operation rather than risk harm, which would be unwise.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Hydrocele.
The ancients recommended cauterizing the roots of the artemisia for hydrocele and this is done according to the following method: take one strand of dried artemisia root that is about as long as your finger and as thick as a digit.
Here is the translation:
And do not think that you should apply your cautery before the swelling has become obvious in its condition.
And just as some ancient authors say that some men used cautery with iron resembling a ray and fire, placing it in the location between the shoulder blades until they reached the abscess, so that it became purulent, as we have said regarding the testicular abscess.
But in this puncture with the cautery there is no fear, for he will die immediately or an accident will occur at the place where the fistula cannot be cured.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the mole.
When you treat the disease of the mole as we have said about the treatment in division and do not confine your treatment, then at that time the cautery should be done in three ways, all of which are appropriate. The first is that you perform three or four cauterizations according to the length of the mole, following the shape of the testicular cauteries, the figure of which has been described previously.
And there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the testicular cauteries as well.
And do not apply your hand with the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to heat the cautery vertically twice, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the swelling that is on the right side of the mole where the patient lies on their left side.
And so make your elevation according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both ends, one ignited, into the opening where they will penetrate the opposite side of the wound.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
And then take care of the cautery so that it does not shake for too many days, because it is more convenient than other causes preceding in the healing process.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Cauterization of Hydropics.
Cautery is not used for hydropics except in a certain proper manner.
When you treat the hydropic patient using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the sharpness of the wound.
And then let the cautery rest abundantly so that it does not shake for a long time.
If you do not remove the harmful matter from the treatment before applying heat with water, which is necessary for bringing the two intentions together, it should be hastened by assistance in healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be nail-shaped as described previously, and it should be olive-shaped for the back as was stated according to its form.
Chapter XXXII.
On Cauterization of the Stomach and Other Things.
When the stomach is inflamed and filled with thin water, it is necessary to cauterize the stomach above the joint between the little finger and the ring finger, holding the cautery in place without twisting it; then lift your hand slowly and do not return it completely, as the thin water will be expelled.
The cautery should be in this shape: And then place two cauteries on both sides, and for each side use a cautery with the tip shaped like a knife blade. And the cautery should be in accordance with the length of the side: place one below the armpit and the other at the middle part of the side; and on each side, use two cauteries.
And leave the area untreated for a long time until some water is expelled from it.
And then treat with the causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On Cauterization of the Abdominal Area.
When something from the belly is due to grinding and humidity entering that weakens the functions, it is the function of digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with these methods of treatment without changing them, and let the patient endure cauteries displaying weakness, at times cauterize that with a large cauterium over his stomach as has been preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cauterium and four small cauteria around the navel, with a fine clavilh cauterium; and with two cauteries on the alcatin above alozis large, or with two cauteries.
And if the excessive humidities and the patient can bear it, then cauterize that over the pentenilh and over the intestines, and lightly place two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure through which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted humidities, they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not change the usual treatment. Then cauterize with three small triangular cauteries below the spine on both sides, and place a cautery above the navel between them.
And if you find that his stomach is congested and the food he eats is not digested, and his face appears inflamed or abscessed, then cauterize that over his stomach with a large cautery as has been previously described; and place one cautery on his liver, and another cautery near his spleen with a fine clavilh cautery; let the patient rest for some time, and then treat him so that he may be healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the area around the tooth extraction.
When you extract a tooth, you should use fire to cauterize the area, which resembles a wound. Near the extracted tooth, apply the heat to ensure that the cauterization reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
Do this once or twice, for if the area becomes inflamed, then cauterize each tooth as we have described, and afterward treat them with appropriate medicines until they are healed.
And if you cauterize too extensively over the area, it may be harmful instead of beneficial.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature near the parts of the body.
When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is distressed by this, it should be treated with cauterization.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the area near the nature, and it is old, with pus-filled and corrupted moisture, then what is most appropriate to do first is to probe it gently, and subsequently determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Then apply fire to cauterize the area, which resembles a wound. Then place the heated cauterizing instrument in this fistula according to how deep the probe went.
And repeat this burning with cautery until those corrupted parts are consumed once or twice or three times, according to the amount needed.
And guard against burning the nerves and veins; if the fistula leads into the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be careful at all times in these places; do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it does not penetrate further.
And then take care of the place so that it may heal.
And if the place is sealed and the substances are removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances do not come out from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of corrupted bone, or that it falls into those causes about which there will be mention later.
Chapter XXXVII.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When pain in the hemorrhoids occurs due to rubbing or excessive gas, and because of this the patient's condition is worsened, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with a cautery on each hemorrhoid using an awl-like instrument of which there will be mention later.
And wait a short while before cauterizing the second one, so that there will be three cauterizations lined up, and thus they will be more effective in providing relief.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens that the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, at this time cauterize in the area just above the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the pus; and cauterize with one cautery in the lowest part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be shaped like a nail as is described.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the throat.
When there is friction and moisture in the throat, and because of this intercourse is prohibited, and their menstruation becomes corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs due to its occurrence, at this time it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and one cautery above the area on both sides, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be shaped like a nail.
Chapter XL.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the joint.
When there is moisture and swelling in the area of the joint, and the causes are due to its displacement from its proper location, and the sign of this is that one part extends beyond the other when compared. The place for reduction is found where it bends.
Then when you cauterize the malady above the joint, cauterize it in a similar circular manner, since you will have marked with ink around the joint as it is revolved, and so that the part falls at the middle point of the circle.
And let the cautery be of such a form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spicitude of the entire chain; and then take care of that which needs to be healed.
Chapter XLII.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the joint, and it is caused by friction and humidity, the malady is treated as we have said and does not conform, then it is old, you should purge the malady of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either use combustible medicines for the cautery, or use fire.
It is done according to two known methods, one of which is that you cauterize it above the joint in three triangular cauterizations following this form; and do it with good depth. And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauterizations are olive or large.
And in some cases let the cautery be on the middle part above the head, for there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle from which the shape precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, so that it forms a continuous circle and burn the length of the entire tendon.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
But if it extends into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you will direct the malady, which is the pain; and one cautery on the bone, four fingers away from the bony part.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, let the depth of the cautery be according to the length of the tendon.
And if the malady you direct causes the pain to extend near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there with one cautery at three points or four or more as you may need.
And if the malady you direct causes pain to be below the elbow in the tissue, then cauterize there with one cutaneous cautery.
And be careful in every cautery that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and by this you should be over the malady without harm or contraction.
And I saw one and another of those who cauterized over the nail and ended in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the swelling reached the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And after a strong solution of the bowels, and thus death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said concerning the cauterization of an area: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date stone or somewhat less.
And within that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a pea; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those bars should be the size of a pea or two peas, and make along those edges an appropriate border of iron around the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then ignite it in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then place it on the affected area, the patient lying on their back. And thus cauterize that area with three cauteries in one session.
And then let him rest for three days; then apply a bandage to that area and leave the wound covered for more than ten days; and afterwards treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have rarely used due to the fear of its consequences, and therefore few have found those who pay attention to it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you measure the spaces which are between each of the size of the thickness of the finger; and let them be eight below and above, and let them contain each other according to this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the wound where the patient is sitting, and press it there; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire gradually increased, and do this for the quantity of one hour, until the patient feels the biting and the itching — as if bitten by fire — until the biting stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the wound with cool water.
And then leave it for three days and place a dressing on it until the blackness of the itching subsides, and keep doing this for several days, and pus will form; this is a sign of improvement.
And then treat that with herbs until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or the armpit, treat it in the manner described for treating the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and of a cloth not extinguished from both parts one, and twist them and place in a new bowl of which the part below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the preparation.
After the pause, take the bottom of the wound and another bandage rolled up, and pour over it alkaline water mixed with living fresh water, which will hold those [bandages] in place for one day, and then when you understand that they are adhering properly to the meat, leave the poultice to descend from the sharp water into the part below the wound.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another fresh bandage and another renewed alkaline one, because at those times it will have great strength, which is administered in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other members, as this operation does with fire.
And for some medicines with which it is cauterized extensively, such as vinegar and honey mixed with aniseed and a bandage soaked in soap, so that they are mixed together.
And Galen recounts the operation and the treatment by which a person from ancient times was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and praises it greatly as being very effective, saying there is no need for any other treatment, and that it heals once performed as recommended, for it quickly cures that condition with baths and exercise.
And it should be taken in a cloth of green color, and if that is not available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be wrapped with a little wool and placed on the leg where the pain is, or on the buttock, or on the hip, and left there.
And it should be left in place for three hours or for as long as the patient considers appropriate for the adjustment.
And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is relaxed, move them to the ground, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that one should not apply cautery with these medicines except immediately after the evacuation of the body.
And Celsus says that when one makes an incision with the horn of a goat, the vein is cauterized, and it benefits the patient greatly; and here are the cauteries according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the stones.
And then take a dry goat's horn and burn it over fire until it turns to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it spread out. And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Tooth Pain
Sometimes pain in the teeth is due to various causes, such as trauma from hitting or colliding, or excessive evacuation, and similar reasons, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
And cautery is not used for any other condition but this specific one, which is caused by the infusion of corrosive matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance with thin pills and similar to them, they should be applied on the tooth where the pain is, three lines according to its latitude, then place in each line up to five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
And let cautery be applied with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four, using a central pointed cautery as follows:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
This disease is often seen in small children; the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their limbs, with elevation and movement.
And you will notice in the last vertebra of the back and in those that are beginning to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then apply cautery with a circular cautery as follows: so that the cautery is applied evenly over the entire part of the vertebra.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And let the points be close to each other.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have said.
But be careful not to administer cautery in chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When pain in the joints is caused by the friction of humors that are enclosed within each member of the body, at times when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to use a poultice properly.
And thus, when the gout is cured due to friction by a method of treatment and not by removing the pains, at times the removal happens through cauterization.
And it is when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with the application of cautery.
And this is an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then use a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you wish to treat this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of an olive shape from all sides.
And if you wish to use these cauteries that are necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, but only around the specificity of the joint.
And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauteries that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the muscles, and it is called podagra, then make punctures around the affected areas as it revolves, making two lines of punctures.
And if the pains remain in the mentioned areas, then make punctures around the affected areas on each node and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach after several days in the joints or the muscles, then cauterize the places all around with hot irons.
And if you do not evacuate the malady with good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done well and the noxious matter is evacuated by this cautery, God willing, it will heal.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you find a fracture in the thighs and intestines exposed before the genitals, and this begins to happen nearby, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stop their food intake for one day and use laxatives so that the rupture descends from the abdomen.
And have the patient lie close to you on their back, and command them to hold their breath or bear down as if having a bowel movement so that the genitals or intestines appear.
And then return to the patient and examine the rupture on the bone of the pubis, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
such that it is round and emits sparks. And then reduce the intestines or genitals to their normal position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestines do not slip back.
And you have already applied bandages to the patient's body and left one joint uncovered, another above the hips, and another below at the feet, while the patient lies on their back.
After pausing the cautery on that mark, hold the cautery straight and enter within where you can feel the bone of the joint between the fingers; and repeat on the other side if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
Observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or some other great harm befall the patient.
And know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And after the cautery, care for the site of the cautery for three days until the burn scar begins to heal.
And afterward care for that with other medicines until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the wound healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of the healing time, so that the intestines do not protrude due to excessive straining.
And after approximately forty days, gradually and carefully increase their activity, and keep them resting for another forty days.
And let them be restricted from work and overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this complete healing regimen, they will be healed.
This is about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, you want them not to spread, so cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and it should be as thick as the third part of it; then treat that area as we have said, and it is sufficient.
And some earlier ones said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a tenta:
and draw a line that you follow along the latitude in the flanks above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is quicker and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Twists.
When pain occurs in some members due to falling or impact and persists for a long time without being relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For it is common for such pains to be punctured in a member next to the one affected, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On cauterization for leprosy.
Some lepers benefit greatly from cauterization, but it is not much help for the type of leprosy that results from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholia.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is commissary and can be cured with what we have said in the division, and do not proceed if it is not so, and fear that the malady will cause corruption to encompass the whole body. Then cauterize that person on the head with a hot iron: place one at the middle of the head, and another further back; then over the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one at the back, near the nape or neck.
Lastly, your cauterization should go a little into the skin to create a small indentation, so that the scales are displaced and the expulsion of thick vapors is eased; cauterize over the ulcer as required.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize that person with those irons which we mentioned for the head; and use an iron on the tip of the nose, two on each cheekbone, two on both sides of the neck vertebrae, ten on the lower back vertebrae, a large one near the hip bones, one on each hip bone, two on each thigh, one on each side of the thighs, two on each elbow and one on each side of the elbows, two on each wrist and two on each muscle, and two on each tendon of their feet; cauterize that person over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on each thigh bone.
And guard against the nerves, especially those on the heel, that you do not burn them.
And in some cases, it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pubis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the observers do, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the nature of the tools used.
And properly care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On Cauterization for Inducing Stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb.
And let the heat of the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little. And properly care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And in some cases, numbness is cauterized on parts that affect the muscles and joints, and on the nerves that control that limb, to relieve the numbness.
Let no one undertake this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and of the emergence of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that become inflamed.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize over them with something that will change their appearance slightly so that they become redder and their color is altered.
And for that, apply a poultice made of flour of oats and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of dove or the blood of robin, a part of each, and all mixed together. Then place a cloth over it until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On cauterization of cancer.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize around it with a circular instrument as it is surrounded.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the deepest cauterization in the middle area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have observed this happening several times.
And it is safer to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Chapter LI.
On cautery for hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess moisture in that area, or because of the patient's condition, being old and weak with little blood, or due to the time; if you wish to hasten their maturation, then cauterize around them with small punctures; and afterwards let it rest so that it may mature quickly.
But if you want to perforate with the cautery, then prepare the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied to a place further away so that the arm is more comfortable; and then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LIILegend: It seems there might be a typo in your request since you mentioned "Capitol .lii." and the response ended with "Chapter LII.", but then you referenced "Chapter LIIL" which should logically follow as Chapter 52 after Chapter 51. If you need specific content from Chapter LII or any other chapter, please provide additional context or text for translation.
On cautery for corrosive treatment.
Corrodent is a corrosive condition in the limb, which corrodes as if fire were consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosive condition in a place where it can tolerate cautery with fire, then prepare pointed cauteries, small and large as is appropriate for the location of the corrosive condition.
And then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
Leave that for three days, and then pause on the places cauterized thrice with oil mixed in until all the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is removed.
And then treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
If after three days the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then at this point repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted places.
And for corroding, some cases are treated with an acute medicine, because that is the method instead of cautery. However, cautery with fire acts quickly and effectively.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and so use that when you see improvement.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Joints and Other Similar Areas.
Often in the lower parts of the foot there is a sickness called a joint, which is caused by swelling and inflammation that affects the foot; and cauterization in such cases follows two methods, namely cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
However, cautery with fire is done by heating the concave cauterizing instrument, similar to a small wheel, which is made of iron according to the size of the joint in all parts, and it should be finely polished.
And then place the heated instrument on the joint, and then move your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. Let him be kept for three days and then let bleeding begin. And apply a poultice of wild mallows and salt to it, and let the poultice remain on for one night, for thereby it will be eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a healing ointment until it is healed.
And if you find non-conversion occurring, and spots frequently appearing on the surface of the body, especially in the masses and the glands, then you should administer cautery with water. Take a small tube made of iron or copper or tin and place it over the affected area; then pour a little hot water into the tube, hold it tightly, and rotate it under pressure from your hand, so that the edge of the tube touches the root of the affected part. Wait for about an hour as the hot water draws the moisture out through the root of the affected area; and after a short time, remove it, because then the spot with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this with each of them in turn until you have addressed all such spots on the body.
And then treat the pus where the roots of the spots have been eradicated with the water from ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever caused by friction, or from some similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and at the feet, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
And when the shaking subsides and hastens the health of the patient, it rubs.
Chapter .lv.
On the cautery of white spots on the body.
When on the body there appear white spots and pus-filled blisters which are made of thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is extended over fire; or with long rosemary twigs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is applied immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not feared, and the excess is removed by doing so, and they heal from them.
But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation or phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cautery of a bleeding caused by an accidental cut to an artery.
Often when a bleeding from an artery that has been cut occurs due to the disease that lies within, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar situations, it is difficult to stop that.
Therefore, when such a situation occurs, immediately apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and pause over it with your thumb pressed firmly to stop the bleeding until the flow of blood ceases.
And place in the fire the cauteries of olive wood, both small and large, in great number, and blow upon them until they are well alight.
And immediately take one of them, either small or large, according to the location and condition where the artery is ruptured, and place it quickly upon the vein before your hand trembles, so that the cautery becomes heated and constricts the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move your hand and take out the cautery, then immediately take another one quickly from those cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is then impossible to constrict the blood in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless you use one of four methods: either by using cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or let it be treated with honey or a bandage with strong pressure, or let them be placed upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be strengthened with a pad and appropriate compression.
But he who administers proper restraint with bandages and pressure using cloths or by positioning burning substances and similar methods should do so slowly.
But if this situation befalls someone and there is no physician present or medicine available, then gently press the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply strong pressure until the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and do not move your finger over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over it, which has great chilliness, to congeal and thicken the blood; and then determine whether cautery or medicine is necessary.
On incision and piercing and suction and of phlebotomy and of plasters and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cautery with fire is appropriate and the burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of the cauterizations; and I have arranged the chapters on the subtility of the head among the matters.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the seeker may be satisfied with what he asks for.
And before I begin this, understand, son, that in this chapter what is here is similar to what was in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great caution is required, because in the operation that is in this chapter many precautions must be taken regarding bleeding, whether it involves blood from which life depends through the aspersion of a vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an exit or purging of a plaster or extraction of gravel or the beginning of a stone and their similarities. And with all of these there accompanies fear and trembling, and in the worst cases of their precautions, death.
And I warn you that this should not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for some cases depend on your methods of handling people with various illnesses. And among them are some who become angry with their illness and are near death because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and their fear signifies that it means death.
And of those is he who gives to you his goods and says, you hoping for him health, and the woman's illness is fatal.
And therefore it does not become you to consent to him who comes to you in accordance with this method; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause upon this without certain knowledge which verifies this for you, and to whom proper succession gives praise.
And use in the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, for in that you have helpers towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, my children, may God inspire your judgment and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it preceded in the chapter of cauterizations, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that what you seek and need regarding this may be made clear to you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often afflicts children after birth and when the nurse presses the child’s head too forcefully.
And at times it happens for hidden causes which are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appeared to me as a deadly work in them.
I saw that a child’s head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that Caesar could not place a crown upon it because of the size of his head, and more than this, the moisture had increased to such an extent that it caused death.
And this moisture either aggregates between the skin and the bone, or it aggregates below the bone on the skull.
Because the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with a single incision, and let the length of the incision be about two fingers wide so that the moisture can run out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And if the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions made in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams of the head covered on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from the outside to the inside, and it does not come back immediately. It is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:
and immediately extract all the moisture; then dress the incisions with cloths and plasters; then apply a poultice of vinegar and oil from the fifth day onwards, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointment, and bind the head evenly; and eat food that is dry with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, for sometimes it is better on the occiput, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where the abscess appears and the swelling of the fluid, and do this as best suits you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and allow blood to flow, or else the patient will suffer harm from that blood loss and from the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Second.
When dealing with certain catarrhs or rhinitis in the nostrils or in the throat, and this is an old problem, and if you do not rely on that for treatment with medicines, then at such times the last resort in this case is to make an incision of those two arteries.
And therefore it is important when you wish to incise those arteries that the patient comb their hair back, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the veins appear clearly; then secure the patient's neck with a cloth; and then locate where the pulse is felt; and these points are near the areas behind the ears, though they may be hidden in some people.
And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then make an incision in each one with a sharp instrument, cutting diagonally to penetrate into the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatum before the artery and cut it where it branches above.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width, for when any vein is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating eruption, which comes out by frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not appear in the incision, now you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then with a probe feel inside the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let is a quantity of one vi uncie, and it should be drawn out more or less according to what appears from the patient's strength and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the condition, and if there remains on the bone any cause of swelling, now incise that so as not to cause an abscess by heat.
And then strengthen the condition with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from chronic headaches or acute attacks due to excessive moisture in the brain and its qualities in the veins of the temples, or severe pain similar to these, and such conditions do not respond to treatment with medicine, then we resort to bloodletting from the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
Here is the translation:
And if it is hidden, then tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and immediately rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until it becomes clear to you the artery clearly. And now you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you peel the skin with that which is easy until you reach the artery; and there remove it and extract it to the principal parts until you extract it from the skin and discover those tunics that lie beneath it, from every part.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the point where it is, and then cut a part of it according to the quantity by which the extremities are lengthened and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not thus divided, the blood will not rise at all.
And then remove one to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then make sure you tie it in two places with a very strong thread or cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and thus cause a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife cautery until the extremities are divided, and this will serve as that work.
And it is better to do this work if the patient has a fever or is of heated complexion; for cautery is among those causes which help in finishing off humors, and thus it is better for recovery.
And it is appropriate during the extraction of arteries that the place be prepared with old cloths, and they should be laid on decently prepared ashes, and nearby there should be prepared dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and warm applications within which it may heal.
And if while you are working, blood begins to flow from the artery, then you must act to constrict that blood, either with cautery or by filling the place with cloth and pressing your hand in until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your thumb on the spot until the blood is constricted, and apply the area with water of great coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as necessary.
And what is quicker in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked the two places with a needle, and then place some ignited material between them until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that it may be stretched out what is between its extremities, since they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted. However, if you use less sharp cloths than two, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two cloths, they may approach each other too quickly and cut the flesh too rapidly.
Thus, when there is a swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is quickly excised.
And this work is better than any other work and quicker.
And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects the veins that run over the forehead, and if you do not find any cause for treatment with medicine in this matter, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and a sensation like ants crawling is felt on their forehead, and their eyes become weakened, so much so that even the hair around them can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears. The ancient surgeons used to perform this operation with great skill in such cases, and they would not undertake this treatment without proper care.
And it is that you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise three furrows equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly ahead of the movement of the tears that flow through the lacrimal duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three of those adjusted.
And if you have a piece of prepared lint or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part between the plates to the second incision. Excise with that all the tissue which is between two incisions at the suture which is on the bone, and then do this for the median incision to the second incision. And then stretch it with this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And use the sharp edge to separate the flesh from the tissue, and use the blunt edge inside the bone, and insert it until you reach the median fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But ensure that the incision continues to appear in the tissue, and then do this in the median fissure to the other fissure.
And when the amount of flowing blood equals that of the collected clotted blood, press the areas where the clots are located.
And then apply pieces of old wood charcoal to each fissure, and sprinkle them with powder mixed in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, and bandages so that it does not lead to an abscess or cautery.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or thyme, and afterwards treat it with an ointment of basil, rose oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of headaches through catharsis and the expulsion of ascending vapors from the inner parts of the head.
When there is acute and continuous catharsis in some cases, and at times the head of the patient is weakened and small, and already their care shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and in the forehead there is sharp pain leading to extreme constriction, then you should understand from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come but from veins originating in the inner parts of the head.
And the best treatment for these cases is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one along its length (beginning from the left temple towards the right temple; and this cut should go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples, which are about the size of two fingers away from the mastication point), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then place between the two edges of the incision some yellow wax or strips of cloth. And then apply above a poultice of boiled vegetables and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, now cover it so that it scabs over where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth and mix them to form a plaster which is applied to these wounds where new flesh is forming.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what enters the ears.
Any cause that enters the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something resembling a stone such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant such as thorns or beans, or it is fluid such as water and sour wine or their like, or some animal.
And when a stone enters the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or become embedded in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some drops of oil or savory, and shortly afterwards induce sneezing by appropriate means, and plug the nose before the act of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear and extend the ear upwards towards the sides, as doing so helps to dislodge these causes after a few moments.
And if it is not dislodged, then administer extraction with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which is subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is dislodged by the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer extraction with a fine piece of wax through multiple foldings.
And if it is not dislodged by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube. From there extract the vein with strong traction, for troops watched as we have recounted.
If it is not forcibly taken in this manner, then take a thin thread or a piece of equipment with which birds are caught a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and immediately wrap around that knot carefully placed. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not forcibly taken for all the reasons we have recounted, then you should proceed to incise that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of incising that is to begin by puncturing the diseased area of the sephatica vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its nature, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards the upper parts, and make a small fissure at the edge of the ear near where it is most pressed. And let the fissure be of a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure at that time quickly, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause lying in the ear is one of the growths that arise and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed with this immediately, then take soft wax according to this form: and administer the removal of that growth which has arisen in the ear.
If you do not wet it as you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the bath, place it in small pieces, and put them on the wounds or with fine touches, or as we have said concerning incisions, for the extraction is easier.
In the water which has been introduced into the ear, it is well that the patient use snuff at the beginning with certain conditions, and fill his affected ear with some old cheese, and then place something over the ear in which is the water; if by this means it is expelled, it is good. If not, now take stones or beans according to the length of a finger, and heat them slightly in the fire, and let the patient introduce one of these into the channel of his ear, and jump on the side where the ear is affected, and strike upon the stone with another stone which is inside the ear. Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled.
Do not remove the stone inside until all the water is expelled. And once the water is expelled, take paper or cotton and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over a fire until most of it is burned.
And then put in another piece of cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and stir it with a cannula as was said above about the stone extractor.
In the extraction of an insect that has entered the ear, if it is a small object, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with touches and incisions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the removal of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations and do not confound your treatment, now you should pay attention to the ear in the sunlight.
And if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract that part gesti or am onci subtle, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula below narrow and above wide, which has this shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that suffices for the patient; and then suck out with a strong suction, and do this multiple times until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not follow the instruction, then you should pack and seal around the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, which you will find in the chapter on distillations.
And your application should be with the instrument in which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, which has this shape: And make it of silver or ivory, below narrow, in which there is a small tube, and flat above.
And it should be like pressing against the curvature of the cannula where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap the end of it decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cloth above and press with your hand on it gently so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
Let it be soaked in the ear after it has been slightly scorched over fire. And be careful that the substance you distill into the ear is not too strong, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs with unopened ears, and this also occurs in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes affects the narrow part of the ear canal which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And when it occurs in the narrow part of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, it is in the most difficult positions for healing.
And when you can see it, have the patient expose their ear to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obvious blockage, open it with a fine probe of this form:
If the tip of it is small in width, with one side sharp and the other not; and the probe should be two-sided so as not to injure the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the excess flesh.
And if the blockage is in the narrow part of the ear canal, then take a thin needle and slightly heat it over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
And thus if you have seen that the swelling occurs where the patient finds ease by lying on it, because of the gravity of the ear, it forces the oppression of what is below; and guard yourself so as not to plague the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear a plug of what you made according to the quantity of the cloth which you wrapped in Egyptian cloth; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the injury; or take something and insert it into water and powder it over it three times and use it. And if you see the ear already inflamed, then you must remove that plug and replace it with another plug which you wrap in wax mixed with rose oil until the inflammation subsides; and afterward care for it until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then you submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have these available either in tin containers or in ounce quantities, and then scrape them with the edge of their rasps, and afterward place them on the affected areas three times.
But if pain with bleeding occurs, then you should cauterize those areas with a fine ancient cautery.
The best cautery is applied after incisions and wounds have been examined to see if there is any cause for inflammation remaining; and when it has been applied with heat, those inflammations are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for ailments that affect the eyelids.
Inflamed and hard swellings that occur in the eyelids due to some cause are compared in their strength and hardness to serious ailments and are therefore called serious.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the treatment for this is to observe whether the swelling has appeared on the surface of the eyelid and spread throughout, and if so, the cause is superficial.
Then make an incision along the length of it, and subsequently drain it thoroughly until all of it is evacuated, and then dress it with some ointment and bandage it.
And if the condition is severe, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is minor, you will not have to do much for it because the warmth of the eye restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is spreading to the inner parts of the eyelid, you should examine its surface internally. Then dress the eyelid and apply ointment to the swelling, without making an incision if it is not necessary, and press it thoroughly from all sides. If the eyelid needs to be incised to lengthen it, note that there is no need for such action unless absolutely necessary.
At the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with liquid that will cause it to heal until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of a tumor above the eye on the eyelid.
A tumor is grayish and is generated in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it occurs more often in children, aggravating their eyes and causing them pain; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate there.
And because of this, you often see them lying on their faces all the time and sleeping with their faces down; and thus, their lower eyelids are covered by moist eyebrows, which have become inflamed, and there is an apparent swelling near the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a tumor within it.
And one method of treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the size it contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that on top and press with your fingers all around so that a tumor aggregates at the center of the circle, and then apply moisture with spatum incident on the fissure along the latitude, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flavotomy.
But in the incision you must cut through the skin entirely until you reach the tumor, for in severe cases, you proceed to remove the tumor through a fissure according to the shape of white gristle.
Then extract it from the cloths in which you have wrapped them, and roll it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert it into the fissure so that the pus does not reach the wound and damage it.
But if it does not appear to you appropriate at the beginning of the fissure, then insert into the fissure a small piece with ease so that it can be easily processed; and subsequently extract it as we have said; and then immerse the cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the location and sprinkle them with powder.
And some people use salt and apply it in the deepest part of the fissure so that what remains is free from moisture.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, now treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the wound.
When hair grows beneath the natural eyelashes and becomes old, it causes irritation to the eye and leads to various ailments such as persistent tears and inflammation of the eyelids, which can result in damage to the eye, known as examining or touching the wound. This is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medication as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or with cannulas as I will explain.
Therefore, place the blade of the lancet at the site; then turn down the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it is turned down well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part below the eyelid where pus may be present, and penetrate the needle to the kernel above it, near the margin of the eyelid from which hair grows, near the hair, and draw out the kernel towards the upper part with the eyelid, and turn that one towards the light.
And then make an incision inside the eyelid below the hair towards the spatum (the canaliculus) of the major tear gland into the minor tear gland; and then extract the kernel and place below the eyelid fine powder from wood or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with a probe, as shown in the figure resembling a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among people; some require that it be incised from a large portion of the eyelid in proportion to the extent to which the eyelid is softened.
And then make an incision on the spatum along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the major tear gland into the minor tear gland. And if your incision is near the natural hair line as thick as the king's hair.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and then excoriate that entirely, and then close the incision with two lips with a fine thread or kernel of wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what you consider superfluous kernels on two eyebrows for certain viscous causes, if you wish to do this, but if not, do not worry.
About three or four days after sewing up the wounds, proceed with care using this water.
And if you wish to treat the wound without suturing, use a liquid that dries and constricts, since the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; however, suturing is better. This is what the ancients recommended for such cases.
However, one must be careful about the swelling, and it is part of good treatment, and should not be feared.
And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small strips arranged in this form:
But if it is not possible to use the strips as mentioned, take a needle with thread and place it in the center of the marked area. Place one thread near the larger tear duct and the other near the smaller tear duct, adjusting them evenly between these points. Then lift your hand evenly and raise the entire marked area as we have described.
And then bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
And at times you may find that the eyelid's hairs are turned inward; then it is necessary to use what we have described for incisions. However, suturing in such cases is more artificial.
To make a needle follow this form: and then you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then, by art, make two needles or two slender sticks whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which shall be slighter than the width of the pupil. And you have already incised at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and constrain the needles of each section with a firm ligature, and leave it for several days, for the tissue will die due to the constriction and will be rejected, and it will fall off by itself.
But if it is delayed, now break it with scissors, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Then when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two needles which you will make according to this form: and there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with an awl when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural hairs, hard and rough, that sting the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine awl and place it at the base of each hair in a delicate manner, and then adjust the ends of them carefully. And let the length of the strips be equal to the quantity of one palm.
And then prepare another fine strip below it briefly, and use the ends of that one if you wish.
And then raise the patient's head with a pillow, and place it near a light source so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be extracted, and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly before you remove it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert it into an instrument, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is removed along with the instrument from the eyelid, leaving the natural hair.
But if the instrument is pulled away and the hair is not removed, pull the instrument away from the surrounding area toward the strip that you have prepared for it, so that the instrument is cleanly withdrawn without the hair.
And look at that with the eye's vision, for now you will withdraw the instrument and the strip, and wash the eye with water, and leave it covered for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows back on healthy flesh.
And if the hair is shorter than desired, now attach a long hair from among the natural hairs to it, and raise it up with that one, or leave it for some time so that it grows longer in place, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a wound that occurs above the eyelid.
When there is a wound above the eyelid, and it contracts when the eyelid is closed, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor healing of a wound or incision or cauterization, it is called leporine. This wound can be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar malpractice.
The method for the procedure is that you should divide that contraction and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use treatments for it that dry or constrict, because if you do this, the wound will return even worse and never heal.
Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek; boil the seeds and leaves in water, or dissolve some myrobalan in it, which should be liquefied with some oil, then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it.
The essence of your treatment is that you should ensure nothing remains unhealed according to its original form as it was at the beginning.
And this operation we have described is merely a correction of a wound that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of a hematoma which occurs below the eyelid.
This hematoma which occurs below the eyelid, which is properly called a hematoma; and it can be either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is caused by blows, or by cuts, or by cautery, or by other similar means.
And the way to perform the procedure is that you take a needle with double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct into the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh in the areas above the needle and cut around the needle with a broad probe. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take a probe and place it in the incision, and with that adjust the eyelid, and close both openings at the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two openings form two corners of the incision that you have made where they meet, and let them be made to come together to form a proper shape when they converge.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the quantity of the width below it, that which dries out the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and afterward treat those areas with what we have said about softening medicines and plasters until it is healed.
And if through excision, incision, or cautery an opening has been made, now you must make a flat incision above the eyelashes as was previously described. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of excisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as has been prepared for the form of the excision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way that is feasible within their ability to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adapt according to the requirements of the operation and the instruments in the best arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you must introduce a blunt instrument below the eyelid, elevate it with it, or extend it to the root.
And then you should cut the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp enough to cause injury from the incisions, holding it bluntly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula gently so as not to damage the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
And so you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in the place of rose dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a probe, and apply on the wound wool infused in egg white, and after the third day use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the tear duct and the swelling of the flesh around the tears.
Know that the tear duct exists in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle tube; or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron does not easily take hold, it is severed and the iron is not inserted into it.
And both types do not begin except from the main lacrimal, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and movement of the wound.
But the method of work in the incision is that the patient rests their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and then grasps the duct with a small double probe and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread, and double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the duct, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with glue the duct; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape away with the hair the side of the duct which faces the pupil. And thus you should proceed with the hair inside at the rear end.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by this incision there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail should be lifted with sunlight or fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, of which this is the form:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, place a small amount of powdered salt or fine gold leaf in the wound, and let that remain for another day; then treat it with what is needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot place the needle in it, nor has it been inserted elsewhere before, then this type of nail is treated with medications, and it heals as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the abscess and take a fine lion-shaped spatula with sharpness according to this form: with precision. And if it happens that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then apply your saliva in the wound made of fine gold leaf or fine cloth or powdered salt, and cover the wound for another day.
Then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is there, but if the opposite abscess has been cauterized, leave it alone at this time and initially treat the abscess until it is healed.
Then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh causes great harm when noted in the eye, suspend it for a moment; then incise part of that one, and do not complete the incision so as not to allow the flow of tears.
Then apply a distilled rose water and sinew preparation to the lacrimal region until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of styes and of what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, soft flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and tightly binds the parts from within, and it is assembled like the edge of a balcony.
The procedure there is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at convenient moments with forceps or a needle; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And make your incision with the scalpel that you use to incise or with the spatula that we have recommended for nail incisions, or with small forceps with which hair is collected, depending on how it will be done in this form as this chapter will proceed.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it has been thoroughly scraped, now fill the wound with salt water, or sprinkle on red powder similar to that used in corrosive medicines, and place a white cloth over the wound so as to ensure it does not become inflamed.
And if any cause arises for caution and the wound is hot and inflamed, and you fear an abscess, then let the wound be laid open and treat that abscess with what will heal it, and afterwards proceed with the operation until it is healed, and similarly handle the flesh adjusted which occurs in this kind of wound.
However, you must ensure that the healing of the wound occurs naturally or accidentally, without intervention, and do not use instruments in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus often comes from red veins that are situated above the wound and prohibit its immediate operation, and the wound should be left to heal over a period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness except for pus, then you should collect that pus.
And you must instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two, according to your discretion; and let that pressing be of subtle repetition according to this form:
or two ounces gradually in one motion according to this form:
And so bind those veins with fine threads, with subtlety, and clean the blood hour by hour until those veins appear to be flattened and are turned.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood pure green or red wine because of its sharpness to dissolve what is hardened in the body.
But if it is not possible for you to do this at that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and let him rest for several days until the pain subsides and he is safe from abscesses.
And then repeat upon him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp medicinal cautery, as was described and not healed, then do not allow pus to form but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should treat it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
He is called the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by lime or etching by fine puncturing (as in the following form).
Place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the tissues mentioned, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and remains for forty days without being renewed and without abscess formation and without any incident occurring, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, now it is not about generating but reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: that is, you expose the bone either with a tool or with an acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you prepare three parts according to this form:
Let the extremity of the tool be triangular, and the shaft of it gradually narrowed towards the extremity as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand slightly, and then rotate your hand around the tool until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the discomfort because you will notice air escaping when you move your hand.
Now, treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Thus, when the flesh and the place harden, at that moment the matter which was flowing to the surroundings returns to the nose, therefore this is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Nose.
When the nose protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in breathing, then you should allow the patient to rest, and subsequently apply windy poultices to the head without incision and suck it properly; and afterwards apply an ointment made of storax, aloe, iris, and sarcocolla on the nose, and then strengthen the plaster over the nose using powdered materials.
And the method for the powdered materials is to take linen cloth strips, and each strip should be folded into four parts; and make those powders from them.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity that the nose requires. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the poultices with suction without incision; and then remove the poultices and leave the nose bound day and night.
But if meanwhile the binding becomes loose, then it should be made tight again.
And then remove the binding as we have said, both day and night.
And if you see the nose already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal layer.
When you find disruption in the uveal layer, and it is prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, and has the shape of a human eye because of this, and you wish to incise it, then the operation there is as we have recounted: You insert the needle at the root of the uvea from below and above, and immediately place another needle where the double thread will be near the lacrimal part, and allow that to penetrate while holding the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift up that part of the uvea around the needle, and move it as required.
And then remove the needle and place it over the prepared lamb's wool soaked in egg white, and leave it there until the thread is with the uvea.
And then treat the eye with what will comfort it until the injury is healed.
And in some cases, he applies from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the eye to fit the large prominence, and then pierces it with a fine probe that reaches the surface of the eye, allowing the moisture to escape, and the eye will descend shortly thereafter.
And then wait until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of alopecia (hair loss).
This illness, which is called alopecia, is not actual water descending on the eye but appears to be similar to water descending and is not actually that.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
But if the drainage to the sinus with water as we have said is not prepared, now make the patient sit and take a thin probe and place it over the panniculus cernent a little behind the continuation of the conjunctiva on the cornea at the crown (entering the visible part), until the pus drains out.
Once it is drained out, now you should instill warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending into the eye.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which one is suitable to pierce, as explained earlier, now do so according to the health condition.
Now it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift his eye up, with firm support.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye in which the water is the left eye; or with your right hand if the eye is the right.
And then with your right hand take the probe, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the probe near the crown through the thickness of the sclera in the eye towards the smallest tear duct, and then gently insert the probe with rotation of your hand.
And so proceed to the white part of the eye, and feel that the almond is already reached due to its curve.
And measure the distance from the almond to the pupil, which is the space between the pupil and the end of the darkness, and it is the edge of the eye; for you will see that through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And proceed to place the almond in the location where water is present, and then pull it down into another area nearby, and if the water descends immediately, you will see the defect on which his sight rests immediately, and the almond in its eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, now you should pull on that other area before the almond is displaced.
And when it has stopped and does not descend, now you extract the almond with ease, and roll your finger in it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in water and wash the eye with this solution; and then cover the eye with a piece of cloth or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white.
But we and those of our time rest the eye covered with a piece of cloth soaked in egg white.
And if you cannot insert the almond into the eye due to its hardness—since there are some people whose eye is hard—you should then take the spatula, which is called an alberid, of this form:
And thus pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not stop your hand in the wound, until you make a way for the almond to pass.
Then he should introduce the probe as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for a comfortable sleep in a well-prepared dark room where they can lie on their back, and restrict all movements.
And pause in the nature of water to smooth its nature, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to their condition on the third day.
Then undo it in that dark room and examine the wound carefully, and show him some reasons for this, and then re-bandage it on the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of care or shortly after infusion. Having said that, you should do this so that the water can freely flow due to great and vigorous attention.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should undo the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water to help the abscess drain.
Now you can examine the wound and focus on the surface through which the dressing will be changed after a few days, while keeping it in a dark room.
Then gradually move them from that room and converse with them about their condition.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple is not exempt from observing certain things, and now you should be confident about the operation.
And I have come to us from some of those among whom it was customary, and some said that they made fire in the Airak with a hole made in which the water is sucked up.
But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of holes for which they are on those that do not know them:
And they are made of iron or of proper steel, and their extremities are shaped with this subtlety in a triangular form, the sharp end as well, just like that is the shape.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there are various flesh growths that differ in nature, some of which have causes similar to a spider's web due to its sticky quality, or to a sea polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature. And there is cancerous flesh, pale, of dark color; and there is flesh that is red, not of a dark color.
Therefore, for the one who has these red flesh growths that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover them so that the disease feels between your fingers and expose the nose to the sun, and starve the area around it, and apply hot applications to those parts. And then extract that from the inner parts, and then carefully cut away what you have identified of those with a sharp, subtle spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason that allows removal, then remove it with one of the fine instruments easily so that it does not remain for any reason. If the master commands it when there is bleeding or an abscess that requires cautery, then proceed with what is necessary; if it is one of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that which must have its blood vessel severed and all cavities drained.
And if it is necessary to incise near the nose above or with water or vinegar. But if the nose is swollen and from the process of moisture going into the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as is necessary, then you will know that within there is flesh growing on the superfluous bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Then you should mix faithfully with the substance to which there is some swelling, and use walnut shells, placing between each shell the quantity of a finger or less, and apply it to the diseased area and insert one end of the substance into the nose either by ray or for another reason that is possible.
And after this has been done, let its smell be drawn into the passages of the nose, and place it on his forehead, for diligent observation of such actions is common among children in schools, and it is an easy cause for one who wishes to do it.
And then place the two ends of the substance, one end coming out on the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a flesh clamp to the walnuts that contain the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the walnuts of the substance.
And then extract the substance, and place on the nose near the bloodletting a poultice, and do this for three days or more until it has corroded everything that remains of the flesh.
At the end of the treatment, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you use a method of treatment that dries, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used to administer enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon, like a little shell, and the tube similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument used to administer enemas should be flat and open; attach a handle to the end of it, which you can hold when heating it in oil or any liquid you want from substances that are absorbent.
Chapter XXV.
About the glands naturally found in the extremities of the nose.
Often a gland is found in the extremities of the nose, and it is admired and treated for several days until it is properly cared for.
And for this reason, you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance and treat it entirely. Here is the translation:
If the incision is delayed until it has become hardened, then consider whether it is pus-filled, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; at this point do not touch that part with iron instruments, for if you incise this abscess, you will act out of great malice against him who requires your help.
And if the abscess is painful to touch and not dark in color, and it often happens that incision is possible at all times, then evacuate the pus and incise it without fear, and treat the area with substances that dry and heal until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing up the nose and lips and ear when continuity is lost due to ulcer or similar condition.
Know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some men.
Therefore, when there is any reason for one of these conditions, consider whether it is a fresh ulcer with its own blood, and then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches, and subsequently treat it until it heals.
And if the edges of the rupture in continuity are already separated, and each edge is healthy, then you should scrape away each part of its apparent edge until blood comes out. And then approximate the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and over these sprinkle dragon's blood powder and thrisse (a type of grass), and place on top a piece of mastic plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave it for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster, and continue treating with an ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you do and make known.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips in the privates.
Many times in some men in the private parts of their lips appear hard abscesses resembling goose fat, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Then it is necessary that you turn the lips and incise each of those hard areas from all sides, and immediately after the incision fill the place with finely chopped wool until the blood has clotted, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Often there appears on the gum flesh that is adhered to it, which the ancients called albulus. Then it is necessary that you suspend that with a thread or needle and incise it along its root, and allow the pus to run out or the blood.
And then apply to the area finely chopped wool or other astringent powders or exiccative substances.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason for Pulling Teeth with Iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in both the inner and outer parts and between the gums are sharp, rough patches or stains, some of which are black and others are yellowish or green, causing corruption to occur at the gum, and thus the teeth become stained.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your thighs and place his head on your thigh, and rasp the teeth in which those rough patches appear until no such cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowness and other stains so they may be cleansed.
If this is done as described at the beginning of the rationale, it is good; if not, repeat the procedure on those teeth on another day and on the second and third days until you reach the final stage as you intend.
And know that the teeth have the need for various tools and figures of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And thus the razor used to rasp the inner part of the tooth is different from the razor used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in total extraction, for there is no cause that can replace the place it occupies once it is extracted, as it is a substance of high quality that cannot be compensated for by its removal.
When the patient complains that a tooth must be extracted, you should firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and he says it is in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen by the experience of barbers.
Therefore, you should be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know that, it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with something spatula-like in which there is some virtue until it dissolves from the tooth and gum completely, and then remove it with your said tools or with fine forceps little by little until it comes out.
And then grasp it with strong forceps for good leverage or firm hold, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you have a secure position without hurting him, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause more pain to the patient.
And if it is not dislodged, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath it on all sides and exert the removal as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is fractured or broken, then you should cover that fracture with a cloth and secure it with a thin thread so that it does not break further during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you should work carefully around the scarification on all sides of the gum and guard against your strength so that you do not break it or damage any part of it, and return to the patient with caution for the sake of ensuring that what follows is better than the initial pain.
And be careful that you do not perform what ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the removal of [tumors], since they do not administer what we have recommended; for often they cause serious illnesses to come upon people, which are harder to cure, and the roots of them remain uncured completely, or partially, or that you extract it along with some bones from the jaw as we have often testified.
And after the removal of [the tumor], the mouth should be washed with warm water or salt water.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as often happens, then apply some quantity of sugar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not help, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and holding them skillfully with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning should be long, short-handed, and thick, so that they do not bend when you need to work with them.
And they should be like thick handles inside so that when you grasp them, they do not bend, and their extremities should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron in the form of straight extremities, and at the ends of those there should be teeth of which some fit into others and grasp by strong constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are shaped like the beak of a bird called a stork, which is strong and has a firm grip.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the locked jaw.
When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is rotten for some reason, then wait on the place cut around it for one day or two until the area becomes softened; and afterwards insert these or use tools whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, which have the shape of forceps:
The ends of them should be made in such a way as with a file or a rasp.
And if it does not obey to you when using these forceps or tools, then wait on the root and cut away all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And it should be of short thick length, and not enclosed such that it is rotten.
Then if by this the root is exposed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of even finer end.
And with this instrument, which has two prongs of the following form, you will assist: and with other instruments which will be mentioned for scraping teeth; because it is useful to use this instrument that resembles a small spoon, and this is its form:
with a triangular end that is bent or short, which has some thickness, and is not enclosed such that it is rotten.
And know that the instruments for the teeth are made in a similar manner to the other instruments.
And the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands from the operation and the various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse types.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if you need to apply pressure, then proceed carefully using appropriate instruments and forceps, as we have described in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures of this form:
And if there is any swelling, reduce it gradually, and keep it in place with the mouth so that it does not escape or spread until all the bone has been thoroughly treated; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that part of the decay and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course because of their form being irregular, especially when this affects women, particularly those who are venerable; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and there is no possibility of extraction or filling, then remove it; but make sure it is not attached to another tooth, so use this instrument whose shape resembles that of a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And let your incision be such that you incise it in too few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and may it not become infected by any other teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth to be filed, then file that with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And let it be entirely of Indian iron and polish it accordingly; let it have small sharp points like the file on which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes infected and causes pain. And then smooth that at the end, and polish that with some razors.
And if it is a tooth of which part is broken and the tongue touches it, then you should file down the inside where the sharpness of that piece is, until it is smoothed and evened out, so that it is filled in such a way that the tongue does not injure itself nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of infected teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loosened or displaced by impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite on what they eat, and you have treated them with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then to prevent them from becoming infected, strengthen those that are loose with a filling of gold and not silver, for silver will tarnish, whereas gold will not change in any way.
And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the method of applying it is that you take the filling and place twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, then increase the filling in two spiral forms between one or more infected teeth until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. From there proceed with the tissue into the part from which you began, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not harmed.
And hold the thread with which you stretch the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
And then cut the excess part of the thread using forceps or scissors, and attach it to each place with your fingers, and twist and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue. And then cut that as narrowly as a Roman would.
But if it becomes loose or broken, stretch that thread or those threads with another thread throughout the entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two damaged teeth, as you see these tied:
And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper places upon setting, and they grow back as we have recommended, and they recover.
And only a skilled artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a piece of cow bone is shaped for some reason in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is stretched as we have said, and it remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the membrane that is on the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which was mentioned above, either belongs to the tongue naturally from birth or has become accidental due to an illness that has already healed.
And the operation is when men open the mouth of the patient, and their head is positioned properly; then they lift the tongue and proceed to cut that nerve ligament longitudinally until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or lump in that area, which has become solid due to illness, then you gently cut it longitudinally until the ligament is divided and the lump is dissolved.
And be careful not to make a tear in the surface of the skin so that you do not cut the arteries and cause bleeding.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with fresh water or vinegar or salt water; and afterward place linen below the tongue. So the patient should hold a piece of cloth between their teeth each night to prevent the wound from healing too quickly.
But if bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the location with a hot cautery iron that is appropriate for this. And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Sublingual Cyst beneath the Tongue.
Occasionally, a cyst appears beneath the tongue, resembling a small swelling that prevents the tongue from its natural movement; and it can grow large enough to fill the mouth.
And in the operation you should place the patient sixty paces facing the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of dark color or black and hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that which is crunching.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you place the incision on it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then you pause above three times, which is vitriol, until the blood constricts.
And then return to your work once you have treated it properly, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that occur in the throat and other abscesses.
When you encounter an abscess in the throat, which are glands that are somewhat assembled together, some of which appear outside and are called ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark colored, with little sensation, then do not touch that with a metal instrument.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with a metal instrument due to the flow of blood; instead, let that mature, and then either you will remove it, or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of white color, hard, and the layer beneath it is thin, then that is what should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider before your operation whether the abscess caused by heat has already healed or if there has been any reduction; and then have the patient sit facing the sunlight, and his head should be towards you, and open his mouth, and the assistant takes with their hands the tongue of him below with an instrument of noble form which has this shape:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Then when you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, look at it closely with your vision, then take some and place that in the cavity, and pull it out to the sides as much as you can. Or take something from the tunics to use as a cause, and then incise that with an instrument which has this shape:
Or take something from the tunics to use as a cause, and then incise that with an instrument which has this shape: and it resembles a pair of forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each is aligned with the other, sharp, made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise that with a scalpel which has this shape: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have incised one slit, incise the other in this same manner of incision, and then the patient should wash with fresh water.
If blood flows out, guard and use water from the decoction of thorns of mulberry or leaves of myrtle and similar to those of styptic causes until the flow of blood be restrained, and then cure it as it is healed.
And sometimes these pus discharges in the neck or other abscesses in those two ears, and incise them as it is said about the incision of two melons similarly.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was born in her neck, the abscess tended to have a dark color and little feeling, it had already closed the passage of her throat, and the woman breathed very narrowly, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if I had not acted for one day or two.
And the abscess had become so swollen that it had made two bulges from which it drained through two tracts.
Then I decided to surgically incise one of them and inserted my finger into it, and when pulled out, a large piece came with it, and then I incised the other tract from where I understood it originated, and then I closed its opening, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the poultice on that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood came out from it. Then her throat was completely clear, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she started eating food. I did not need to incise that abscess again for a long time, but another abscess appeared in its place, which I incised before it could spread further.
Thus I cut and cauterized the tumor of his neck, thus completed the procedure; and then I walked around and did not know that God had done it all for me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of the shoulder when it is inflamed.
When there is a discharge from the shoulder, and it is inflamed and swollen, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, it is then called a bubba.
But when it is cured with what we have mentioned in the division and does not conform to your treatment, and you also encounter cases where an abscess has been cauterized but still persists and is subtle, then you should incise the rounded parts that are aggregated; and if it extends over a long length and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in the center, then you should attempt the incision because there is fear of malady in those areas.
And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, that you should recognize the malady and press the tongue of it with an instrument which reveals its form and then fix the incision in the new area, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned for the double incision.
And you should not incise more than what is appropriate according to the natural limit without exceeding it, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the double incision, and treat it until it is healed.
If the patient is frightened by the incision, use an instrument in the cauterization of him without fear, and the method of the cautery on him is nothing but sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it with that cause alive, and place it not thick nor subtle, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is as follows:
Let the extremity of the cautery in which the medicine is placed be like the hollow of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person by the intrinsic medicine does not descend from any cause onto him and thus disturb him.
And then apply your hand with the medicine, and press that onto the uvula for a short while until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the cautery, and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the cautery with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization, clean around the uvula with cotton dipped in syrup, and modify it with what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with fragrant water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and take care of it with remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less painful from fear.
In some cases, the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision. It is cured by sub-fumigation in this manner: take a poultice, hyssop, origany, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs; adjust all these causes or some of them in a pot, and steep them in fresh water which has been boiled, and let it boil; the water should be moderately thickened with flour, and place a trough at the center of the pot, on top of which place an instrument shaped like a sieve made of straw in this manner: it can be made of silver or straw.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula, until the uvula is sufficiently affected.
And repeat this procedure several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would overly affect the abscess. You should not do this; instead, you should wait for the abscess to declare itself before cauterizing it.
But if this instrument is not present, take a cane and attach a hollow tube of horn to one end, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the tube of horn prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and what adheres to the skin and other causes.
Move gently around the belly or spine of the patient or for some other reason.
Then look to remove what is apparent there where your sight rests, and then press your tongue or use an instrument in the sunlight so that it may be revealed what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a cause attached to the throat will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or a leaf of lettuce or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the place where there are thorns, then it will carry them out. And take an eel and bind it with thread, then place it inside and gradually extract it; or take a probe and gradually insert and withdraw it.
And if it is not expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And it should be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it there should be a hook that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
And have the patient's head raised upwards, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the patient or cause pain in the bones or spine, or make the patient afraid.
However, if the patient himself inserts it, it is better, due to his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and to avoid pain, and he should pull his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity prepared within him so that it may be expelled.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Removal of a Leech Attached to the Throat.
When treating a leech with the water we have mentioned in the section on treatment using medicines and not compresses, consider the time of day regarding the position of the sun in relation to the patient's throat, since you have already swollen the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we recommended.
Then if you see the leech, remove it gently with your fingertips or with a small instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it with your hands, then take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the leech dies and falls off), and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
And then take a container filled with clean water and open the patient's mouth to it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not allow any other substance to be swallowed and change the water every hour or so because as soon as the leech feels the water it will cling.
But if it is not possible to follow the method we have recommended, then smoke the patient with cyprus or asafetida using the instrument we recommended for smoking the uvula.
Do this, and see what happens.
And there is another method of operation in smoking the leech, which is that you take an olive shell in which there are ignited coals and the shell is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and attach the end of the instrument to this hole; then perform the smoke infusion from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the leech, for the leech will fall off immediately.
And if it does not cough, then at this time repeat the subincision, and prevent the patient from drinking, and let them eat salty and dry foods, and let them not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be avoided.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood from the gum is sucked when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as well, but there is some curvature in it. which is placed in the gum, and the tip of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is made rough with a file, so that when it presses against something, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are of various kinds and methods, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And they vary in their puncture and incision by two methods, one of which is according to the nature of the abscess itself; and due to what it compresses of humidity.
And the second method is according to the locations in which they occur on the body, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from one occurring at a joint; and each has its treatment by operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but only when the pus has properly matured or at their completion.
So abscesses that must be drained when they are crosswise [across joints], and have not matured according to their proper time, just as abscesses that are near the joints, for an abscess when it is close to a joint extends its nature within so that what is around it becomes corrupt, and weakens the tendons or nerves of that joint, thereby causing contraction of that limb; or if it is near a principal member, and you delay perforating it until it has matured in the principal member; or if it is near the anus, therefore pierce it before it has matured; but do not pierce it raw when it is not fully digested, except for one that is near the anus, so that pus does not escape from it and spread to the inner parts of the anus, thus forming a fistula, or that it be made in its place where it cannot heal. It is necessary that you know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you should know that it is mature when there is relief from pain and the cessation of fever, and also with the reduction in hardness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made in the place where the pus is lowest in the abscess and from where pus will come for the healing of the elevation.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the back or legs, and in places of tendons, ligaments, nerves; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to postpone the incision until the second stage of digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it will prolong the suffering of the patient and increase foul matter, and make hard the lips of the wound and deepen it.
However, some abscesses should be pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or part of the body due to necessity, or as is appropriate for the limb in question.
And it is necessary to administer a small incision in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a larger or wider incision according to the variety of their size.
And in other cases of abscesses where it is necessary to hollow out and cut deeply, when this is done as needed, such as when it reaches a stage that requires it, just as occurs with excessive dubec (inguinal swellings) and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three corners; and of those in which it is incised like the shape of a laurel leaf, as in the abscesses of the armpits.
And in those where a round incision or a crescent-shaped incision is administered, similar to those cases.
However, for those whose abscesses are superficial like lions' (likely a metaphor or specific condition), it is necessary to pierce them with a shallow incision or simply a flat one.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should pierce it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a portion from it, on another day open the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and repeat this multiple times according to gradation until it is fully drained.
If the patient is a young male, or a woman in her period, or an infant, or an old and infirm person, for the animal spirit quickly dissolves with the evacuation of the humor, the sick person easily dies, therefore you should operate.
Keep this chapter with great caution, and when you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, make sure to clean the pus and then consider whether the pus of the abscess is small, or if it is a flat section; if so, administer some of it or use antiseptic cotton. And if the abscess is large, and the wounds from the incision are many, then place wax in each part until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is cut or you have hollowed it out in the circuit, then you should fill it with old cloth or thread made from linen, as when you treat ulcers or wounds without moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and thereafter proceed to care for it using whatever remedies are necessary until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in which you soak a piece of linen, and place that on the site of the bleeding quickly.
But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and care and use powders that have been recommended in various places of this our book and its divisions.
But if it is in the winter season, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should mix powders with vinegar and heated oil, and place them on those locations.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, you should apply poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open up the abscess and clean that area and proceed with the treatment of it with what is suitable for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in what manner is the way of treating it separately by chapters.
Chapter XLI.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur in the Neck Area.
In the neck area, small abscesses occur, and they are of various types of nodes that contain membranes similar to their structure; and the types vary in their characteristics.
And they are soft to the touch, and those that contain moisture similar to jelly. And those that contain moisture similar to dust, and resemble them; and those that are like stones, hard.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not harm the arteries.
And the procedure in incising those is that you should press them with an instrument whose shape is similar to this, which is called an entrometer, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should cut that with an incision according to its length with a superficial incision according to this form:
And begin at the section of the line of B and enter into the line of G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, you shall excise that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any part of it remaining, for if left behind it will return as a source of trouble.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian oil if it is available, and if not, in salt water; and fill that with the dressing and leave it there for another day, for in this way you will dissolve all that remains of that skin layer.
And then repeat the treatment on that wound with Egyptian oil a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; now care for the wound with the dressing until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise it according to this method: in a section having the shape of a cross, and place incisions between both lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your experience opposes this, then do as I have described initially.
And similarly, treat the calcified abscess with sectioning and healing as we have told you; and cutting into a calcified abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes in some of these abscesses which occur on the head in people who are not very moist; this cause is because I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found within it a hard, rough, white stone-like mass that could not be removed, and if touched by anyone with percussion, it would cause pain.
In other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the chapter for them; likewise, the abscesses that appear on children's heads and behind the ears should not be included here. However, the section of all these shall be a superficial section.
And pause the puncturing of those from the lower parts so that the contents of the abscess are discharged to the lower parts.
And treat those accordingly as is appropriate for that condition.
Chapter XLII.
On the section about treating scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Often these abscesses occur in the neck and behind the ears; and at times they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often arise between the layers of tissue there, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
And the types of these scrofulas are various; some are lithic, some contain moisture, and among them are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you find one that is well disposed upon examination, whose color matches the skin tone and which does not adhere to the neck's nerves or veins, and is not hard, it is appropriate to incise it with superficial cuts above and below the body of the lesion along the line G between the line B, and peel it off completely from all sides. Extend two flaps of the skin an inch or more if necessary, as we have described for abscesses of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
It is necessary to be careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the scraping not be sharp, so that it does not irritate your hand during the incision or disturb the patient; and do not cut what is not necessary to cut. For if you should cut a vein or artery and stop bleeding from it, then apply green vitriol powder or other powders that cause blood flow, and bind the wound tightly; let the pus remain inside where the inflammation subsides, so that the swelling becomes softened and begins to rot. When the bleeding has stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then ask the patient if there is any cause for other small swellings, and if so, incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the base of the swelling, be careful not to incise that swelling from its base. Also be careful to apply firm bandages and let that remain until it heals on its own without harm.
And then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then dress it.
And if you incise the swelling completely, then be sure to approximate the two edges of the wound and ensure that pus comes out so that no excess fluid remains.
But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the size of the swelling, then be sure to incise the base of it, drain it, and apply sutures as described.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make an incision at the surface where it appears to you at the site of its maturation, and do not pierce down to the pus deep within the body, as we have said.
And around the area of the incision, apply treatments and remedies appropriate for such cases, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleansed, now apply remedies to generate new flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
The ancients called this incision an epipustule, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform it in this manner.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [ancients].
But in men who have scrofula, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epipustule, as it is not beneficial because all the veins and major channels are affected here.
But in those who have boil-like swellings in the mouth, groin, or ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use incision of the epipustule to avoid the damage that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the epipustule below three circles of the epipustule or four small sections in width between two circles in quantity. The incision should be made in the flesh, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are prominent.
And if the surgeon is cautious, he should wait until the vein expands due to blood congestion and then cut the vein so as to reach the channel, but avoid cutting into the vessels that carry blood if you see any reason not to.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have recommended; and this is significant regarding the section of the channel by the flesh which is around that which is disrupted there, and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound untreated for some time.
Then when the time comes for which that perforation is feared, add two lips of the edge of the wound, and close it up except where the cartilage is.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recommended is to see whether some of these abscesses have already obstructed the vein of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And by this command, leave the wound untreated until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, at that time, treat the wound accordingly until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and cut it into her own vein, cutting off a part of the windpipe's cartilage, and I was called to treat her. I found the wound as if it were that of a dying person, and uncovered the wound to see the blood that had come out of it in small amounts.
Thus he confessed that he had not incised any vein or ligature, and the wind issued from the ulcer, and cured her inside as if by fire.
And it did not affect the servant unless he coughed in his voice, and after some days he returned to the condition of his disposition.
And now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and it is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the skin, and it often occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is cause for concern. And it does not require that pressure be applied with force except in the case where it is small. And you should proceed with caution and investigate it carefully. If you find it similar to a fatty lump and it is not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would a lymph node and extract what contains the fluid inside; otherwise, thoroughly examine its nature, and afterwards treat the area as necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the division of types of knots.
Of the knots there are various types, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And it is necessary for me to recount thus the difference between a knot and an ulcer as it causes doubt.
Therefore, I say that an ulcer is a condition of heat and fever and intense pain within, where the ebullition of the excess is settled; and it completes putrefaction when then the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But a knot is not a condition of heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that swelling which occurs in the private parts.
And it is according to the color of the skin, and the beginning of it is like a pimple and it forms in various ways, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types, either dry or fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are various, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you should express it and inquire about its origin at the beginning, which is called an intrusion, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all knots, which is to take this origin and insert it into the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and you will rotate it little by little until you know that the origin has already penetrated the tissue.
And subsequently, according to the size of the abscess, withdraw your hand, and then extract the insertion and observe what has come out in its wake.
And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is disregarded, then at that time you incise it with a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if from the remains of the introitus you do not have moisture, then you will know that it is greasy.
And if it is dry to the touch with a superficial section having the form of a cross according to this shape: As I have taught you, suspend it in this manner, and scrape the cord from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac if you can over that area, and extract that pus at the knot.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should frequently apply dressings for this reason, and then you will extract it in stages until none of it remains due to any cause.
For if some of it remains due to any cause, little or much, the knot will return as is worse.
And if you see that some of it remains in small parts, then complete the treatment with certain corrosive and sharp powders and strengthen the area, and place over that which is an affected abscess a dressing, and treat that from another form of treatment until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then you cut both sides of it and treat that with what causes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is against it, then you should cauterize and fill the place three times with vitriol and leave that open for two days or three until the dressing has become loose and the boiling of the blood subsides; and afterwards return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, there are forms of instruments, which are of three kinds: some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Let them be made of iron, of steel, with well-curved tips, so that they may facilitate the instrument in the incisions.
And these are the forms of probes, and they are named albered, and one of them is called berid.
And they are of three kinds: some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large probe is as follows:
The form of the medium-sized probe is as follows:
The form of the small probe is as follows:
It is appropriate to use these for abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and boils, as they are useful between bones and for other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like lions' claws, similar to large needles used for sewing sails, and they are made of citrus wood, or wood, or iron, or silver. The best ones are when they are made of citrus wood.
Here is the translation:
And there are three kinds of them, some of which are long, and others medium, and the rest short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of the great expert of lead:
Form of the medium expert of lead:
Form of the small expert of lead:
The forms of the needles are of various kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And they are hooked in shape, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple needle, its form:
Form of a large needle having two curves: Shape of a medium-sized needle having two curves: Shape of a small needle having two curves:
Shape of a large needle having three curves:
Shape of a medium-sized needle having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped; they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Shape of a large knife:
Shape of the medium-sized knife:
Shape of the small knife:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they designed in such a way unless to perform the scraping of nodes courageously without fear of injuring a vein or nerve. And through these, the patient may be healed and find peace shortly due to the adjustment that follows after the abscess has been scraped.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
Let there be a decoction of iris with the appearance of red wine, like which alcohol is made.
And it is in the area beyond the dotted line with the spatula hidden and in that corridor to the parts inside and outside, as you wish, just as you see.
The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden among the said feathers for the incision of abscesses and I do not perceive the maladies, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cups from which the blood flow is cut off, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Let them be made of citrus pith, round with some length, and thin.
And you should have these kinds of cups, large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the blood flow quickly when necessary, and at times when there is no other immediate treatment available.
However, do not use them to cut off blood from all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas such as the sinews of the arms and legs, and the sinews of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and thighs, and similarly in other fleshy, moist sinews.
And at times, some are made of other small tools resembling fish scales in this form; with which the blood is cut off when performed by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's nipples, which are similar to those of women.
Some incisions become swollen; the nipples of some men should be treated with care as they begin to harden, and then the nipples become swollen like those of women, and we should cut them if necessary.
And for those whom you treat in this way, cut them in a crescent shape as shown, from line B to line G, then remove all the roughness, and afterward apply a healing ointment to the wound, and sew together the two edges of the wound. Continue treating until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is soft due to its size, similar to women's nipples, then cut it into two parts along its pus-filled areas, each in crescent sections as shown by line B and line G. Then remove the roughness between the edges of the wound, and take out the fatty tissue, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive liquid and leave it until this corrodes what is left of the fatty tissue. Then continue treating until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Are Located in the Throat.
These abscesses that occur in the throat are among the types of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a core that can be extracted.
And only some of those contain moisture; those that do contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. Once all the pus inside the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with boiled cloth and leave it for another day.
And after the cloth is removed and the area is treated with an appropriate ointment, it should be left to heal.
And if the abscess is of the type of glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described in the section on scrofula.
If the infection has spread and there is putrefaction, then apply cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the area around it becomes inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which one can determine whether inflammation and an abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to be elongated near the front of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound.
And that which is from a vein is round on the surface of the body.
And the section on this abscess is incorrect, especially in those areas where there are joints, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; it is serious, therefore it should be avoided that its treatment involves iron, and those that are in the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided.
For that which is due to inflammation of the artery opening, divide it in the longest section; and then cut with hooks near the section and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with a double knot with a needle in two places, — which I explain in the extraction of two arteries which are in the thighs.
And then press the place which is between two ligaments with a probe until the blood comes out completely, and the abscess dissolves.
And then administer treatment in which pus is produced until the ligaments fall off; and then treat it with appropriate ointments so that it may heal.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, now you should hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in its longest part, and then insert the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it double at that point so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a strong thread as I have told you regarding the grapevine thread on both sides of the middle of the filament.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then place a needle with wax under the abscess; first insert the tip of the needle and strengthen its wax in four places.
When the abscess is dry in its middle part and when what is inside it has come out, then cut away the excess skin, and leave what is adhered to it.
And then apply dust which you have submerged in wine and oil, and subsequently administer the treatment made with cords and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter L of the abscess which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess occurs in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and likewise.
And it is done with the hand in the places of the helpers or at the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually troubled.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding flesh. It is in one of its major dispositions when it is tight with inflammation, and when the patient appears dazed.
And it is not an abscess aggregated at the front of the body, and therefore it is below the skin, and it affects all parts equally and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need for it to be enclosed with iron, as it would easily lead to contraction.
Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum. If it is a small abscess, open it with forceps and cut it out with razitz.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and scrape that area, and afterwards close it; and stitch the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek as it occurs on the abdomen.
Indeed, for some people there appear growths on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungous because they resemble mushrooms, whose root is fine and the head of it is large; and often the lips of these are smooth, and among them are those that are small, and also those that are magnificently enlarged.
And I myself have seen one in whose abdomen there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with fine roots.
And the lips of those growths were inverted and split, and moisture continually flowed from them.
Therefore, I incised them and found inside one weighing about eighteen ounces and the other about ten ounces.
And the procedure in incising them is that you should consider whether the malady is humid, and if the color of the growth is white, humid, with a fine root; then you should incise it with a broad spatum, and immediately over a flame cauterize it, because when dealing with such growths, the section of it expels much blood; and if there is bleeding, cauterize that area.
And if the wound is small and fearful, guard against cutting with iron; instead take fresh lead foil, and apply it to that part in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And so adjust it in the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop applying more lead as needed until it is separated and falls off on its own.
But if the part is of thick substance, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you might cut half of it, and then cauterize that part so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut a part that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is easily movable, for such a part is likely cancerous.
And now I will turn to recall something related to this.
Chapter LIIL
On the treatment of swelling of the navel.
Swelling of the navel is caused by various reasons; it can be due to fissures in the abdomen that are above the belly, and in such cases, linen or bladder tissue is used depending on other ruptures; or it can be from a wound where blood flows from a vein or artery, depending on the situation, or due to trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it is painless, and subsequently appears in various situations. And if it is by the exit from the bowel, then its situation is in that place which we have recounted, but with much greater difference, and when you press that area with your hand, it immediately retreats; and it is very light there, and is magnified by means of bath and vigorous labor.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears blackish and declining.
And if it is due to excess flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is embedded in proportion to its quantity.
And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation in this case is that you must consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or gas; now it behooves you to be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have spoken about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then it behooves you to order the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then order them to stand between your hands on their back; then encircle with a bandage wide in the circumference of the navel where you have examined with your hand; then extend half of the abscess above an inch or so; then tie it around the circumference firmly with waxed thread or linen in a proper manner.
From the side of the swelling of the abscess extended over the bandage, place your finger in that spot and search for the purse; and if you have found it or guarded it by the bandage, now extract it immediately and push the purse to the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the membrane, now take that one-inch scalpel; and cut into the excess tissues of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, now encircle that spot, and then return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong points and insert the two needles around the circumference you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which should be penetrated; and then press the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place inside where the extended flesh will drain and fall off by itself; or cut it when it is softened and will drain, and then treat that area with water from the decoctions until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to humidity, now it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat that area with what is needed to heal and strengthen the place.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
We have already said, in the division, about a type of cancer and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is difficult to cure without surgery because it cannot heal on its own; we also mentioned cancer arising in the major parts and the caution required for its treatment.
And let them say the ancients that in some cases cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, just as with the cranc which is in the mammary glands or in the armpit and similar parts assigned to remove all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and hard, do not try to deal with it yourself, for I cannot heal anyone from that, nor have I seen another who could, nor has anyone reached such a condition.
And the operation in it is when it is appropriate, as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient to purge from black bile for some days, and then let them bleed if there is obvious retention.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which the operation is located, and then place hooks in the wound that are necessary for it; and then cauterize from all sides with a well-sewn leather bag to ensure thoroughness so that no cause remains for its recurrence. And let the blood flow, and do not apply abscesses hastily to it, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among the available tools.
But if it is contrary to let the thick blood flow and you must cut into a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterward treat it with another method until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the Treatment of Hydrops (Edema).
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the symptoms of each type, as well as the treatment of it with medicines.
Of her who is treated with iron there is only the kind of ulceration alone, and it does not approach the kind of tympanites or the kind of ileus, for that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of hydroptic tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has become weakened or is afflicted with another such illness, just as if it were in the chest or bowels and similar to those cases. At that time, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
But if you see the patient with abundant vitality, and in them there is no other illness but hydroptic alone, nor are they infants or elderly, then the method of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and the assistant approaches to press their belly with his hand, pushing out the water below the navel, and afterwards take a spatum spinosum according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with a pointed end like a spatum; but in it there should be a slight gradual narrowing, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thereby harm it.
And then consider whether the generation of hydroptic is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that in the section you distance yourself from the navel by the amount of three fingers below, on the right side over the navel.
But if the generation of hydroptic is due to a kidney illness, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the gall, then your incision must be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants the operation, because the superfluities would run to that place freely.
And then pierce with the instrument all the membrane, and immediately insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the membrane and the duct, and you will extract it; and if the quantity is of one grain or so.
And then pierce the duct so that the fluid reaches the empty place, which is where the water (or liquid) should go. And then extract that and insert an instrument which has the following form: and it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or silk or lion's leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut like a pen, as you see.
And at the upper end of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, you should immediately apply pressure on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of fluid at once, for if you evacuate too much in one go, the patient may die due to resolution of their vital spirit, or approach death, as this can be fatal.
But evacuate that according to the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
Here is the translation:
After each iteration with the instrument, if the patient can tolerate it, take a small amount out of the water, and let this continue for several days, but be careful not to remove too much water, leaving only a little.
If you fear for the patient and remove a large amount of water, then bury them in fine sand up to their neck, pour sweat-inducing substances over them, and have them stay in the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the chest and abdomen after the removal of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes a child is born from the mother's womb with the head of its mixture not perforated (or it is trapped or not in its proper place).
Therefore, one should immediately attempt to perforate it upon the child's birth using a fine instrument in this manner:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over that area will not remove this obstruction.
May the part where the wound is narrow be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for so many days until it becomes enlarged.
May those in whom the wound is not in its place be treated as mentioned, and the cause of this is that one who is born with the urethra at the end of the penis tip, so he cannot urinate properly; hence he must elevate the penis with his hand to urinate. And it does not concern sexual intercourse, because thus semen cannot reach the main channel rectly, which is a serious condition.
And the method of the operation in such cases is that the patient lies on his back, and then you extend the tip of the penis with your left hand vigorously. Incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp blade, as if cutting the quill of a feather, or shave off some part so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis, and ensure that the wound falls in its proper place accordingly.
And be careful during your operation to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs; and pause when you need to stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and on corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Such swelling often occurs in the penis and is a significant protrusion of flesh.
And one of these swellings is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
For benign conditions, suspend one ounce of a subtle compound and abscind that which holds the entire tumor; then place upon it a poultice soaked in Egyptian oil; and afterwards treat it with a cleansing ointment until it is healed.
And if the tumor is malignant and of a dangerous nature, then you must administer cauterization around the base and on the sides of it.
But if the tumor is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must excise the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, for when treating both parts simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be damaged.
And if similar conditions occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, such as discoloration and corruption, then you must excise everything that is discolored or about to become corrupted; and afterwards apply a liniment over it mixed with honey, which has been crushed and sifted from barley chaff and burnt ashes.
And afterwards treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
for cauterization is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then you must insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that the urine can pass through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and on whom circumcision is not obligatory; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess) it must be that you use a blunt spatula so that the bandage may dissolve and the head of the penis may be released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you must use the spatula gently on both the head of the penis and the foreskin, for when the foreskin is thin, due to its delicacy it can be pierced easily by its fineness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine thread, which is moistened in water to ensure they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with styptic juice so that it may be healed and strengthened.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other diseases; but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and because it primarily affects children, it is necessary that we establish the best method and the most gentle way to ensure their health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, as they do not use it in their laws. The reason for this is that we have acquired through experience. What I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use a scalpel and forceps for circumcision and purification; they use bandages made of thread and perform incisions with the fingernail.
And thus I have described all these methods and did not discover a better modification with scissors, with thread as in the modification with the nail, because most times you avoid the cicatrix above, because the cicatrix of the foreskin has two tunics, and remove the tunic below, and it is necessary for another incision and certain pain. And in the modification which is done with alphabetization, which uses the fingers, as barbers do, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured, because it easily enters into the groove.
But in the operation with the nail, you easily forget and ruin your operation. And the cicatrix of the child is short by nature, and many times they are in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
But concerning the modification that is done with scissors and thread with precision, the goodness, experience reveals to me, since the scissors should be of proportional incision, because the sharpness above is also like the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand according to the proportions of both sharpnesses, and you make an incision following a comparison at once; and it is done with compression of the thread in a figure containing the cicatrix of the penis from all sides, with which you catch no error whatsoever.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down if he is one whom I understand to be small, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave it for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to you according to what his intelligence can receive. Let him be brought to you already prepared and not in a state of fear; and hide the scissors in your hand or put them out of sight, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
Then place your hand on his chin and blow into the ear, and insert it until the tip of the forceps comes out, and then remove what has adhered to it from impurities.
The shape of the scissors for removal is as follows:
Let one set of handles be unsharpened and the other sharpened, so that the tip of the clamp does not come out, and let the length of both blades be equal to the length of two handbreadths alike.
But the mistake in removal is that you may flee too far from the inner ear entirely, or part of it due to the incision.
Therefore, you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the swelling of the area and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a probe and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the testicle, then you should leave what is inside until the abscess bursts on its own, and when it has discharged, clean that area well, and incise it as soon as you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not suffer from this.
And thus, treat that area with the powders that the plague consolidates from those we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the tendon, and you follow the instructions above, this will not harm it.
And treat that area with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter L VIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and the cause of the pain is severe, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a reed tube, like a quill pen but finer, about half a palm in length, to which there should be a fine tube at its end.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread and tie it at the end of some wool or cotton tightly; and insert the ends of the thread into the lower part of the siringua, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary. Then insert the thread into the tube forcefully, and then gently pull out the siringua along with the thread.
And apply heat to the pain on the saddlebag, and inject the bladder with a tube using unctuous oil, olive oil, and aqua regia.
And then insert the siringua easily until it reaches the end of the tube; and then bend the tube above the part where you will inject; and then push the siringua inside so that it goes through; and then push that inside until it reaches the bladder, and it should reach the source of the pain. If this is not done in this order, but rather follows a winding path.
And then slowly pull out the thread along with the wool bit by bit, for the urine will wet the wool.
Here is the translation:
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enemas for the bladder, with clamps and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or when there is clotted blood or obstructed pus inside it, and you wish to administer water and medicines into it, then an instrument called a clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
But at the end of it, where it is blunt, it is closed. And in that part there are three parts: two from one side, similarly on the other side.
At the beginning, it is concave, where what is to be inserted is placed, and it should be of such a quantity as to fill that space appropriately. When any cause draws out the moisture, it should be drawn out accordingly, and when expelled, it should draw out with it, and when expelled far, it acts like a clampcedra on which naphtha is placed for naval battles.
Therefore, when you wish to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture and pull with it the water that is inserted into the parts above, for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the tube as we have recommended in the circular part; then push in the moisture with the water that you are inserting, for that moisture will reach the bladder quickly, and the illness will be alleviated by it.
The form of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is subtle, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with its head either round like a small feather, and then the tube inside the instrument.
And take a bladder of an animal, and put in it the moisture that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it up between two strong ligatures made of waxed thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the tube.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it is thoroughly spread within so that you can feel when that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce it all around its circumference; and then insert strong wax into those holes, both ways; and then attach the circle as is attached in such cases, so that you can place in it what you want from moist substances, oils, and waters.
And then tie that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which this operation is performed, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And he who narrates it thus presents it clearly and concisely.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of the signs of it is that the urine which is emitted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and there appears something like sand; and the patient scratches his penis, and small drops come out, and soon he is relieved; and with this you are given advice in words of those.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition until they have reached fourteen years; and treatment is difficult for the elderly. But in young people it is moderate compared to those extremes.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is longer; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, how we reach the treatment of that condition is to begin with cleansing the patient's bladder by extracting all the sediment that is in his urine; for that sediment sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its investigation.
And then the patient should lie on his back and be encouraged to drink plenty of water so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or jumps from its place, sometimes.
And then place the patient between the thighs properly prepared, and let him keep the things of it away, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the parts behind.
And there I examined that and all around it.
So if you feel the stone in the space, now you should cut it out immediately.
And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now you should anoint your index finger of the left hand, if a female, or the middle finger if male and older, with oil, and insert it into their anus. And examine the stone until you feel it with your finger. And gradually turn it little by little into the bladder neck.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel it outwards towards the place where the section was made.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand to pull back the skin that is below the thighs, near the place where the section was made.
And then insert a spatula of this shape into it: and cut what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but more to the left side; and make the incision over the stone and have your finger in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you can extract of the stone, and no more, because your finger in the anus presses the stone against it without difficulty after the incision.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and margins, because of which it is difficult to remove them surgically.
And that one is similar in appearance to a hazelnut, it is round, and it can be easily removed surgically.
Therefore, for that one which has angles and margins, adjust it into the fissure.
And if it is not removed easily, now you should apply something over it, or use a properly sized tool, the end of which is like a file with which you can work on the stone without avoiding it; or insert an intricate curved instrument below it.
But if you cannot do that, now slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flowing, cauterize it with a tool dipped in tripedal vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and subsequently press gently nearby; and similarly proceed if they are in greater number than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise it with a large section, because this causes one of two bad outcomes: either death or that the patient suffers from continuous urine dripping, because the area does not heal completely.
But administer an expulsion so that it is removed, or devise a fracture with forceps to extract the stone in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with powder of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it. And apply over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixed, so that the abscess may more readily yield.
And let the patient lie on their side with the affected part uppermost, and do not loosen the bandage before the third day.
And when it has been unwrapped, anoint the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with a decoction of pennyroyal and calamus until it is healed.
But if an abscess should occur in the wound, which is hard and adherent, and appears as though blood is congealed within it (and this is known by the prohibition of urination), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left untreated it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate to its condition until it is healed.
And it is necessary throughout the entire treatment that you examine both the wounds and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is lodged there, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, for many have been accused of unnecessary section due to this treatment; and I say this, which is that you take a blunt iron probe, which has the following shape:
with a triangular end, sharp, attached to a handle.
Take some wax, and tie the thread beneath the stone with it so that it does not return to the bladder.
Insert the needle into the thread and pierce with ease until it reaches the stone. Rotate the extractor with your hand on that stone little by little, and as you enlarge the hole, allow the other end to penetrate; for the urine will immediately be relieved.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is outside the thread, for it will break and be expelled with the urine, and the illness will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties. Then extract it. Then untie the thread and clean the accumulated blood, which has formed around the wound.
It is not necessary to tie a thread below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread above it, because when the thread near the stone is untied, the pain will return to its original location and the wound will become inflamed again.
And for this reason, it is necessary when tying the thread above to lift the pain to the upper parts or return to your initial care, as we have said, so that the wound does not become inflamed again.
Chapter LXI.
On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in one of them, the treatment is difficult at that time, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman is too weak.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is sufficiently honest to reveal whether she has given it to the doctor when she is chaste, or whether she is one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation well.
And the fourth is that the site for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a distant incision, and this is dangerous.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a trustworthy and knowledgeable woman, but few are found.
However, if you lack such a woman, then seek a discreet and careful man, or present a reputable midwife who is well-known for women's matters, or a woman who is proficient in this art.
Therefore, bring that person present and command them to do everything you would instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to ensure that the woman is honest, so they should place their finger in her and feel for the stone.
Then if you find that one, cut that below the joint, and now order him to incise upon that one.
But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the joint into the woman’s vagina and feel for the stone, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and compress that one well.
Then if you find that one, now proceed to gradually remove it from the bladder's opening to the sides below as far as its root within until it reaches the base of the matter.
And then incise upon that point in the middle of the vagina where the base of the matter is, wherever it may be to him convenient and place the stone there, and let the said joint not be cut from the stone below it.
And let the incision be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the quantity that you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and hard, others are rough and sharp, long and round, and having edges.
Then you should know the types of stones for what you signify regarding what you want.
And if you wish to cause bleeding, apply vitriol thrice to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Prepare those instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder on the area and stop it with a bandage and compression, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone there and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the bleeding has subsided after some days and the area has become clean, then return to your operation until the stone is dislodged.
Chapter LXII.
On the incision for an inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white tissue beneath the tendon of the groin muscles, which contains the spermatic cord, and this is called a pouch.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer that nature has prepared for the passage of the spermatic cord, such that one may think it is another cord; and the tendon of the groin muscle is between this white pouch that we have mentioned, and this is not so.
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, causing this matter to protrude into them; and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin area.
And this moisture can have various colors, for its color may incline to yellowish or reddish, or brown, or be black and thick, or clear and white, and the latter is better.
Here are the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is such as this: for if it is in the white skin we have mentioned, then at that moment the abscess is round and leaning slightly in length like a hen's egg, and the cheek appears, because the moisture extends on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper subcutaneous tissue, then the abscess is round but divided like a bird's egg, and thus it is estimated to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the cheekbone and the white skin, then feel below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe of which the shape is known; and according to what appears in the marks left by the probe, judge what is inside.
When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bloodletted if that is possible for you, and apply the body of the instrument to it.
And let it be raised up on his back on something slightly elevated, and place below it some dry cloths.
And you sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his hand from one of the two sides to the cheekbone and to the division near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and split the cheekbone from the middle location along its length near the temple.
And the incision should be made according to the rule equally distant from the line where the hair of the pubis begins, until it reaches the white line that encompasses it.
And peel that area, and observe, and be careful so that you do not incise it; and your peeling of the part which you are peeling should be suspended more deeply and carefully examine the peeling according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the blister full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the blister to the parts above; and do not touch the skin that encompasses the pubis, and incise the blister in such a way as is possible for you. And incise it entirely or in pieces, and especially its soft part finely, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if you proceed with that outside of its skin during the time of your operation, after you have completed the incision of the blister, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the pubic skin with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspension, extract the wound, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other equally; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
After you have wiped away the blood, apply wool soaked in oil or rose oil to the sections; then place another layer of wool that has been immersed in wine and oil over both groins and the abdomen; cover this with folded cloths and poultices, and bind them all together in this manner:
Then take two cloths and fill them with crammed wool according to this pattern; make the extremities out of wood or wet wool, which are attached to the structure in the belt area of the pants; one end of an extremity should go into the buttocks towards the other, and the second should attach at the thigh part, and two extremities above two hips and two others above the knees, and all attachments should be adjusted in the belt area of the pants.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery at the site of the section using iron; you should take a thin knife-like cautery and insert it into the groin ligament, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the moisture becomes visible. Then you take a cautery in this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter.
Then pierce through that cicatrix, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the cicatrix with hooks and excise it with hooks, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; incise it as much as you can until all of it is removed; be careful that the area does not catch fire from the heat.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if for you there is opposition in abscess during the time of cutting or cauterization, or bleeding, those times call for you to treat whichever opposition faces you accordingly, and with treatment that suits what was previously mentioned.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid.
Now you should have the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at the lowest part below the navel, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough for all the fluid to drain out.
And then extend over the area and secure it there so that the remaining fluid can drain out. And then treat it so that the illness is healed.
But if there is opposition to the drainage of the fluid at that time when you puncture it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the opening of the abscess resists and prevents the discharge of the fluid, then you should place a probe or instrument used for extracting fluid from cysts into the abscess, as previously described; or adjust a small piece to compress the abscess.
And know that the water returns, and it is agglutinated in about five months or thereabouts; and when it has become agglutinated, then it should be perforated according to that same method, for thereby the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section about this hernia there is great fear of danger in major cases; therefore, in my opinion, it is best to leave it alone and save the patient by that means.
And I am now recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitals are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and harsh excess, which is discharged into the genitals, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin, and there is no alleviation in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess becomes stone-like, of which the color is dark, and there is no relief from it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of arteries, and by the swelling of those parts as has already been perceived in its recollection, or by the swelling of veins.
But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and there is no need for that part to be touched.
May it be known that what is done by inflating a vein is not dispersed for any cause due to the compression on said veins.
And it is possible to perform a section on this particular area and on other tissues; you should incise the tendon of the thigh muscles, and thereupon the flesh will be exposed above, extract the fatty white substance, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and then incise the suspensory ligaments after delivering it from all parts.
Therefore, if the flesh has already become consolidated in those areas, now you should extract the flesh and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to some cause within the fat, or between what is between the vessels, now you should release all that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, now you should incise all that is there and extract the flesh as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the intestines.
A vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to a boil on the soft tissue around the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and walking due to the condition.
In the treatment of this disease, one must be afraid of that from which it is preceded by reminiscence.
However, they must say "operation" as they did in the second one that the first ones performed.
And he says that you must make the patient sit on a raised stool; and then apply bandages to the suspensory ligaments below; and then place your hands on the genital muscles near the testicles and near the thighs as you feel them around the penis; and have another assistant with you, and extend them with great force.
And then incise with a sharp, wide scalpel across the veins so that the vessels are exposed.
And then carefully examine all around as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the tissues.
And then place a needle with a double thread in one of them, and tie it at the first location where you act, and tie it again at the last of those locations. And then incise them in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound as you would treat other wounds where you want healing to take place, so that the vessels do not cause one of the testicles to darken, for it is not harmful by this.
But if you act on all the veins, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or that the testicles be covered by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the veins, and that they become atrophied, or that they be covered in such a way that they do not receive any benefit from them.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that exists in the cleft extending over the front part of the sides of the abdominal cavity, through which some of the bowels protrude.
And this rupture is either of the cleft or from its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, jumping, shouting, lifting some heavy object, or similarly.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the cleft, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal in size to where the cleft compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the cleft, because at the beginning it causes a sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from what would be seen near the rib, and this is due to the bowel protruding, and its body extends beyond the cleft.
And in some cases, the membrane is torn along with the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called a strangulated hernia.
And in some cases, it is caused by gas, and in some cases the bowel forms a fissure where it is trapped, and this causes great pain to the patient, and often there is severe pain when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of these types of this illness with iron, there is fear, because it is advisable to avoid the use of such instruments in this condition.
Here is the translation:
Of the incision by which the cord of the testicles is cut above, and then make the incision of the testicle cord all along its length; and immediately insert hooks into both sides of the section as you may need to hold open the section with them.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible for you allows it, remove some of the contents from there.
And then remove the fatty tissue around which you previously cut the cord of the testicles until the hard white capsule of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into the place where you cut the testicle, between the white capsule that is behind the cord, and between the subsequent capsule, and separate any adherence that is in the part behind the cord.
And then tie the cord of the testicles to the parts behind, and with this extend the white capsule up with your left hand, and lift the cord with the capsule to the section part; and instruct the assistant to raise it above, and you separate the adherence that is behind with a complete solution.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the bowel wrapped around the hard white capsule. But if you find any cause for concern, now you press that back into the abdomen behind.
And incise in the part below the groin, from which section blood and pus flow as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the plague; and tie a ligature as we have recommended (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, for several times this happens) and leave the ligature so that it does not fall.
But if the dressing of it is delayed, then hot water should be applied and placed on it so that it stays as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone dared to treat it with surgery.
And the earlier ones said that it should be treated as we have described for hernias involving veins; which is to tie off the veins near the section with ease and then dry up in a suitable location around the abscess caused by this, until the veins collapse.
Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said until they are healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the incision that is made in the glands.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the glands as we have said, and one should examine the area.
And they do not assign to the testicles any cause for the bags on the testicle; and if they do assign one, it is rare; and it returns at all times.
But if the time is prolonged with this condition, there is an adjustment in the fissure of the scrotum through which the bag descends into the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, as we have said, which causes the area to become lax and soft, and swelling occurs, and it should be examined.
And the treatment for this is with cautery as was preceded in the narration of it.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the two thighs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried with section along the length as described for three times.
And then stretch the white scrotum that is below the testicle until it is exposed.
And then take the cautery and place it over the prominent part of the scrotum, and press it towards the front of the abdomen.
And then burn the two prominent parts at the extremity of the scrotum with the cautery, and join them together with a suture.
From this extract the extremity of the vein, and do not incise the sinus completely, nor extend the hook, nor any other cause such as I will make you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And in the treatment of those with wounds, when you incise the sinews, clean that area and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the sinus is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that is there is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is treating this condition to have the patient lie according to their side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with stitching.
And if you wish, remove the excess of the softened cord at the beginning with three or four cuts and secure it with firm stitching.
And then incise between the stitches; and subsequently treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed and the sinews have recovered.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for certain reasons it has been read to me and I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways: one way is so that when asked about it, the physician knows the treatment for those who need it; and the other way is that we have sometimes had a need for castration in other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
Therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting or by division.
In the method performed by cutting, the procedure is that we should cauterize the animal in warm water until the genitals are softened and flaccid and hang down. And then take those with your hand enclosed so that they are relaxed and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration performed by incision and division, hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side so that two processes are created.
And then cut those parts after you have stripped each one. And do not leave on those of the penis any cause for injury, but rather the subtle part of the penis that is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by cutting, because cauterization leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the Treatment of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space between the scrotum of the testicles, where there is a figure resembling that of a female in which hair grows.
In some cases of that disease from which urine is discharged through a channel in the scrotum.
In women there is a special case: the female organ above the pubis is similar to the testicles of a man, slightly smaller and inward, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
The treatment is of three types: two for men and one type for women. It is necessary that you incise those tight tissues through which the disease escapes, and then treat them as you would other illnesses.
And in the second type for men from whom urine is discharged through a channel in the scrotum, there is no cure or surgery available.
Chapter XXI.
About hanging and flesh protrusion due to causes in women.
A mild form of hanging is naturally tight but can be stretched with careful handling; in some cases, it becomes enlarged in women to such an extent that it protrudes similarly to men and during intercourse.
Then you should grasp the excess of the hanging part with your hand or with forceps and incise it.
And do not delay in making the incision, especially at the root of the protrusion, so that it does not cause excessive bleeding.
And then treat it as you would other illnesses until it is healed.
This raw flesh is the flesh that comes out of the horrid part of the mother within which it fills up, and strongly light it is spread to the parts outside according to the appearance of a tail (and by this mostly I first called this "tailed illness"); therefore we must cut it as we would cut the navel, and treat inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are when the woman's hymen is not perforated, or the passage is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by loose flesh or by thin or thick phlegm.
And it is caused either in the front part of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and it prohibits menstruation and intercourse and pregnancy, and very easily it prohibits menstruation.
And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with the speculum, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed directly; but if it is not apparent, then seek it out with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to thin phlegm and it is close to the two lips, then you should examine and disrupt that.
And you should place cotton pads over the two lips, and then use your fingers to examine both areas carefully.
Let the woman lie on her back, spread her legs apart, and then forcefully pull both lips apart so that the small obstacle is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And immediately take some linen and soak it in oil, then place it on that area, and change it daily so that the incision does not become consolidated.
If the obstacle is large and thick, now it is necessary for you to incise that with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
但如果阻塞是由肉芽组织引起的，现在就将其浸泡一段时间，然后切开它。
Here are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from a bite, such as haca'tia, dragon's blood, and enses, prepared with egg white.
And immediately administer a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And hold that for several days and administer dry heat.
And immediately treat with the other method of healing until it is healed.
And in some cases, accidents occur during the natural maturation of other tissues, and at these times it is necessary to incise according to this method. But if this is due to chronic abscesses, in the case of chronic abscesses that are in the process of maturing, do not do anything contrary to them with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and with old hemorrhoids, these nodes are formed.
And now I have mentioned in the division the types of these and the signs of them, and to say also which of these receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and nodes when they are in the process of maturing and do not appear to the senses, at this time do not treat them with iron.
Those are the veins which are in the opening of the womb upon which one feels a touch, those are the ones that should be treated.
And when you put the woman in a bath, clean and prepare the area with scissors or with rough cloth, and cut those with the razors.
And then sprinkle on those from which the blood flows from one of the powder containers without chewing, such as acacia and similar substances.
And then press their feet for one hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have that person sit in a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and galangal and similar substances.
And then take flour of barley and prepare that with honey and sour grape juice and make a plaster with it on her back.
And if the blood is congealed, that is good; and if not, attach to two bellows, and to the nipples without incision.
And then take wool and immerse that in the juice of cilantro or in the juice of hyssop or in the juice of garlic in sour grape juice and attach it to the place; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the piercing of an abscess in the groin.
Various types of abscesses occur in the groin, such as stone and ulcerous abscesses, as well as hemorrhoids, fistulas, piles, and other abscesses. And I have already described these ailments and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
And what I say in this treatise about abscesses refers to those that occur in the groin when they are infected, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it appears red and feels painful when touched, then do not proceed with piercing it, and treat it in such a way that helps with maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
And now you should have the woman lie on a chair that has two arms; she should recline on her back and position her legs with her feet below the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her elbows, and bind them with bandages as appropriate.
And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the groin will be made, the form of which will be described in these cases.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should place it along the edge of the abscess in the woman's groin, and what is inserted from the instrument into the groin should not exceed the length of the abscess itself. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the greatest orifice, then at that time you must apply poultices to the tissue around the greatest orifice so that no part of the instrument enters the greatest orifice.
And you must place the lubricant that flows from the instrument of the back above it, and the minister should hold the instrument while turning the lubricant inside until the opening of the greatest orifice is sufficiently moistened.
And when the wound appears and is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then at that time you must dry it by applying a powder to the head of the wound.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you must apply to the wound a piece of cloth immersed in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and place a plaster on the dry section around the wound.
And place clean wool over the greatest orifice and on top of it, place lamb's wool immersed in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated appropriately for about two days until you find the method that suits this condition until it is healed.
And sometimes the greatest orifice and the wound should be washed in this way with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which the root of lily or long-leaved arum has been boiled, and then return to the appropriate treatment.
And if the wound is deep within a swollen orifice, then you must be cautious about treating it with metal instruments; instead, treat it as we have described in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner living embryos are treated when it appears unnatural according to figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs of light, and it is when you see the woman pressing down below and desiring to breathe air, and she is deceived by what is above her during labor, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and the delivery is over the head, and in the second one either hanging from or suspended by the navel.
When you see those signs, then it is appropriate to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends lightly because when it is delivered over its head, the second one will be delivered, and these are cleansed by proper cleansing.
But that which is different from this birth is unnatural and blame-worthy, for when the embryo is delivered on its feet and the body of it is delivered before its head and feet, or one hand or foot first, or the head and a hand or foot, or the belly, and easily turns over its neck, resembling the figures that are blame-worthy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those cases, and which condition is in them so that it may be signified by that and remain on that.
When the fetus is delivered over its head by natural effort, and that is strenuous for the woman and makes childbirth difficult, and you see the strength of hers already diminished, then make her drink, or let the women hold her, and evaporate the sweat from her using fenugreek powder and moist oils.
Then insert the probe between the said small spaces and split it with the second instrument, or open it with its nail until you remove what is inside from humidity. And press the woman's abdomen so that the contents come out.
But if it does not come out, now cover the woman with a mixture of finely ground wheat and fenugreek seeds mixed together.
Then tell him, after the cleansing, to be made to sneeze with certain conditions; and do this at his mouth and nose for one hour, because the contents will be expelled immediately.
And if both parts of the contents are expelled at the beginning, now you should reduce them to small pieces little by little. But if he does not obey the instrument, now place the woman on a cushion and lift her off it, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the striking.
And if the parts are not returned inside and the contents rot, now incise them and extract the remaining contents or tie his hand to a cloth and pull it out with equality, because it will be expelled.
When the contents are on the membranes, now you should push them up, and then compress the contents gently, and then even them out, and then take a piece of it and stretch them little by little.
When pus has settled inside the abscess, then you order him to squeeze it out in convenient times, for it will come out if God so wills.
And if it does not come out as we have recommended, then you return the operation little by little until you stop at the second figure of nature, for it will now come out easily and quickly.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hartshorn and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and afterwards apply it to the place where the woman's womb feels pain, below her navel. And then have the patient sit in hot water, so that it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the parts below his armpits are cleansed, then you perform the smoking with myrtle and have him undergo that. And when the smoking lasts for one hour, then you have him sit on a chair, and afterwards make him sneeze and open his mouth, and remove that, and press the part below his navel gently, for the matter will soon come out.
Insert the finger laterally during the expulsion of the matter. Be skillful in reducing the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and let it go.
And if it cannot be let go, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike her body vigorously with blows, and then administer liniments which are cool and composed of mucilaginous substances.
And if labor has begun, then make her sit on the birth stool, and then proceed with the reduction of the hand, and massage the matter out according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to exert herself until it is expelled.
Insert the finger over the shoulder using your fingers and the strap to guide it, with the mother lying on her side. Let the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, so that it may be facilitated.
And when and how it is massaged, then pause on the area that we have recommended with oil and mucilaginous substances.
Here is the translation: The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When deciding on the horror of the major according to this method, consider it, and then you incise with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise at that part of the belly, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus to the parts inside until you place it where necessary, and tell the woman to press herself several times, and the waters will be expelled quickly if God so wills.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins usually are born in a single birth, and sometimes three or four [are born], but this is rare and uncommon; however, these cases are due to causes other than nature, and they do not occur often.
And with those [twins], whether they are multiple, make one incision, and separate them by a suture, distinguishing each along the umbilical cord. Sometimes they are expelled in such a way that it seems like a single fetus is being born naturally, while at other times they are expelled improperly as we have recounted.
And if some of them make the childbirth difficult and you reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should with ease and skill, both in promptness and delay, and acts according to all figures as prepared for the childbirth leading to safety.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Some pregnancies are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh months, and rarely more than ten months, and now you have been verified that a woman aborts at six months, and another at all formations, which cause was made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is easy for her to recognize these things, and thus she can act accordingly as what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of the treatment and it does not come out, then you must use surgical intervention. At this time, it is necessary to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not suffering from any of the conditions for which her safety is feared.
Now the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head tilted downwards.
And the attendant should hold her by both legs or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and mucus made from honey, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then gently inserts her hand into the mother, and then searches with her hand for the location where the hooks are in the fetus.
In suitable places: then you consider whether the poultice is prepared to be placed over the patient's head, and at that time you place the hooks in the ears of the patient, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the beard, or in the clavicle, or in the proper places of the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
If the poultice is to be placed on the patient's feet, then place it in the heel, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you hold the hook with your right hand, and place the curvature of it in the place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it with ease into one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the affected area.
And then place and fix in position another hook, or a third if necessary, so that there is an equal pull, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
And it should be gentle in all parts, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done in the teeth for their extraction.
And it is necessary in the area between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them carefully and manipulate what is retained.
Then if a part of the fetus is protruded, at that time the hooks should be moved to the place which is more prominent; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
If the hand is dislocated against another part and it is not possible to reduce it by contortion, then at this point a cloth must be wrapped around it; and after that extract it until all is dislodged, and incise it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do this also with the other hand and with both feet.
But if the head of the boil is large, or happens in the contortion when it is dislocated, or at the head of the tight bandage, then you should insert between the said spines and cut open the head and drain the fluid, or expose that part with an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter close to this one.
And similarly do if the boil has a large head by nature: then you should incise that with some instrument, or take it as we have said using an alundat; and then extract the contents from the bones with forceps.
And if the head is dislocated and contorted behind the clavicle, then it should be cut open so that the moisture which is in the tissues can be drained.
But if it is not complicated and does not adhere to the dislocation, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or affected by dropsy, then you should puncture it so that the moisture which is inside can drain.
But if the boil is on the legs, then the attraction of it is distant and the direction toward the mouth of the vein is distant.
If it is necessary to open the belly and the thighs, at that time you should take out the cloth with which you have wrapped your hand, and cut open the belly and the thighs so that the fluid within them can run out.
If the other members remain stiff and turn the head, then place your left hand in between; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into her throat, and grasp with it the head, and pull those mentioned into the mother's mouth, and immediately insert an inch or two inches, and pull them along with that.
And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an abscess or boil that occurs on it, then it should not be bandaged over it; instead, at that time apply moist and fatty applications. And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, make it lie down; and administer what we have said about a living birth.
And if this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And make sure that you do not leave any cause inside the secondine.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for abscesses that occur to the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and above that another pregnancy, and the other fetus was also dead. It happened to one after a long time that an abscess formed in the place of pregnancy; and it inflated inside where the fetus was, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the illness did not improve.
Then I applied some causes of strong attraction to her and extracted one bone from her, and after passing several days, I extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the womb.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I questioned the illness and extracted many bones from her, the woman existing in her usual state, and thus treated her for a long time, until she discharged a little pus.
And I did not find it strange, but rather realized that in this way there is knowledge and assistance for what the physician uses his hands to administer in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a spiral in which the largest part is at the top:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the leaves are balanced, to which there are two spirals at the ends of two posts. However, may this virtue be such that it is more subtle than a thread, and let it be made either of wool or of the wood of a tree.
And let the width of each piece be two fingers, and the margin on each side be one finger; and the length of each should be half a palm plus a bit more, and at the middle point between two pieces, attach therefrom those same wooden fittings which are already fixed, whose length is about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the larger one so that they are open to them when you rotate the two prescribed threads.
Form another similar one that is even finer and lighter:
Let it be made of wood or tree bark, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of those two additions as you see fit, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you have her lie on the bed with her feet hanging down, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with scissors equally according to the amount you want, within the opening of the larger one until the metrona does what you want.
The form of thread which the ancients called:
Form of expelling what is expelled:
Form of joining what contains the great head
And it is similar to forceps, which has teeth at the extremity, as you see. And some times it is made long like this forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw, with which incision and containment are performed. Form of joining a few:
Form of one having a spine:
Form of one having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two extremities at which the head is divided:
Form of two broad spatulae:
All those instruments are exercised, and when their various types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for them to perform their operations and they become more useful for people in proportion to their quantity.
And you must prepare yourself for the use of those instruments, wherever they may be needed, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the second one.
When the second birth is retained during childbirth, you must command the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if this causes it to come out as a result, that is good.
Take some wool and at this time take a piece of it and pierce through its covering a hole and place in that herbs to fill the mouth of the wound, such as calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic saffron and cinnamon and sage. All of these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the wool, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the wound, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the wound.
And then make the person sneeze as we have said, and the second time let it be expelled quickly.
But if it remains close to this treatment and is not expelled, then you order the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or almond oil, and then insert that into the cavity and search with that for the second object. And when you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is stuck in the root of the wound, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second object, extract it slowly so that the patient does not fall due to strong attraction. Also make sure that it alternates between the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the wound is obstructed, we have already recommended the treatment through sneezing and the medication of the wool with herbs.
If it is not expelled along with all the causes that we have recounted, then be careful not to over-exert in repeated attempts at abstraction. But instead ensure that what remains inside goes from the mouth of the mother into the body of the woman, and subsequently apply a pessary for finding and expelling; for this will cause it to pass after some days and it will dissolve and be expelled.
When it is passed, raise the woman's head and place it above her chest and stomach, which will alleviate the illness; then it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this.
However, some of the Ancients were accustomed to administer fumigation with natrtle and dried figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated due to retention of menstruation and dysmenorrhea:
It should be made of wood or ivory.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end above the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep that inside until the fumigation is completely consumed and repeat it with another one.
Treatment for the uncircumcised penis of a child.
Some children are born with uncircumcised penises, which become tight and covered. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that foreskin with her fingernail; and if not, pierce it with a sharp probe, but be careful not to touch the glans.
About the flax soaked in wine and oil; and then treat that which is found within until it is clean.
If you fear that it is obstructed, then for a few days apply a tube made of cloth, and remove it when the child wishes to vomit.
And if constipation of the anus occurs due to consolidation of an abscess or swelling; then it must be that this consolidation be incised, and afterward it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region, near the base and thick in nature, which appear near the anus outside or in the space between one part.
And it is either one fistula or multiple.
And as this swelling becomes old and drains watery or white mucus or subtle pus, and some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And these penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through drainage and swelling; and sometimes the condition of drainage is bad, and it is easily recognized as such.
And some of these fistulas extend in the space penetrating into the bladder and into the urethra; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the leg.
And to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one near the anus, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently introduce a thin probe of iron or metal into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
If there is pus in that place, then insert a fine probe of lead or horsehair so that you can feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of that and do not find any cause for evacuation, whether worms or gas, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and at that point apply yourself to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then the treatment consists in this manner of urine from that and prohibits doing so that the affected area may be consolidated by medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the spine or into the bone and there is pain in the circumference, then the sign of this is that the probe passes here if there is no pus around the bone, and there is pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have lasting weakness from it; and that it cannot be treated with medicine, nor is it consolidated by encounter.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is laborious and futile for physicians, as that is their firm belief.
But in the one that is not penetrating and is not chronic, healing with proper treatment is hoped for, as I will now recommend to you, and what has already been beneficial.
And it is that the patient lies down on their back with their legs raised up and the spine inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if there is pus in the fistula, so that you can feel where the probe goes.
And if the patient complains of pain around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe easily penetrates, or if you feel something between your finger and the membrane or flesh, then you will certainly know that it has penetrated; and do not work on this, because there is no cure in this case, as we have said.
But if someone were to say that it heals in some men slowly.
And concerning the treatment by which improvement is hoped for, you should ignite a cautery gently according to the width of the fistula, as was previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues are now constricted like the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and afterward treat it with medicines that promote and consolidate tissue growth. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will never heal by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate beyond your finger that is in the anus, and between it and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane, and sometimes the fistula ends on the surface of the buttock, then dry the area from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the drying reach to where the tip of the probe reaches, and by this method it is freed and cured.
And clean the flesh of those fistulas which are like an owl’s feather tube and do not cut any part for that reason.
But if blood flows frequently between you and your operation when you incise those tissues, then quickly it should be done, and for the pus a sharp instrument is to cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of those tissues adjusted, and the other is the absorption of blood and the drying up of humidity.
And then treat that which is wrapped in bandages or cloth three times a day until the place sweats, and then quickly treat the plague with hard flesh-forming applications that generate and consolidate.
And for medicines in which there is styptic and drying properties; when they are restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anal region and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And thus if you find the fistula and between you and it is a membranous or flesh barrier, and it is prone to penetration, then there should be no operation but rather proceed by faith and hope.
The cause should be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the firmness necessary for you to insert certain instruments and begin treatment properly; do not proceed with drying if it does not allow access to the pus, and ensure that the patient is informed about this process without causing distress; then treat it as we have said because it will heal easily. Or extend that membrane and clean the pus that dries out close to the anus, as we have said, or use a probe or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are revealed in the section; afterward, strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper opening does not consolidate, leave the open fistula on the side of the anus, and it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the crack of the buttocks around the surface of the body near the thigh and on the edge of the buttock, then take out the probe from its perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing the hearts according to this form:
and insert into that vein wrapped around it with five veins or so; then immediately insert the probe into the vein in the fistula until you reach the curvature of it.
But if it is penetrating at the edge of the buttock closer to inside, then you extract the vein from there as if you were inserting your finger into the buttock; and pull out the end of the vein and tie both ends together, and secure each one tightly, and leave this for one day or two, and when you may need to cut open the vein in the flesh, secure it well until those parts of the flesh are cut between the two ends of the vein and they join.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever manner you have prepared, but do not force it into the muscle, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to cut through the tissue; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the sharp-pointed probe with which the fistula is incised: one end of which is sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as often happens.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those areas.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, one kind in the region near the anus similar to those that are like coal, or those which are like radish flesh. And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them constantly and they are one type, and they are mobile, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which yellowish water or a little bloody mucus flows continuously, and their appearance depends on the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to command the patient to sit down and compress the area until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you cover yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have with your nail, and then cut those away from their roots.
However, if you do not have hooks because of the moisture and softness of those hemorrhoids, then take a rough cloth or a comb or a piece of wool, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut them and powder should be sprinkled near the incision to serve as a cauterizing agent; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat those with other methods until they are healed.
And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then apply a small bite of a blister to the patient using water that is in the anus so that it facilitates quick evacuation when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of theirs is lightness, and it is that you take those with your finger, or that you take those with ointment, and incise those, and afterwards cure those with what we have said within until they are healed.
And for the one whom you have incised, see that you manage sutures of theirs according to this manner: take thread wrapped and insert that in needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the flesh on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread at the part below the needle, and so horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then tie off the thread and extract the needle.
And do this for all of them, and leave one of those unsewn, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax; and place that on it and command the patient to rest. And then leave that inside until it heals; and when it is healed, cure those with baths or with other treatment until they are healed.
And when they become chronic and do not respond to that medicine, then you should scrape those with the point of a scalpel or with your finger until they are made moist and the scab above them is removed, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they are healed.
Now you should remove those [veins] with such force that the first one lets out blood and they are inflamed; and immediately treat those until they are healed.
Know that almammar, which is the key point, and it is not but small round spots similar to the head of a nail in color on the skin, and they appear throughout the body but mainly below the waist and around them, and from these you should deduce the treatment for pain.
Then it is necessary to incise what is within the area of the key point, and hold it with forceps or钳子，并用根部将其拔除；然后治疗那个部位。由于最后一句的翻译中包含了一些不自然的部分，我将重新调整以提高流畅性：
And if you wish, cauterize the one that is mentioned before in its chapter.
But a warty mole is a small, rough, fistulated, round prominence on the surface of the body, and spots and veins appear in most children.
And the treatment for it is that you should cut it open and apply fir or pitch inside, which flows into it. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small, feathered or thick, fistulated prominence on the surface of the body with pain in the vicinity, and when it is scratched, it feels like an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a needle from an eagle's feather or a vulture's feather, and let it be strong, and place it on the mole so that it contains the circle of the needle around the parts; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut out what is within the circuit of the mole, and place it in the vicinity of the flesh, and eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or of steel in this manner:
Let the upper part of the needle be drawn with subtlety, blunt (that is, not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when it is held by the finger, its grip and rotation are secure.
And if you want to cauterize the ant as was said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterizations.
Regarding the shape of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Sometimes it is made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes it is made of those instruments large and small according to those to whom you administer them, for the one administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose rectums are sensitive or painful, the specula for them should be small.
The form of a large and rare speculum:
The head of the tube above, to which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and at the place where the bag is tied it should also be like that as you see.
And the end of it below, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (closed) like a lion's tail, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rays, a little thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong honey from raw honey, which should be of this amount, or around it; and tighten the bag at that point; and when you place the bag there, it should fit tightly at the head of the speculum between two distinct tight knots, and immediately cauterize each thread: However, the quality of cauterizing then is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity the patient can tolerate; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise her buttocks with something underneath such as a chair or a pillow; then apply olive oil, egg white, albumen of hen, or mucilage of fenugreek to the cautery; then insert that into the anus with ease; and then the attendant takes the bag and squeezes it vigorously until everything in the womb is evacuated through the tube; and then remove the tube and the patient lowers her buttocks to the side.
And if the medicine forces her to evacuate, let her do so as much as possible; and if she sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for recovery.
But if you treat her for abdominal disorders and evacuation of the bowels, now you should repeat the cautery until she is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then the womb should be treated gently and carefully, as with the wombs of women who have given birth.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with medicine according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the place where the plague occurs.
And the causes by which wounds leading to plagues occur are such as stone embedding, or cutting by a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that occur in the parts of the body, such as a plague that affects the head, neck, feet, abdomen, groin, and similar ones in the limbs.
And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recall of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object, and if only the skin has been broken but it is a large wound and you fear that an abscess might form there, then you must take action immediately and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein without delay; do not postpone this. And extract as much blood as necessary according to the quantity required by its strength, unless some cause prohibits bloodletting, especially if little blood has come out of the wound.
And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from overeating and from eating heavy foods.
But if some reason prevents you from bloodletting, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow them to eat meat or rich foods.
And treat the plague with care if an abscess forms, applying it only in rose oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
But if you are certain of an abscess forming, then treat the wound if it is fresh and the air has not yet changed the powder that I recommend to be applied in small amounts.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a fracture and the lips of it are not suitable for stitching together, then stitch those as I will explain regarding the suture of such wounds.
But if the wound is already exposed from the bone and flesh and there is no need to hold it back except for a small suspensorium, then incise that and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitches, and instruct the patient to eat food that is light: eggs, fish, and similar foods until he is healed.
And if you find that the stitches have become putrid and do not adhere to the bone, then cut out all of that decayed material and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur and it does not stop with medicines, then press on the artery. If you find that it has not stopped bleeding, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you and what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; sprinkle this powder on them, for it will consolidate those wounds before the air changes them.
And the method for making the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them thoroughly and sift, then fill the wound with this mixture, and compress it properly so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
From the depth of the wound above apply poultices and leave them on without removing them while it is still such that it has not formed an abscess, for medicine does not reach it until it is healed.
And sometimes this cure is used alone when it is not at hand, the juice and blood of a dragon.
And this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place them open and narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then do not apply the position of this powder, but at that time cure them with what we have said, by placing on those some cooling digestive herbs, or place on those flour dust mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterward cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens with the wound that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with forceps.
And I say the treatment of fractures of the head is what is dangerous.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound happens on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no immediate treatment but rather avoid any cure that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances which harm nerves and contract them. Do not pause on any cause of worry about the plague, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is the source or root of all the members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in roasted or unroasted oil, and then dried after being washed with warm water and the other minerals applied according to this method, and they find moisture.
But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or close its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is corruption in its deepest part, then pierce it at the most affected location.
But if an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if the necessity arises for such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been severed, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should approximate the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck and do not touch it; instead, equalize and reduce it to its natural shape, and afterward strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; afterwards treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound suppurates, and the excretion from it subsides.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found later in its chapter.
If there is a thrust wound from a spear or knife, and if you examine its depth, then consider whether the wound produces swelling when the injured person moves; at this point, you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then apply powder for the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain trapped in its depth and return to the heart, causing further injury; rather, apply an attractive ointment, and change this twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then place a piece of cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the injured person lie on the wound so that what is trapped in it flows out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction of the limbs has affected the injured person, and you observe other good signs from it, then you know that the wound is safe; at this point, treat it with dressings and other healing methods until it is healed.
But if healing of it is unnecessary and the area has remained open for some time, then you know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If there has already been a probe inserted into the bone, and some pieces were cut off with it, then you should rotate the wound to try to extract those pieces if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, as their removal would be easier.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have described.
For wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to manage by other methods, and it is also harder to return them to their proper place if you do not promptly address the intrusion back to its location, as it swells and becomes enlarged, making instruments difficult to use.
Therefore, the best condition is moderate, as in this case it is not difficult to return the bowel to its place, unlike in the two extreme cases mentioned earlier.
And you should know that there are four methods of stitching the abdomen, but two of these methods are common and suitable for stitching other wounds on the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Thus I say that when the wound is small and it becomes compressed by some cause of the bowel through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation occurs in the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
And thus when this is so, then it is necessary that you warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone, or steeped in warm water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I use that which has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And thus when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which tea and mallows have been steeped, for by this the instrument is made smooth with little irritation.
But if the instrument is irritated near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument on which hemorrhoids have been divided.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there should be no need to dry out due to necessity and deficiency.
Concerning the instrument, here is its form:
One part of the sharp edge of the probe, and the other part not sharp, and the tip subtle, and not as fine as a needle, but slightly blunt.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the edges are separated from the fascia, it is now necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible in this manner, for it is better.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now you must make the patient lie on his back, and place his arms further from his head than his own head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place his head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now direct your attention and consideration constantly so that the side in which the wound is lies higher than the other.
And so you must administer this for both large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And for small wounds, prepare what is necessary, and then have one of your most skilled assistants perform the task, who should hold the wound with their hand and align the edges, and then proceed to suture it appropriately.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or an equivalent needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the wound; then place the tip of the needle at the end of the disruption from the middle finger, and pull the needle tight enough so that you do not place stitches at both ends of the suture, but rather between two points inside the edges of the wound; and once you have joined the two ends of the suture and the two points inside the edges, this makes four knots.
About the length of a finger, make a double loop around the needle, and take several turns on both sides, then bring together the two lips and the wound by decent joining; then lay the thickness of a finger and put another needle in that one, then tie that loop as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium size between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles penetrate the flesh quickly; and coarse ones are difficult to insert in the tissue, and therefore it is desirable that they be of medium size in terms of both fineness and thickness.
And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the tissue in a straight line, because this causes the flesh to be cut quickly and the wound may separate before it has consolidated.
And do not extend the stitches too far apart so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping; and place loose powders around the stitches, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of stitching with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it suffices to use one or two needles or around that number.
But the second type of stitching is more common: it involves managing all four ends, of the tissue and two ends of the suture thread, at once, with a needle that is properly wrapped in terms of both fineness and thickness.
When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that middle part from which you started, so that the thread can be drawn up to the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture may lie like a cloth stitch upon the cloth where the edges are stretched tight.
And pause between each suture by the amount of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to the people.
And in such a suture I closed the wound which had been inflicted on a man's abdomen with a knife, and the tearing of the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was situated around two palms from the midgut vessel, and the tearing was at the center of the limb; then I closed that after the gut had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated him and he was cured; and after that he spoke for some time, and returned to his normal condition.
And other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; and by a miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any remedy, since he was in a place where remedies were not available, but applied dry suture twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until the wound healed.
But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin the suture from the edge, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates the bone and in that place holds firmly according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other end the needle from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same end of the wound from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the suture which is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
And make your penetration such that you penetrate in the suture at the end of the seam which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And from this place, start from the side where that end of the suture is on the other side, and extract the needle from the bone which penetrates, and then reduce it to that bone and attach the end of the suture which is on the other side to this end of the seam; and extract it from the bone which is on this part.
And do this one time and then another, and do this one time again another time until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew the tissue membrane with which you stitch the skin, in such a way that you sew the suture once from the side of the bone end, and leave it to be completed on another occasion.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at the end of the suture closest to you from the outside, and make it penetrate inside the part through one point, and cut off both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it exit from the inside to the outside at both ends of the suture.
Then turn each one of them and make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of another suture that is on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common quick suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Gualia
And if some may say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each one of them and begin by inserting the needle from the side that you need to, and make it penetrate through the opposite side according to the suturing technique used for sewing clothes.
And you should know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
This is because when you manage a recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bowel and suture it properly, then apply powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some substances that are present in your surroundings to make it form a hard crust and seal the threads; and afterward, treat it as you would any other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause for that short while, because it begins to form pus, crust over, and change every other day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need another medication in many positions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then cover it with linen dipped in high-quality oil or anointed oil, and place that over the area between the joints, applying it as needed.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestinal pouches, as this often happens, then administer a small amount of black styptic tebe root, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and an incision must be made into its thickness.
And know that what is of the thick intestine heals more slowly from pus than what is in the thin intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called “gegunu” does not easily recover from a wound that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the fineness of its wall, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain it fresh, reduce that according to your skill in the same way as you would reduce the intestines.
But if it has passed into the space and has already become green or black, then when you apply that with wax on the area that is discolored, so that blood may flow, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
And in this way cut what is another piece of bandage, and leave both ends of the thread hanging from below the wound so that above it may be alleviated the attraction of it; therefore, you must place the dressing and emission of the pus from the wound.
Reminder of the wounds that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, there is a possibility that it can be repaired in some people; for this reason, I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, with discharge from it and gas.
Then I treated the wound whether or not I was confident in its healing, but proceeded to care for that part which would heal and the area would be strengthened.
And when I saw the area already healed, I warned about the harm that could come from the bad event in his belly; and no one should fall into such harm because of this ill accident by neglecting proper diet and drink, and then immerse himself in baths and exercise as mentioned.
And some experienced individuals say that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then adjust the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when the ant bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce that and apply the dressing; and leave those strips attached to the bandage so that the bandage remains intact; and do nothing harmful to the patient.
And it is possible that the bandage be tied with fine thread made from animal gut, which is as sharp as a needle; and you take one end of this bandage thread, make it bare, then tie one end of the thread to the bandage, wrap it around, and then insert the thread through needles and attach it to the bandage, and reduce it to the disruption.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine bandages, then there can only be a partial healing, and not a complete healing of it.
On the treatment of boil and fistula.
Know that every wound and abscess when it invilifies and becomes old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated even after a long time and has not been excised, whether in any limb, is universally called fistula, and we refer to it as such a boil.
And truly, a fistula is a felted knot, hard and white, at which there is no pain but to which there is attraction as there is attraction for birdlime; and because of this it is called a sticky boil, that is, a trap.
And in some people, it is moist, which lasts for a long time; and the moisture is excised within a few hours in others. In some cases, this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have now shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and the cure for them with medicine in the division.
And it is appropriate that I tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery with my methods.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among them are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints composed similarly to the wrist and ankle; and some of these affect parts close to major limbs and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are diseases difficult to heal, and do not easily receive a cure, and treating them requires effort and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above and you hope for and trust in its cure and wish to ascertain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight ahead, explore it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, for the lightness of its body causes it to float and bend around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will reach the other openings and flow out from them.
And then inquire very carefully according to the method by which you can know whether here are bones or nerves, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings that lies above all this within your power, within your examination, in which you examine the disease, and the cause of the pain under your compression on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have stood on all those causes with true observation, then proceed to the treatment according to your confidence: and that is that you now consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salt place, distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I have told you about.
Now you should dry the fistula according to what was said earlier about its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh or of similar tissue, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, it is necessary to incise that as deeply as you can, and then remove all corrupted flesh; afterwards apply hot applications wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you find any reason to avoid doing so because of a vein, nerve, or major limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you should scrape that until all the corruption is removed; afterwards treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it heals.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it thoroughly with your strongest means, and then treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which you have not reached, and thus in that case there is nothing for you to do but to let nature take its course.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is up to you to remove that; then you pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any because of your strength.
But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or muscles as necessary, and release the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at this time, then apply something that can reduce the swelling to the affected area, and leave it there until it is surrounded by flesh and ligaments. Protect the area so that it does not become consolidated, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation remains open.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a poultice submerged in hot salted oil or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when these will reduce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their attachment, and the attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted on it is only the surface, then scrape off that corruption with a tool only behind where the blackness and corruption are, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted is a large part of it, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and thoroughly incise it where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is healed and consolidated.
Here is what is recommended for you concerning the treatment of a person in their condition so that you may follow this example and assist with your operation.
A young man around xxx years old experienced pain in his body, and the part inside where the matter is located within the body has become infected, resulting in a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
Then time was wasted due to the doctors' error until the abscess became severe, and pus formed from the matter, and his treatment was delayed until an opening had to be made in the abscess, and openings were created for the pus and the moisture of the body to drain.
Then many doctors treated him for two years, and none of them had knowledge in the art until I was called.
I saw the abscess and the matter flowing from those openings in large quantities; his body was completely weakened, and his complexion was yellowish.
Then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
Then I quickly examined all the openings and found that they reached all parts of the abscess.
Then I decided to incise one of the openings so that I could expose part of the bone, and found it to be corrupted; it was already turned to earth and decayed, and part of the abscess had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I used what was shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out not from the bone but that corruption which I had previously identified and prepared to remove.
And then I paused the treatment of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I repeated and exposed further on the bone secondly over the initial exposure, and found continuing corruption in the bone.
And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I was compelled to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it did not restore.
And then I exposed another part and did not stop incising the bone little by little particularly to restore it, and it did not heal until I had cut around one palm's width of it, and that extracted along with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting of it except for the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, because it was afflicted at all hours due to excessive evacuation of syncope malaise.
And thus it healed completely, and there is no flesh instead of the hard bone; and his condition improved in his body, and he regained his strength; and he returned to his normal state and did not experience contrary effects during movement or harm from any cause.
But if there is a prominent bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that protruding bone, and instruct someone to extend that thread; pause with a thicker piece of wool after the first thread; then wrap the thread around the skin near the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus expose the skin over the area where you want to suture so that the needle does not injure the flesh.
Place a board or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw through the corrupted area little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption occurs and does not appear on its surface, then you must saw from another direction.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides; and place a board underneath, and saw off that of the first part where the corruption is, so that the sawing of the other part continues.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the ratio but is excessive.
And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should expose that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and correct any excess when it does not come into conflict with veins or nerves.
And you must know which instruments and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation.
And know that the operation depends on the type of instrument which you need; when you are a great student and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness to ways of illnesses, then you will yourself provide what is appropriate for the instruments for all illnesses.
And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simples among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Saw shape:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be in the form of the points of awls.
And it is not appropriate unless you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another saw properly made: let it be made with the sharpest curve and the edge of iron, and the handle of wood like a dagger properly made. Shape of it:
Shape of the razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved tip:
Shape of small razors resembling a tenta:
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Shape of another cutting instrument; this resembles a reed, and its tip is like a saw, and it is demonstrated in various places according to the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a reed that is suitable in proportion to what is being drilled into the bones:
And its tip is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly it seems that all the reasons we have mentioned for razors and cutting instruments and saws apply.
Regarding the cutting of tips and the sawing of bones.
The tips may need to be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or if you have treated the corruption with medicinal care and the treatment has not helped, or if the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent reason, then it is necessary that you cut off that part of the limb where the corruption occurs so that the patient may avoid death or further harm, which would be a greater evil to the body.
And the sign of that which befalls one is that the member becomes black until it is burned by fire, or you place near the blackness something that causes putrefaction in that limb so that it dries up and takes over the whole body; and thus take care to do this incision on that part.
And similarly, this is caused by the corruption due to the impact of certain poisonous causes such as from a scorpion, sea creature, viper, or rattlesnake and similar beings.
And if the corruption or the impact is at the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if it affects the hand, then you incise at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the elbow joint.
And if it invades that area, then you incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and surrounds the shoulder, then that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause in treatment depends on the amount of effectiveness.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption invades the toe, then you incise it between two of the joints.
And if it spreads to the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. But if it penetrates to the toenail, then you incise the toe at the joint of the toenail.
And if the corruption has already reached beyond the bone, then at this point there is nothing to do but dismiss [the patient], and leave the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting or ligating the member is that you tie a ligature in the part below where you wish to cut, and tie another ligature above the location; and extend the practitioner one ligature below, and have the assistant extend another ligature above; then separate the flesh which is between two ligatures until it spans about a palm's width so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to cut or ligate.
And it is necessary to cover the patient with linen on all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and to ensure that the wound is properly dressed and abscesses are cauterized.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and afterward return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then tie the injured limb with a bandage at a convenient place, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what one encounters in the soldier's camp, this kind of accident which I and you have recommended, the one that turns black on the skin due to burning like fire combustion.
And that corruption occurs initially on the skin and then tends to spread over the entire body.
And then that person prepares for the possibility that the treatment will proceed to amputation because of the intensity of the pain and burning he endures, and thus cuts off the limb at the joint, and the wound heals.
Soon corruption occurs in that joint of the hand indicated.
Then it comes to me, and so I perforate to expel that excess with what I apply to the hand by way of medicine, near the cleansing of the body; and if the excess is not expelled, it begins to go to the other joint before reaching the hand.
And if the patient asks me to cut off his hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, but rather fear that the amputation of his hand will lead to death, because the power of the disease is very strong.
And after he leaves me, he returns to his homeland and it is reported to me that the man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have included this narrative only as assistance regarding the approach to treating this disease, and for its significance in guiding how it should be addressed.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends inward until it collects pus, and then it ruptures and is perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption, nor does it affect bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a hemorrhoid, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends inward such that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a hemorrhoid.
And in the treatment of which incise that scab exactly as it is turned over, and especially when it has become fine like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the scab will adhere and that such corruption has not yet succeeded by later consequence, and on the scab there has passed some time facing up, then now treat it with an enema.
And when you consider the sinus, and now if it is large, and the arm that you use smells foul, then administer an enema with Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and turpentine in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer the enema to the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
And then extract that enema with care; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And at times an enema is given with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and take the ashes of herbs, put them over the water; then strain it and administer that enema until you are confident that the sinus is now cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed thoroughly, and give an enema of vinegar and honey mixed together, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and vinegar helps the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar is rich in astringency and dryness.
And when you wash certain areas and feel that the sinus has been drained, then irrigate it with water that promotes the growth of flesh.
And it is that you should take a decoction of dry ingredients and dissolve them in rose oil and vinegar; or what you irrigate it with certain medicines and other decoctions which have the properties that I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not receive the tube for irrigation, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place in it a plug wrapped in Egyptian decoction or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should approximate the edges with sutures and leave it in a quantity sufficient for the irrigation to be added.
And if the opening from which the flow comes is raised to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where the flow runs below, for when the arm is constricted at the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lower part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with a preparation so that the flow runs lightly according to your convenience and without any obstruction hindering the flow.
Move what is above the opening of the sinus, which you should probe at all times so that what is lodged in it may come out. And so that you may know whether what comes from the wound of the arm is thick or thin, or whether it is digested or undigested.
And in this way you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in the abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter deposited over the opening of the sinus has adhered or will adhere, then you should loosen it on the first day or every third day, and when you loosen the crust, then change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
But if within the sinus there is empty space where subtle pus is present, then do not despair of its adherence, for healing of it is appropriate, as in some people the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and in others the opposite occurs.
And if for many days the wound is indigest and pus is not flowing from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this causes prolongation, then adjust to drying properties of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied as a dressing, especially when there is an excess of moisture.
And the most important thing in curing it is to take a finely prepared dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over what has been previously treated with an ointment of its substance, and use this as needed.
In that action, when there is no bandage, find a dressing, and use honey which has been cooked to thicken it; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them, then sprinkle all over the honey which is on the fire and immediately spread linen over cloth and stretch that over the wound; and apply that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and sprinkle over cloth and stretch that.
And sometimes administer with the aristolochia longa and roots of lilies of heaven (and it is celestial lily), and flour of oats and centaury, and use those simple substances or adjust them, sprinkle them and sift, and powder over the honey which I recommended; and use that.
And if the wound is prolonged and has not been healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its root, and it makes an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
On the treatment of boil wounds, worn nails, and the cutting of an added finger and sectioning.
A boil is an abscess that arises from under the nail of a toe or finger of the hand or foot, and sometimes it appears on other fingers. As it prolongs and its treatment is delayed, it can become an abscess caused by cautery, or it may be corrupted. It generates pus inside which corrodes the root of the nail, and very quickly corrupts the entire area, spreading its corruption to the bone causing a foul odor. The extremity of the finger becomes disfigured, and its color turns dark.
And when you have that as we said in the division and do not find your treatment effective, then it is necessary for you to incise with a scalpel all the excess that is rotten from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound nearby, because cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
If the bone is sound and the tendon is healthy, and the divisions of the tendon are already healed to their respective parts, they begin to pierce and irritate that area. Now you should take a fine needle and place it at the angle of the tendon where you will puncture the flesh, then push it upwards and cut through that flesh easily; pause over what remains of the flesh with medicines that corrode and burn until it is completely consumed; and afterwards treat that wound with remedies until it is healed.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, now you should cut out that part of the bone and extract it, because it will never heal as long as the bone remains corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the digit, now you should cut out that part at one of its joints according to where it is necessary, and then treat it until it is healed.
If there is an injury or inflammation in the tendon, and there is severe pain there, now you should bleed the patient at the beginning, and then dry out the tendon with a sharp spatula across its surface from top to bottom, but be careful that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh below the tendon, for you would cause intense pain to the patient, and it would lead to the excessive growth of new tissue in that location; and afterwards treat that area with something that relieves pain.
But the condition that arises in most people is that it becomes excessively fleshy very easily, or there is little bone, or it affects the tendon very easily.
And some of them arise at the root of the joint, or the growth occurs in some of the joints of the tendons. He who is born with weak joints of the fingers will not suffer much, and he who is born with strong joints in the limbs will be less troubled.
And for those who are born with fleshy bodies, the operation will be easier, and you should cauterize that part with a hot iron spatula.
But for one who is born with a condition at the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, guard against its amputation.
But for one who is born with weak fingers, you should cauterize the flesh at the beginning with a round cauterization down to the bone, and then use one of those appropriate saws to cut, and subsequently treat what remains until it heals.
But for consolidation that occurs between the bones due to injury or because of the person's birth condition, or due to healing from an illness or burning by fire, or similarly, then you should operate on that consolidation until the said parts return to their natural form.
And then place between the bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not heal too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly healed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of the bones on the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and appropriate to the figure of the limb.
Of cauterization for veins, these are varicose veins.
Veins that are varicose are those wrapped thickly and full of melancholic humors, which move in the limbs of the body, and they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer purgatives for the black bile several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of their condition with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
The sectioning of it is according to this method: at the beginning, apply a poultice with hot water until the thick blood is dissolved, which will be sediment in the poultice, and then press the poultice on the patient's body at the most prominent part inside at the lower part of the navel with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide sectioning, and then draw out the black blood with the right hand from below the poultice upwards inside until the quantity is removed that you want and that suffices for what the patient can tolerate.
And then advise him, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and note this to the patient.
But the raising of it is according to this method: you should shave the patient's skin if there are any hairs on it, and then place him in a bath and apply a poultice with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or exercise him vigorously with exercise if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
For the operation of circumcision, cut the skin along the side of the vein by incision either in the length or at the back of it, or lower down remove the tip.
For the operation to open an ulcer, use hooks and scrape away the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and when you see that part where it turns black, you should expose it.
And thus when you open it, and of the ulcer you see that white which is its core.
And then you place the knife inside where it is raised and turned away from the ulcer, and suspend it with hooks as a lion does.
And then make another incision near that incision for three reasons, and then scrape the ulcer from above the vein until it appears.
And then raise that and incise it in the rear section to remove the tip, and then extract that and raise it until it comes out through the second incision, and then extract that from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or most distant of all the incisions, until everything comes out; and now make an incision there.
And if you are not able to extract and raise it, now insert a needle with a sharp point double-edged and ligature it and extract it, or insert the knife below and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will become difficult to raise it like this, and you will have caused harm by this mishap.
And when that whole process is completed, place a piece of linen soaked in wine and rose oil and plain oil over the site of the wound until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with twists and turns in its covering as we have said it should not be, then you must cut along all parts of those twists and at the places where there are coverings on it, and afterwards raise that part up with forceps until you elevate the entire thing.
And be careful in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; use your prudence in this.
Shape of the incision through which the vessel is severed:
It is not sharpened like forceps nor has a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; it should be of thick flexibility like a lion's paw, for if it were delicate, it would cut the vein because of its delicacy; however, it should be unnecessarily thick as we have said.
On the extraction of the crural vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little vegetation and where no grass or crops grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body apart from the legs.
And the formation of it is through putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin are generated inside the body between the skin and the flesh.
Here is the translation:
Then when it appears at the opening, you should wrap around that a piece of lead weighing one drachma, and place it there and leave the lead hanging from a string.
And as many times as you apply it to the parts externally, wrap that in lead and place it there. And if it is elongated, then you should incise part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that too deeply until it has come out externally, for if you incise it too deeply it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
So it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is expelled from the rear of it and there remains no cause for illness in the body.
And in some people, this vein extends to a length of five palms and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms.
And if it is incised during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate that along the length of the body until everything in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area with medicines for several days; and afterward treat that as you would an abscess.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or on the foot, and extends to multiple openings, with each branch coming out of its own opening.
And thus treat that as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
On cutting into worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some places "bovine illness" because often one finds similar cases among cattle and the worms are such that they are born between the skin and the flesh, and move throughout the body up and down, and it shows through the sensation caused by their movement from limb to limb until they break through the skin and come out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and intestinal worms occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, at that moment it easily enters through the nose and destroys the brain, which often leads to many cases.
And when you wish to cure that person and extract it, it is done only according to the movement and appearance of it through sensation. Then you should press on what is above it and what is below it firmly with bandages and constriction, and then dry it out and remove it.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire on the place where it resides. The main concern is that it may corrupt the area around it as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then press firmly on the eyebrows and then dry out the area, and remove it; and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse their body with medicines that evacuate bad and putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
On incision for inflammation of the throat.
This illness is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and it often changes from one limb to another.
And now I will describe that as I shall recount to you. I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm. After waiting for about an hour, I observed that this inflammation spreading gradually, as if it were quicksilver moving from place to place, though more quickly than could be expected.
And then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it remained there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was moving throughout her body as I had observed, and I was greatly amazed by the change and the speed with which it moved from limb to limb. And I had seen something similar before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never witnessed such pain changing from limb to limb. But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
And I did not think this could be anything other than the result of her being weak, with a dual nature and exposed veins, in which such airiness and changing sensations appear.
It is necessary that there does not appear according to this back-curling in those who are delicate and whose flesh is moist from burst veins.
And when you want the treatment for it, and the patient feels that pain, at that time it is not apparent as we have said; then you press firmly on that area and leave it briefly so that the trapped air can escape, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not perform it with your hands, then treat that by inducing sweating and by expelling air, and apply plasters for foul-smelling pills and for senna pills and similar remedies.
Of the extraction of thorns.
Thorns are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body where they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, others small, some concave, others blunt; and they may be solid. There are also those with three angles, and those with tongues; and there are rod-like ones.
And the signs of a headache are when it seizes in the sagitta, and passes through the bone, and exits from the cephalus which is above the brain, for there occurs by the soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the eyes, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and easily speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the place of the ailment comes out white moisture like dust, and there comes about dryness of the face as with the wetness of flesh.
And so if these signs appear to you, then you must abstain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left mamilla, and feel there where it has been driven into a hard place, and not into a soft place; and easily the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and blood from the wound is black, and dryness comes over those extremities, and cold sweat appears, and fainting occurs; therefore you know that death will come very soon.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are that blood with foam comes from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the complexion changes, and great breath is exhaled, and there is a craving for cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the vena cava which is in the chest, and then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is great difficulty and severe pain and much sighing, and it does not allow movement of all the limbs by the muscles.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, immediately apply remedies for the plague and any indigestible food.
And if the arrow strikes in the abdomen and is embedded within it, apply a poultice for the plague, or use cloth or gut ligatures where it is severed, and there is no hope for recovery by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes in the bladder and urine comes out with it, and the process causes some injury to the surrounding parts, and there is severe pain over the wound, then you know that it is fatal.
But in other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders, and the helpers [muscles], and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the ribs and similar parts of the limbs, they are saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recount this to you as I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may signify to you concerning your own treatment.
The cause is that when an arrow struck a man in the lacrimal bone near the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side and left the bones of his ear intact, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the bone of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was deeply embedded and could only be obtained with a small part to which it adhered; it was a large sharp arrow of those used by the Turks, made of iron like a lion's tooth, without any notches.
This is from the Cæsarea, and no ill accident happens in its vicinity.
And I extracted an arrow from a Christian man who was injured in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, and it had penetrated deep into his body; then I incised around that area between two grooves, and then I delicately removed that arrow, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who was struck in his abdomen, and he seemed likely to die because of it; however, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he recovered, and no further ill accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck both sides of him, and the wound had become consolidated on him, and after seven years had passed, I extracted the arrow from the root of the wound.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the wound had become consolidated inside her, and there was no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any difficulty with her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his face, and the wound had become consolidated, and he broke the arrow without feeling any pain, and many similar cases are like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man who was the prince of the king; it had struck at the middle part of his nose and had already slightly deviated to the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
This is called the treatment for removing the arrow within three days of its embedding.
Then I examined the wound of the arrow with a probe; then I inquired into it with a very fine probe, and felt nothing there; but he felt a painful spot below his right ear, and then I supposed that this pain was at the end of the arrow.
Then I applied a plaster to the place which has attracting and digestive properties, thinking that by this the seat of the swelling would reveal to me the location of the arrowhead so that I could act upon it.
And no significant accident occurred at the site that indicated where the arrow had struck; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any further incident; and as the wound began to heal, on the third day from when I first felt the arrow inside his body, he informed me of this sensation.
Then I applied acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until there was an opening, and with a probe I probed it and found the tip of the arrowhead, which adhered to the shaft.
Then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the acute medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me about four months to reach this point.
Then when the wound had sufficiently opened up and I could insert tweezers into it to remove it, but did not succeed immediately, I continued to carefully consider and devise ways to extract it, until one day I began using specially made forceps in a manner described at the end of this chapter to extract it; and then I closed the wound.
And some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I have restored it and the wound has healed, and the patient was cured completely, and there was no need for further treatment.
And I advise you to inquire about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you can apply this rule and its significance to what has not been mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood without narration nor do they comprehend them who read this book.
And the wise craftsmen compare with few words; and from what is present to what is absent; and when accidents happen, they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of strange causes from the art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they intersect; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is removed by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in soft tissue, and it is drawn out.
And if you do not obey this advice about the time when you catch it, wait some days before removing it so that the flesh around it can heal and be prepared for its removal.
And similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you do not follow this advice, then wait some days and gently move it according to its attraction each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not follow this advice for some days, then it is necessary that you pierce around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the space around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and cannot be felt, then you should probe for it, and if you can locate it, then pull it out using some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is attached to the ears along with them, then remove the flesh in which it is embedded as completely as you can with all the skill you possess; and devise a way to proceed, if you cannot do so by avoiding damage to the flesh during the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until you are able to proceed.
And when you perform the extraction of the splint in any place where it may be, then you use your hand and forceps to all parts so that it obeys; and gently with delicacy that the splint is not broken and that it is made difficult for you both in its grasp and in its extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it heal, and then try again when the condition is improved. But if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about the treatment in its respective chapter.
And be careful not to injure veins, nerves, or tendons, and administer the treatment in every possible way to avoid the splint; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended.
And therefore, make the splint conform to the figure according to which you should place the splint in it, as this is more beneficial for the patient. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But for splints that are placed against the opposite side or that you have already extended some part to the outer parts, or if there is redness in the extremity of the splint due to pressure from a part above the shoulder and it protrudes prominently; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the quantity held by the forceps; and then pull it out, for it will come easily at this point.
If a splinter is stuck in the bone, then at that moment turn it according to its opposite direction until the splinter presses against the bone, and gradually remove it from there.
And if not, leave it for several days and then try again when it softens.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then push it out from there.
But if the shaft is embedded and you want to apply force, then insert something into it; if it is blunt, use a concave instrument so that it fits between the curvature of it and the base of the arrowhead and then push it out from there.
But if the arrowhead is convex, then push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the arrowhead will be lifted by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you cut away all the flesh around it, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what seems appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close to where you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to do so safely, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and remove it, and then treat the wound as needed until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the ends of the forceps be shaped like the beak of a bird, which functions as a clamp when it grasps the arrow so that it does not slip.
And from those are made various types of patches, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the sinew, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
Like a ray so that the instrument may be guided easily into the concave arrow, and it is pushed from that side.
About phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, among which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at xxx points: sixteen of these are pulsating veins located near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins that appear on the temples; and two veins located in the two tear ducts of the eyes, which are called aspicientz; one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; a vein located at the tip of the nose; two glands that are found on the neck; two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; these last ones are called algelic; and there are also two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms total five. Among these is one cephalic vein, which is also known as the "latz silvestre"; and people call it “the vein of the head,” and another smaller vein composed from a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; this one is called by people "vein of the whole body," and the basilica vein lies in the domestic arm and is named “citillar,” while the common name for it is “the belly vein.” The funis del bras, which lies over the focil bone, is the vein that appears on the forearm visibly; and salvatella, which is the vein between the thumb and the little finger, and this one is present in both arms.
And in the thigh and the groin there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the tailbone of the wild animal; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the groin of the wild animal; and in the groin there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic diseases, emigration (emergent? or evacuation?), sycosis, and old sores on the head.
And the quality of treating those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the patient's head in the occipital region where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; instruct the patient to press the two veins near their ears in two places below the head; and examine them with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, this is a sign to attempt the treatment.
Then take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and then insert it behind the vein into the bone until the blood flows out. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the upper parts and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers aligned or around that amount; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And then apply pressure with poultices and let that area heal.
And there follows at the beginning of the book the inscription of those and their cautery.
But the two arteries are for the Templars the remedy for phlebotomy is to alleviate ancient and usual evils and continuous ophthalmia and acute effusions of excess to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those I tell to you as follows: instruct the patient to hold his arm so that the two veins appear clearly to the sight and feel their pulse below with your finger; then proceed to try.
And then raise the edge of the lancet above the vein towards your finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below, and elevate the vein upwards; and cut it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity that is necessary for you.
And then loosen the patient's restraint, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and afterwards place it on the cut and poultices, and tightly bind above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And there is preceded the reminder of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the remedy of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face and to alleviate headache, stiffness, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is as I recommend to you: that the patient bind his arm with a cloth so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Pause the punctures at the point where they are above the vein on top of the fossa, and strike them gently or for some other reason in that manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then untie the patient's perforation and stop it so that it may be healed.
And in some cases it is opened with a venesection, but it does not need to be pointed like other venesections; rather, it should have a flat end so that the transverse venesection can be performed there, because the bone is close and strong, and the blade would easily break if the venesection were sharp.
May the treatment of the two veins that are next to the tear ducts of both eyes be for eye itchiness due to irritation and grease in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient should hold his arm with a bandage, and then perform the venesection, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
And the venesection should be performed diagonally along the length with a slightly blunt venesection tool, as there is little flesh in that area; and if the venesection tool is sharp, its tip could easily break.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause when it reaches that point, and tie those areas for one night, and then untie them.
And the venesection of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when they are chronic.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle thin long and place it in the middle point of the nose tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear by sense here, and because the blood begins to flow instantly.
Move your hand with the small phlebotomy needle little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for it is quickly restored.
The harm of the phlebotomy on the two [veins] leads to constriction of breath and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers just as in herpotromeno.
The quality of the phlebotomy on those [veins] is that the patient strains each one in his neck with a cloth; and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a long and slightly wide phlebotomy needle little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity, or according to what you consider necessary for that purpose; and then proceed similarly with the other vein.
And then loosen the cloth and gently compress both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not overconstrained, and leave them uncovered because the plague is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy on the large veins is to relieve small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
Of the quality of phlebotomy from those things that you should do is to place the patient before you, and strengthen the neck of him with a bandage, and then roll back his lips and look at the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of both, and that more so because in the circle around those small veins there are black ones; and then cut each one with a cutting incision.
If doubt is present in you and you do not know which one it is of those, then at that time you should make an incision in the larger of those, and of the more apparent of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lip.
But the two veins that are below aid greatly in phlebotomy for the cephalic artery, which is in front of the throat, for ailments of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is to place the patient between you and the sun, raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side for a vein and on the other side for another vein, and the color of each one tends toward blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to press too hard when phlebotomizing those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend usually run through all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two methods, either apply to the phlebotomy a small sponge made of myrtle or olive, which is slightly coarse; or use a sharp knife for phlebotomy, and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
Let the incisions be made as mentioned above, and it is appropriate to open the concave full veins with obvious thick roots, and those that contain thick coagulated blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and has a more delicate extremity, and it is appropriate for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin fluid blood.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that burden the head and the neck, and from those that dry the feet and the abdomen.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that vein, to be very careful with it and have great fear of it, because nearby there is an artery. If he errs and hits in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on that vein with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting method as described.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave that one and switch to another, or seek some branch of it. Or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is clear; and proceed with that phlebotomy as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the arm, place your hand above the constriction of the arm where you know the location of the pulse, and slightly higher than the middle of the arm; then extend the arm and section the vein in a concave manner as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery at any point along its course.
And when you do it, as you strengthen the ligature, inflammation appears in the place you marked higher up, then that inflammation is arterial inflammation, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and then you should hold your finger there for a long time; and afterwards remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops after a few moments, then you can tighten the arm above it.
And keep the patient away from moisture, and let them be free of fear and do not allow them to use that arm for several days until they are healed.
And if the bleeding does not stop and you do not have a doctor present for it, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take flax fibers, and burn them, and take half of them and apply that over the vein area with a ligature and powder on another day.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what precedes regarding the recall of the location of powders to stop blood flow.
And the excision of the bone is difficult in many positions because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful in extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it consists of branches of the basilica and of the cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during the phlebotomy of this area because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its healing is difficult, and often it is not healed completely. And this nerve appears to many people through sensation; and since it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, therefore it is necessary for you to perform the phlebotomy at a place where you are strong, and avoid the nerve in your skillfulness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And it is appropriate here if you want to phlebotomize using the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for this is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
However, in some people a pus-filled abscess is found when it is not detected as a blood vessel on the first examination, and we do not notice that abscess.
The first of these is about knowing that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with the hope of preventing illness, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins located in the elbow area, which are: cephalic, median and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, preferably after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or when three hours have passed since the first pus appeared.
However, phlebotomy that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that a child not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth to the seventh month, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized in some way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a cleansing enema, if there is any retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous substances from the impure bowels during the phlebotomy of the purified ones, and that they do not affect the main limbs.
Do not perform venesection on patients suffering from seasickness and drunkenness, nor during the onset of illness or drunkenness until they have purged what was ingested, nor in cases of dropsy. Moreover, avoid venesection near colic pain and after vomiting, and when there are issues with gas in the intestines, as well as during excessive sexual activity, work, exercise, fasting, or vigil, and any cause that dissolves either bodily strength or animal spirits.
And also take into account the subtlety of the body's condition before this, whether the blood is thick, and regarding food and drinks, as well as medicines if it is possible to do so.
And also bathe if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way so that the blood becomes finer.
And avoid venesection at the end of the day, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And ensure that the patient is protected on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all excessive physical activities, such as hard labor, unnecessary exertion, sexual activity, and similar things.
And at the time of sitting, have present the causes that are used to improve the atmosphere with aromatics and odors and with balms and similar substances according to what is possible in quantity.
And the person performing the venesection should sit on a higher seat than that of the patient who is to be bled.
And then extend his arm and clean it with his hand twice or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around twice.
And let the ligature be timely applied, for if the ligature is not equal or if it is too tight and thereby stops the flow of blood; or if it is too loose and allows the blood to seep through.
And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that the one who is to perform the phlebotomy rub the area thoroughly before making an incision so that the veins are inflated and clearly visible.
And regarding the phlebotomist, they should anoint their phlebotomy instrument with a small amount of proper old oil. And then place their left hand index finger on the vein at the site where the phlebotomy is to be performed so that the vein rises slightly and becomes taut like a string, which indicates fullness due to air; when they press the phlebotomy instrument onto it, if it does not sink in, that vein is narrow.
And thus, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And then press the phlebotomy instrument down, but if the vein is open in one spot, that is where it should be; otherwise, repeat this at another spot near there, or on the side with congestion, if the site is not abscessed.
And if the site is abscessed or inflammation persists, then you should leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as this will forcefully draw an abscess out, nor should one bathe.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and the bleeding is slight, and you fear that not enough blood will be let as you wish, then reapply the lancet along the same line and make the aperture slightly larger, but do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for the area tends to become inflamed after a short time if too little aperture is made.
And if you find that it is already inflamed, then do not reapply there, for it will serve you no purpose; and place upon it a part of the incision from an oil container, for it disperses the blood. And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer oil from an incision in all venesections where the veins prohibit the flow of blood, and apply either theriac alfadoc or sage when one of them is placed on the area, for the blood becomes finer and less thick when it is administered.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the venesection, which sometimes happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or where the aperture in the vein was small, then you should incise it and apply a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, and press this for one hour, for it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if blackness or greenish discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply some mixture of aloes and frankincense dissolved, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
From swelling areas arise abscesses and elevations which require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand on it, and if you find softness, apply pressure to it; then that elevation is bad and harmful. And take care not to do any of what has been mentioned, for the blood will flow easily from the artery.
And apply a plaster with styptic properties to harden the area, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the color appearing in the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is acute, until its sharpness is moderated.
And for one who is robust and has the need for bloodletting at once, phlebotomy from the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to perform bloodletting in small amounts, and the procedure should be quick.
And the best method for venous phlebotomy is to use a transection, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more effective and safer than phlebotomy based on latitude and longitude.
In cases where syncope is likely to occur due to phlebotomy, it is advisable that you treat this beforehand with a small amount of bread infused in the juice of melons or simple oxymel heated; and extract from the blood in three or four stages.
And if there is congestion due to composition, then beforehand take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic syrup that is fragrantly pleasing.
And if syncope occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the release of bad blood, then it is advisable to drink watered-down syrup that is subtly fragrant; use aromatics with some alcohol, and apply this to the affected area.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to alleviate their condition and dissolve their blood a second time, it is advisable that the phlebotomy be for excessive evacuation, and the effect of this is that it gradually evacuates the blood in small amounts, as is according to the quantity of the effect over continuous days.
But for those who wish to alleviate their condition and reduce their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then this should be done about seven hours or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction of its decline, it is advisable that this be done on the second day or the third day.
Place that person in a state where the blood is heated and becomes acute and causes fever, so that the blood is poured out from him in one place, and there is a large quantity of it poured out and you enlarge the opening until syncope occurs; but you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on his wrist to feel the pulse of the blood leaving the body, so that he does not die instead of experiencing syncope, for this happens many times when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to issue forth, that you press very forcefully and bend it freely, for this is too harsh.
Have the patient lie down so that he can be phlebotomized again; or remove this with the acuteness of the phlebotomy which has caused coagulation in the vein's orifice; or apply over it a plaster of theriac alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood is out.
And if the vein is inflamed, now let the patient lie down and do not touch it until the inflammation is subdued.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse, then you should bleed him at that site or in another vein on the other arm.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the cubital or basilic veins when they are not accessible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should put his hand in hot water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
And above that tight bandage should be applied to the middle constriction; and phlebotomize according to the transverse small vein, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
And let the incision be wide and your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize above the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from putting your hand in hot water, and similarly pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves nearby.
And the phlebotomy of the right hand thumb is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you should bind the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after putting it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then phlebotomize that transverse vein; and if you incise it not too deeply.
And be careful not to leave your hand exposed after the phlebotomy, for there are nerves among the aforementioned areas deprived of flesh.
And repeat it again in hot water and let the blood flow there, for if you do not repeat that in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and the flow is hindered.
And when the blood is drawn in the required quantity, then press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not clot immediately; similarly, you should do this for all such cases.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the hand on the left side is that it helps with diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy as you did with the other one.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for diseases that occur in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of various old conditions, and similar ailments.
And the procedure for phlebotomy on that area is that the patient immerses his foot in hot water and performs friction until the veins become visible; then place a bandage above the joint of the foot; the location of the vein is at the back of the heel, and from there it branches out across the surface of the foot in many small branches.
And therefore, phlebotomize the larger branch below the joint behind the heel, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on that area on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves located below that area on the surface of the foot, and avoid making your incision across it, as if you were trying to cut it lengthwise.
And let the femoral artery be tied off.
If the emission of blood is prohibited, then immerse his foot in hot water and let the blood flow into that until it is evacuated.
And if the person performing the arteriotomy errs on the first attempt, then immerse it along with the artery in some salt water, for the place is sensitive; and do not fear mischief, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the vein on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the heel, at the junction of the sole.
And the appropriate time for the arteriotomy is when the blood is needed, specifically when it is necessary to draw blood.
And the procedure for the arteriotomy is that the patient should enter a bath, and quickly and tightly wrap the leg with a fine cloth bandage above the heel, above four fingers from the sole, for it should not be visible otherwise.
And when it becomes visible, then perform the arteriotomy there according to each individual case as is possible and along the transverse direction, which is better; or incise it by incision or section it by cutting, for the location is sensitive.
And it is in the words of some men slightly hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to full sensation, then perform the arteriotomy on one of its branches, which appears between the thumb and the ring finger on the foot.
And guard against the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you want.
And then loosen the ligature and pause at the site of the phlebotomy for a while and strengthen the area, for it is quickly healed.
About suction and the qualities of using those.
Suction cups made of horns, or earthenware, or glass.
And suction is performed in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves suction without incision.
And this suction that is without incision is performed in two ways, either with heat or without heat.
And the suction cups that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are applied to fourteen locations on the body. One is at the back of the head, which is the last part of the skull. Another is near both sides of the neck. Suction cups are also placed under the chin below the jaw, beside the mouth. There are suction cups for the two cheekbones; for the throat area, which is above the collarbone. Additionally, there are suction cups for each armpit and for each wrist.
And suction does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh but works by virtue of those, just as it is effective through phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for suction to be performed with heat or without heat in any illness caused by internal congestion, unless the entire body needs to be evacuated.
But if necessity compels suction due to illness or for continuous treatment, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at some times during it.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle part of the month, I command that bleeding be performed more than two or three hours after noon.
And the benefit of bleeding from the nape is that when you encounter heaviness in the head and sinking of the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this bleeding is at the site of phlebotomy for the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use it for one who is in perfect health, or in one who has a cold, because it causes great harm to them.
And because of this, it is not appropriate to use it on the elderly, and in those whose heads are frequently ill.
But for one who is continually placed upon it, there may be a risk of forgetfulness; and because of this, you should command the person performing the bleeding to pause their hand briefly when removing the cup, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Here is the translation:
Let it be heated slightly the winded alkali, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the inhalation of alhagdahan causes pain in the head and ocular disorders, and migraines, and nosebleeds, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is instead of bloodletting from the basilica.
And you should command the inhaler not to press too hard during incision so that he does not injure the artery and cause bleeding.
And inhalation below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and gum corruption, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is instead of bloodletting from aliheric which is between the two lips.
But the inhalation that is done over the two cheeks causes caphatan, which is made by an excess of heat.
And the inhalation of both sides inside the ears causes the effect similar to bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are larger in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the inhaler not to proceed too much in incision, for the area is bare of flesh and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is an inhalation over the hips that causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
And you command the barber to make a large incision, and let it be of equal width, for the place requires strong drying; and use fine light strokes with the lancet and let it be scarified slightly.
Small incisions from the sides should be made with great care, for they draw blood from all parts of the body, and relieve old pains of the lungs and of the heart, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate boils and abscesses; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy from both elbows, and armpits, and from two veins.
However, they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in some men.
And the incisions in the armpits are appropriate for the treatment of the same conditions as the incisions from both sides.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you make the incision at the beginning wide and then gradually narrow it as it proceeds, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but place them lightly, and leave them carefully, so that the humors come to the site by equal distribution. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and until the rigor of the blood appears.
And now you should scarify and gradually narrow the incisions, and appropriately consider the disposition of the body.
For the person with soft flesh and few pores should be scarified only once so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And he commands the surgeon to enlarge the incision slightly and to empty the contents with ease.
And if the blood is thick, it is now necessary to scarify twice, because on the first occasion the route for the thinning of the blood and its moisture is opened. But on the second occasion, use the acquired technique for extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is muddy, it is now necessary to perform the third scarification so that the last can be achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract thick blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is now necessary to perform additional scarifications.
And the term "scarification" refers to the depth of the incision alone.
And if the skin from which the incision is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for applying the cupping vessels be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or oil of flax seeds, or rape seed oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or blood root oil, and similar preparations.
And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be hysop oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar preparations.
If the wound is of wide pores and tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and it should have applied to it the places of wounds near the wound washing with fresh water or boiled water with solatrum, or water with cumin, or water with borage, and similar things.
And for the one whose blood is of moist humidity, wash his wounds with green vinegar, or water with myrtle and sumac and similar things.
And for the one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or water with horehound, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it should be ensured that the wound is kept away from baths; afterwards, it should be administered immediately after the bath within an hour or two, and it should rest near the wound.
What is needed to be done to regulate the diet for a patient who has undergone surgery or bloodletting before wound treatment.
At the beginning, if the wound patient or one who needs to be bled is choleric and the blood is hot and inflamed, then it should be given cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in green vinegar and lettuce, saffron, julep, and similar things.
And give them foods such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
And for the one whose constitution is weakened, let them drink syrup of amber, or syrup of saffron and seeds, and sumac, and water with moderate pleasant smell between dawn and midnight; and it should be recommended that they use little drinking and eating, and give them foods of poultry and hemp and fish and small birds and dove.
On the day of bleeding and phlebotomy, drink should be more than food.
It should be given to drink at certain hours to some men hydromel or musk medicine, or cinnamon before bleeding or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood is thinned; and it should not be taken by those who are overheated.
The bleedings that are done by incision should be on areas above the groin, and over the gout and navel, in the places of the thighs, and at the side of the abdomen, because these members cannot tolerate incisions.
And it is not sought for anything else but to attract blood from a member, just as we place a cupping vessel over the nipple in a disease of excessive bleeding from the nose; and they use that to dissolve congealed blood in a limb, just as we place it on the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, heats it up, and alleviates pain by resolving congestion.
And it is applied to the sinuses when they are blocked or diseased, because by the power of attraction it removes blockages and eradicates disease from its location.
And similarly, it does the same when applied to the groin and thigh for congestion in those areas.
And these bleedings should be administered repeatedly with suction; and some should be applied near a fire.
And some should be applied full of warm water in diseases of the thigh.
With this you are to fill the abscess and make it larger, which is either warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the abscess administered to the fire: the width of its opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of pus should be half a palm; and at the bottom of it, in the place that is in the circuit, half of it, the passage should be small enough for a needle to enter.
It should be made of raw leather or citrus peel, with thick edges, lion's skin, equine hides, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb when placed upon it.
And there should be a crossbar of iron or wood in the middle, on which a candle is placed above the fire.
And this abscess should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the amount smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
And the abscesses for children and weak individuals should be smaller than those for young and strong people.
And the quality of placing this abscess over the fire on the limb is that you extend it above the fire in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbar at the right spot for the abscess, so that the fire burns around it without consuming the body of the patient.
And it should be placed close to the limb of the patient, and the finger should be on the passage we have mentioned, so that when we have the abscesses and do not want the finger to remain there while the vapor rises over that passage, then the abscess will dissolve quickly.
Concerning the use of fire for cauterization, do it in that manner if you should need to use it.
Make a suction cup to be used in the treatment of pleurisy, which is filled with water, in which there should be no transverse rib or obstacle, and it is placed on the limb without being empty except full of water, and is put over the limb only.
And this is the form of it: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Lancets are not administered in various limbs but only in those limbs where the placement of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or on parts of the body without flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found, which are in the clear waters free from pollution.
And then they should be left in clear water day and night until they are hungry, so that there remains no cause in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body at the beginning of phlebotomy and suction cup application; and then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and prepared.
And if suction can be applied to the area with a suction cup, it is better for relief.
And if not, now wash the area with something cool and then with water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood is prolonged along the course near the attachment of the veins, and this oozes out, then you immerse a cloth in cold water, and place it over so that the oozing may be stopped.
And if the blood multiplies, then powder over it vitriol trisected, or gallnuts and similar astringents until the blood is constricted; or let there be placed on the area masticated fava beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is constricted.
And if it is necessary, change the veins for suction when it is possible to do so.
And if the bleeding cups are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the areas until blood flows; and afterwards place them, for when they feel any blood they will adhere quickly.
And when you want them to adhere, powder over them a little aloes trisected, or salt, or ash, and they will adhere immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is particularly necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, be aware that this chapter is boasted about by quack doctors and laypeople and those who have not for any length of time regarded the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of this for any length of time; and I have applied myself to this not by briefly reading the books of the Ancients, but by studying them thoroughly until I extracted the science from them.
And thus I directed myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
And I have thus described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which I have conducted my experiments; so as to abbreviate this for you and deliver it from the burden of lengthiness; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and show this at the end of explanation; and form here various forms of the instruments used therein, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collection from the treatment of fractures of bones, from those whose preliminaries are necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of fractures and various things pertaining to each. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which one must pay attention at the beginning for understanding are necessary for the craftsman and to stand on the truth of those; so that you and those who wish to know or learn this noble art may do so quickly.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture or dislocation or twist or fall, at that moment you must consider at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to bandage them, or both together, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or it is a child to whom it happens, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or it is a time of extreme heat or cold.
And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small game; and avoid fatty meats and foods that fill the body, including any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure that there is no risk of an abscess forming, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
Then return the patient to his usual regimen as he was accustomed before.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods consisting of meat and heavy items, as well as viscous foods such as those made from wheat boiled with water, rice, peas, cattle stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, and strong wine similar to these. And with this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones broken in humans during the first stage and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by drying of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and applies to the broken bone from all parts some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it within what is conglutinated and joined together, until they come to their end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, and no cause prevents them from performing their works.
And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet to foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the hand is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the rib bone; and similarly all other members differ among themselves.
Here is the translation:
Of various kinds is the diversity in fractures themselves. And the species of fractures in bones are diverse; for one kind of curved fracture is different from that which occurs in the stars [this might be an idiosyncratic or metaphorical expression]; and some fractures occur according to the length of the bone. Among the fractures of the shaft, spicules, adhesions, and both dependent and independent ones, just as when a pen is prepared for writing, there is fracture due to splintering and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each kind has its own proper treatment in the restoration, as will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Of the signs of a bone fracture. And by this, a bone fracture is recognized: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or deformation in the location and no pain is felt upon gentle touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be twisting or a small fissure, so do not press on it with your hand and compress it entirely; instead, pause to apply medicines of which there will be mention shortly at the moment when it is convenient for you to go to the location; and nearby may be a narrow passage due to subtle constriction.
And you should know that the place where it is curved and not split into two or more parts that do not occur in the shaft, as if the whole part of its comparison is remodeled, then you should begin at your convenience to correct it whenever an abscess needs cauterization.
And if an abscess occurs there, immediately do not delay for any days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it according to each method that you can by lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and alignment of it is quicker than that of the bone in which the fracture occurred.
And then strengthen it according to what will come to your recollection of it.
But if you have fractured the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And place yourself in a position where you can put the limb in a proper position according to its natural figure, while the parts that are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those addictions with ingenuity and by each method that you can into their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes to the patient because of your operation or injury; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is fitting that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand what needs attention, and if you see any divergent cause, correct it and adjust it according to the measure of your skill.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors often cause an abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen due to their careless handling.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; because you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of those.
And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and the finger and similar to these, at this time it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that they be wrapped with leather and hard cloth, because this binding connects the large limb and strengthens it from all sides equally, thus preventing any blemish from occurring.
And after beginning, after your evacuation of the bandage, pause appropriately for that, on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four depending on the limb; and tighten it gently with your hand.
And then place it at the upper part of the site of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your bandaging does not hurt the area where you have tightened the fracture site. From around the area of the fracture extend it a little and gradually loosen the constriction until you take from the area a large part.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again around the broken area with an additional layer, and then bring the bandages down below the fracture; and your operation should focus on tightening this wrapping and loosening it as we have said about the first wrapping mentioned above.
Then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture if it is curved; and if not, do not pause for any reason at that point.
Then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place over what causes the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave this for some days; and then you will strengthen it with the plasters.
And the plasters should be about half a palm wide in length, and well made wisely; or they can be made of willow wood; or from strips of palm leaves; and the width of each plaster should be according to this form and figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster should correspond to the size of the limb; then reinforce the plasters with another bandage according to your initial wrapping, and then tie it above properly as we have said about the wrapping, and it should be tighter near the location of the fracture, and the farther away from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish surgeons use strings from ropes for their sutures, it is a great mistake, when you see that the tension is unequal.
And similarly, fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve with tension what you wish, and it is necessary that there be no less than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the stitches near the suture in those places, then pause and use catgut or striped wool until that does not injure him.
Sometimes a fracture is caused by a blow, and a disruption occurs in the bone, and I will mention this in that chapter separately.
And know that not every broken limb should be stitched with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be covered with stitches until about five or seven days or more, depending on your certainty regarding the development of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of applying a plaster for the rapid healing of fractures, suitable for many conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the residue from the grinding process that adheres to the walls of the mill.
And mix it as it is, but sift it through fine cloth, and pause the mixing so that it is not thick or coarse; and then use it.
Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe includes asafetida, lead oxide, acacia, hyssop, and migraich, which is the seed of wild millet, each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each five drachms; aloe leaves twenty drachms. All are to be crushed and sifted and mixed with water or fine cloth if the mixture is too thick; then use this plaster, for it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and gives much relief to many people.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe includes migraich and myrtle bark each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each five drachms; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole twenty drachms.
All should be triturated in a mortar with a crushing motion, then sifted, and mixed with water or fine cloth if the consistency is appropriate, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and to soothe accidental pain in them and for cracks and fractures: take pure wool and soak it in sour wine and warm oil and apply it to the affected area.
Note that this plaster is not effective for restoration, for abscesses, and does not properly expel pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh leaves of the fig tree and wild poppy; crush them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of preparing a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remnant of an abscess: Take rhubarb root, chamomile flowers, violets, and spelt flour, of each one part; mix all together and cook with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, now mix that with cold coriander water or with water and use it.
Another method of making a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when an abscess hardens during the restoration of the limb: Take rhubarb root and linseed, hawthorn berries, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all together and cook with sage water or warm water or wine, whichever suits the quality of the limb and matches its color.
However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration except for a cerot made of wax and oil, and nothing else; he recommends that it be midway between coarseness and fineness.
However, Galen is seen to have them applied to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is a slight drying heat, such as myrrh, henbane, and similar substances to those causes which we have recommended.
Method of preparing a plaster to comfort injury and pain: Take pitch, tow (flax fibers), human hair cut or bird's feathers, rhubarb root, and salt, in equal parts; mix all together, sift, and cook, then make into a plaster.
The quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain and then be removed is such that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not take place nor is the bone out of its place; therefore, do not untie it for several days. And if violent pain or improvement or inflammation occurs in the area, then you should be cautious or undo it at that hour, and remove the plaster.
And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in water, and immerse it in cold water, and with that wash the area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour; afterwards apply it to wool soaked in vinegar and oil or ointment, and bind it over it for a night until you are sure of no abscess formation, and until the swelling of the limb subsides and the pain is reduced.
And then repeat that gentle binding and small plaster without tightening it as much as your first one, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and binding, then repeat that as you did at the beginning similarly.
And if no cause occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not untie it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what seems appropriate for unbinding the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh over it coagulates.
At this point adjust the tightness more than in your first stricture completely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by the recollection of it.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and withering more than is appropriate, then you will know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, apply bandages soaked in linseed oil to it continuously every day for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation bring nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed quickly.
But what those foolish restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as necessary, and it is restored according to its curvature, is an error in their procedure, and great fear, and if they were judges this would be magnified by the Ancients in their books and warned against.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do this.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures vary, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a hard object, and this impact removes part of the bone internally, which is behind the bone surface, just as it would split wood; thus, this type is called an axial fracture. Or the hard object cuts some part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not penetrate to the back side of the bone; this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight, and there is also a fracture called comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact with something weak or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is either penetrating that approaches the panniculus which is below the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures may be great or slight.
And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small fibers, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is named capillary.
And this is the fracture that is caused either by falling or by being struck with a stone and similar objects, which causes some plate of bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it occurs in the concave place just as it happens with the bones of animals when they are subjected to striking and result in their fragments entering into the inner parts.
And this is mostly done in the bones of human bodies, just as it happens with the heads of children.
And for all these types of fractures, treatments are applied, which are pieces just like small plates separated. And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
And you should recognize all these types of fractures through detection on them and by examining their indents and the discolored flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type of fracture is recognized by this: it appears on the bone and is wiped clean, and when examined closely, it appears as a small indentation, because the fracture shows up black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that there is a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting with anger, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar signs of distress and stiffness, and they resemble those in severe conditions, then doubt whether it can be cured.
And if for uncommon accidents you hope for a cure, then you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is because if someone comes to you with a wound at the beginning as it is a wound and this is in the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the condition of the bone until the day fourteenth according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary for you to wait and remove the bone before the seventh day, since what is above the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and in a state of attrition, then it is necessary for you to incise the comminuted and abraded part, as I shall recount to you.
And you should shave the head of the patient who is wounded, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the shape of the wound, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need the detection of the bone, bleeding or an abscess is found, then you must proceed with what is necessary, and this involves filling the area with cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and allowing the wound to rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure there is no more bleeding; then begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of thin form, and this is the shape of it: And then apply another incisor slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
Then apply the knife to cut out the pus that is there.
And it is necessary for you to have various knives, some of which are used to cut out pus deeper than others; and some of them cut pus more quickly than the rest, and they are sharp at their tips, made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in tapping on the knives so that you do not blunt their tip and edge.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to drill around it before you apply the knives with the chisels, which are called non-profound chisels.
And they are not called this way only because these do not reach the end of the bone from where they start, for the chisel has a round tip or margin on top of which is the sharp point resembling a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient for you to take many of these chisels, each of which should match the sharpness of each bone, so that in all parts of the brain, the tip of which is sharp, the length and width are according to the sharpness of this part.
And this is the method for three types of chisels: The quality of drilling around a broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the chisel to another location, and proceed in this manner throughout the entire area according to the thickness of the ray or approximately so.
Here is the translation:
And so that you keep with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the thigh.
And when you have circled the perforated bone, and it is separated from the thigh if it continues there, and you will extract that, so that you rasp and equalize that in the roughness of what is on the bone with another tool similar to an incisor, but which must be finer and sharper than other incisors.
And if any part of the small and delicate bones remains, now take that with ease with what is suitable to you among the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and dressings as we have said.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guy of Chauliac greatly praised; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the tip of this slow and joyful incisor, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped part is left intact and no part is incised, while the pointed part is divided into two sides along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part fits against the thigh with the sharp face of the pointed part facing the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of one part with a small hammer until you have incised all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure concerning the periosteum that no accident happens in any way that you fear, and even if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
If there is any reason to cut into the tissue of the neck in certain bone locations, incise with the sharp point of the lancet, and deliver it where it is easy to do so, since it should be done without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the tissue, and that which is abraded or remains of the bone is its surface, and appears rough with small protrusions, then it should be scraped and those protrusions removed with fine rasps prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them appropriately in any location during your operation on the broken bone and according to its shape.
And you should administer according to your proportion at which you scrape the bone initially with the coarser of those rasps, and gradually use finer ones, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the finest and most subtle of all of them.
But in each of the other small and fine fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what is needed for their correction.
And it is the reason that it is not feared by all those who have studied in that art. And thus regarding what we have written about major fractures.
And if the tissue is torn when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in warm oil, and place it over the wound opening; and then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and soak it in vinegar and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth as gently as possible without pressing too hard; and then apply a wide bandage over it, but do not tighten it beyond what is necessary to cover the wound.
If you are unsure about this treatment for one day or two until you are certain of an abscess that needs to be cauterized; and then untie it and promptly administer medicines that counter excessive dryness, such as lint pads and flour of oats, and powder of roses and aristolochia, and similar ones.
It is that you should make of these medicines powder that is finely ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And guard yourself according to your virtue so that the wound in your treatment is clean; and it should not be in the condition of pus or any other such state; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is adjusted over the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that area, and you will damage it, and this malice will lead to further illness nearby.
And it affects the scalp, as when the bone is exposed and particularly when pressure is applied to the wound, and there is discoloration on its surface; and therefore consider these signs if you see the symptoms we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
And if the discoloration is not due to the medicine that was applied above but rather because of the properties of that medicine, then you should take one part honey and three parts olive oil, and use these to moisten a piece of cloth, and promptly place it over the scalp; and then treat it with appropriate healing spices until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except into two main parts, or sometimes into one of several pieces, because there are two bones there, for the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only crushed, twisted, and deformed.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the socket of the nose, and reduce that fracture from within with your thumb inside and your fingers outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful not to cause pain to the patient during your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a slender rod to reduce that fracture.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And attempt to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
And insert at the end of the nose a pad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two pads if the fracture is in two parts, and let each pad be thick enough to fill the hollow of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in butter, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; rather, it is best to soak the pad in almond oil mixed with powder and leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, a piece of cloth should be inserted into the nose, instead of a cauterization, wrapped in lion's skin; and it should be that with the fracture of the nose so severe that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do cauterizations.
And if another abscess occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or resin mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with myrrh.
But if an abscess that needs to be cauterized does not occur, now you should apply plasters there with sesame flour and powder of decocted herbs mixed with egg white; and then place them over the lion's skin, and do not treat the nose with any other cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments that suit those cases; and then close the gap, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
And if you encounter an infection inside the nose, now you should treat it with cauterizations and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no infection in the fracture, now you should check if the fracture is only on the surface, and not broken into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert your right finger; and push in such a way that the roughness of the fracture comes together easily from the outer parts with your other hand from the outside part of the bone; do this carefully.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts according to straightness as far as possible until the alignment is equal.
And if it happens that the teeth are dislocated or disrupted, then strengthen those which you expect will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately place over the broken jaw some wax, and then place on it a doubled cloth, and place on that a large piece of linen well made, or a pad of soft material equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for you to apply bandaging and convenience dictates, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
And if you find that the figure is already altered in some way, then on the third day you should examine and loosen it; and then correct what has been altered of it with plaster made from powdered brick dust, egg white, or linseed flour, after you have removed the wax, and place over the plaster a thin layer of linen.
And then, as you place and adjust the plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place without loosening it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for this fracture typically becomes strong in about three weeks.
And if another abscess should occur which requires cauterization, at that time administer what we have said about other similar conditions in the section on the treatment of the interior until it is healed, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is due to a blow, then consider whether the bone is separated or fragmented. At that time, use your skill to remove those fragments with what is necessary for their removal using the appropriate instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a scalpel as much as your needs require.
And when you have removed those fragments and not all can be extracted right away, then close the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters that are suitable for it and let it heal until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
There are various ways the collarbone can be broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without fragments; and such cases are easier to restore. Or it is such that fragments occur in it, making its restoration difficult; or it is such that the fracture occurs due to a blow.
And the operation in such cases, when the fracture is due to a blow, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the injured person and supports the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
In order to treat this fracture, place padding as needed so that its shape fits appropriately, neither too high in prominence nor too deep in depression.
And if more extension is needed, now place beneath the tillic of the patient’s body a pad made of cloth or wool, and make its size according to your need; then extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the pad with your hand until the fracture is properly aligned.
And if you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outward towards the side, so that it reaches the preon, now have the patient recline on their neck, and place a pad over the muscle on one side, slightly larger in size.
And the assistant presses the muscle on one side below so that the bone of the clavicle is elevated to reach the preon, and then you correct the fracture and align it as described with padding.
But if you feel protrusions of the clavicle and small bones, now it is necessary to incise over them and remove those protrusions easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing beneath the clavicle the tool used for rasping; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and has the following form:
And it is similar to the bowl of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Make it as long as you possibly can for the operation; let it have two ends just as many times, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound from which you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you now sew together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form an abscess soon, then you fill the wound with patches and powders according to the quantity of the wound's opening.
And if an abscess forms soon, then infuse a patch in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over that.
And do not let the splint be loose over the broken bone; and so you should see the patient every day, and when the bandaging is soft or you see that the splint has already been moved, then you must correct this and tighten the bandage.
And place the patient's head on a pillow at the neck, and place below him a cushion where his head will rest during sleep for a short time; so that with that, raise the support under his armpit from that side, and thus elevate the fracture of the collarbone to the elevation of the muscle; or tie his arm to his neck.
And do not remove the bandaging unless you are in the immediate vicinity or there is an abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it as such, and adjust in the constriction and restore that until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in less time for some people.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The collarbone is broken at the middle part and not broken entirely but only the edges.
And when it is broken at that place — and it is broken in the middle part — and it is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way you can manage.
And after the powder of ground egg whites and lion's fat is applied, apply powdered cloth doubled over; and then place on the wound a bandage of fine linen according to the quantity of the spoonful all or at most a little more.
And if the bandage is convex in some places compared to the spoonful, then fill that convexity with lion's fat, and then press the bandage according to equality.
And then secure above with linen strips of appropriate length and with firmness of the bandage so that it is not displaced from its place.
And examine the dressing each day; and whenever it needs to be softened, change it and strengthen it and equalize the bandage if it has been displaced from its place.
And apply the medicine over the wound as appropriate.
And the spoonful is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
And when this number of days is complete, then you loosen the dressing, and be sure that these are bones for which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone fragment and place a bandage below it, then cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said for the fracture of the collarbone or in case of suppuration, cauterize if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of foot fractures.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and this happens quickly; however, the extremities of it move as cicadas do and are comminuted.
Of the accidents which happen when the bone is broken are that it inclines to the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting of blood; and it is evident in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on their back, and place a bolster between their shoulders; and then press the muscles, and adjust the ribs with two fingers, and carefully do the operation and the adjustment in every possible way and as is appropriate, until the figure of the bone returns as needed.
And then place on the plaster and tow, and place underneath fine spruce or linden wood or similar in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; and then carefully bind that over the broken bone without pressure; and proceed with wrapping according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that with moderate tension; and then consider the bandage at all times, and when it has softened, tighten that again.
And if necessity compels the loosening of it due to corrosion or swelling, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the area, then you examine and loosen that and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred according to the method of treatment; and then reapply the plaster, if it is necessary for this purpose; and adjust the tension until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places where they meet at the back; and from the extremities of them at the front part, such contusion does not happen to those because they are cartilaginous. And concerning the nerve, there is no deception regarding its sensation; therefore, you must examine it carefully.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture as described according to the possible method, so that it is set properly, and then apply a plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if you deem it necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines inwardly towards the parts inside, it causes severe pain and puncture-like sensations, just as occurs in one who weeps profusely, and because of this the bone places a covering; and there is difficulty in swallowing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients were skilled in that concerning living things.
And what they say is that you should avoid foods that cause severe inflammation and gas, so that the belly does not become swollen and distended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
But we should be cautious with this to ensure it does not become a light cause for generating an abscess, if it does not already happen; and if it does happen, then help is needed for that.
And some of them say that it should be stopped above the gas and then sucked out with force; and this reasoning is similar, but it is feared that the gas might draw the excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs so that it is filled evenly, making the bandage equal as you wrap it according to its roundness; then treat the pain as one would for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly constrained by the pain which they cannot bear, and the bone pushes against the dressing with a puncture point, we fear for the patient, at that time it is necessary to cut above the area, uncover the broken part, and immediately cease using any instrument that may damage the joint, the memory of which precedes, and that we should easily divide the bone and extract it.
And immediately adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should incise it and apply powder in warm oil on the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
And let them be reclined on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly in their healing, as well as in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider this: if you see their limbs already softened, numb, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those limbs, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no pain in them, then you know that they are not recovering, and in such conditions it is mortal.
And if they move those limbs and feel constriction when pressed and pierced with a needle, then you know that the bone is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then look at its condition.
Now if you see that the patient is already softened, and it happens in this way as it often does with many others, and soon after lying on their back they vomit involuntarily and have diarrhea, and sometimes when they try to lie on their back they want to urinate but cannot, then you will know that it is mortal, and at that point you should not labor further in its cure.
But if none of those causes occur, then the cause is better and more distant.
And the treatment for them is to apply poultices to reduce the abscess until you place on the affected vertebra olive oil that has been rubbed or boiled; apply this several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
And now apply one of the comforting and supportive plasters, and wrap it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm and not to lie on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that the bone is disjointed or for some other reason separated from its place, then you should set it in place and replace the bone; and then approximate the two sides of the wound, using stitches if necessary; and afterwards treat it with one of the healing ointments until it is healed.
But if the bone is fractured at its end and it is the tip of the bone, then you should insert your fingers into the buttocks, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible using the second-degree reduction method; and afterwards apply a plaster and splint to it if needed, and wrap it securely.
And if you find broken bones in there, then immediately set them, and treat the wound with the treatment that is mentioned beforehand until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad area/wound.
The bones of the broad areas are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is only communicated at the extremities of those bones and they split along their length and incline to the sides; and pain and numbness occur in the location, and movement is impaired when there is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand on it until it is set in the figure as it was before the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it only, then you should align it as seems appropriate to you by equalization until it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that has inclined to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their back until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane next to it, and bind it tightly with bandages so that there is no risk of puncture at the fracture site or displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity with what fills it until it conforms to the straightness equally, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If an inflamed abscess occurs after cauterization, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the cauterized abscess is calmed, and pause on what precedes that; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as necessary.
And if you encounter them in the bone or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist.
The adjutorius is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
And let them be attached at both ends with two bandages, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
And let the patient lie on a mattress; and then place the injured arm on the splint until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend something heavy on that, or allow it to extend downward; and then the physician should ensure that the fracture is kept as close together as possible, so that the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is that the patient lies supine on their neck and suspends the arm at the neck with bandages; then command two assistants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture as tightly as possible, and the other holds what is below it; each should pull in their own direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap one bandage around the fracture and another bandage over that, and each of the two assistants should pull on either end.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the bandage over the splint and the other half below the fracture, pulling it tight.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the bandage over that area and around the joint.
And wrap it in the same manner with ease and effort, and as soon as it is wrapped as needed and properly applied, then tighten it if no swelling occurs.
But if swelling occurs, then loosen the bandage within seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose water until the swelling subsides, and then tighten it.
And the method of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth bandage around the plaster; and then adjust the arm with the aid of an assistant, and have the hand resting on the side of the body.
And wrap the cloth and tighten it around the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause related to the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture the splint that is widest and strongest of the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and make the length of the splints according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And place around the bones the bandage with the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the place of the fracture be tighter there. And the farther apart the fracture is, the narrower should the bandage be.
And thus when you place the bones and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the bandage and the bones as they are until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the bandaging in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs in the place properly; or if food cannot reach the limb due to excess constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or longer.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms be placed across their stomach.
And place a poultice filled with evenly spread wool, and at all times of the night or day ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandaging has become loose; therefore, correct this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at first until bandaging begins; and then gradually increase the nutrition of their diet.
Thus it is customary for the dressing and changing of it to be done every forty days; and at those times it should be loosened, bath given, and treated with medicines that correct it.
And if the fracture is comminuted, then you should not loosen it for either one day or even two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is that which lies under the little finger, and the other is larger and is placed below the smaller one, towards the thumb.
And if it is the case that only the larger ulna or the smaller one is broken, or both are broken together.
And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the ulna is broken below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ulna above, then it is appropriate for the physician, during its restoration, to allow a slight extension with ease until it is set.
But if the larger ulna is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow more vigorous extension.
And if both bone fragments are being cut, now it is necessary for you to apply the saw much more forcefully.
And it is necessary to position the hand in such a way that during the restoration and extension of the limb laid out on a board, the wrist should be at the top part, with all other fingers placed as they naturally would be, except for the little finger which should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie flat on their back.
And let there be a board in front of the patient at an appropriate height or level, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And let one attendant extend the arm from below toward the patient's hand or limb, while another attendant extends it similarly from above.
And let the physician then place the bone back into position as correctly as possible according to its proper alignment.
And if you encounter difficulty in setting the bone, now you must reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a complication separate from the difficulty that prevents the joint from being set and is not within your hope for restoration, now you should act upon it and remove it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to an injury, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to this, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration process, now you should line a cloth with cerote made from rosin oil and white wax, which should be midway between thickness and subtlety, and apply this gently over the area where the abscess is present; then remove the cerote and apply a plaster prepared from powdered flowers mixed with egg whites, and subsequently place strips; let the strip that is placed over the fracture be further out and stronger.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or that is, the fracture in one focus or in two focuses always.
And appropriately pause your traction on the site of the fracture forcefully and vehemently, and when you proceed with the traction above the fracture or below it, pause the traction a little more gently according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging after some days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as inflammation that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then resume the traction.
And if the traction has already been relaxed and the bone is already aligned as it should be, then correct all of that with your skill.
And consider whether nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive traction, for then you should relax that a little and let it be for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
And if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And so the hand of the patient is suspended by its upper part for active movement, and make the patient lie on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or it is lightly restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the said bones.
Know that for the thumb of the hand and for the joints of the said bones, when they are fractured, they heal in about two months.
And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and then place the hand upon that extended.
And then the attendant should extend the broken bones and the physician should adjust them so that they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply plaster and cotton, unless an abscess requires cauterization; then place a pad above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm, then make it appear as a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then wrap it tightly with cloth.
And the pad should be made of soft cloth on which is placed something raised, so that it fits against the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is in the bones of the forearm, place one splint on top and another under the part below in the palm, so that the hand may be opened and straightened; and then apply the bandages as if the hand were revolved at the wrist between the said splints.
And if it happens that there is a fracture in one of the bones mentioned, then if the finger is broken, bind it symmetrically as needed and then secure it to the palm; and if you wish, use a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not compressed.
If the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then bind it and attach it to the healthy adjacent finger; or secure all of them together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and also the position of abscesses that require cauterization and opposition—during your operation—as what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as it is repeatedly described.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the collarbone.
The collarbone, which is often fractured, is made evident by touch according to how it has shifted in the part in front and above.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is wrapped above the fracture and another below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
And so the surgeon should extend the bandage for its application according to the nature of the fracture when it is in the middle part of the bone.
And if it is closer to the waist, then the bandage should be applied from the hand to the upper part of the thigh, so that its extension ends there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the hand, then the bandage should be applied from the hand, and its extension should reach the parts below.
And so the surgeon should equalize the bone on both sides but within limits that reduce it according to its natural appearance, and the bone is joined by proper conjunction; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has subsided, and afterward return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: you need to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and press out the excess; then wrap the thigh up to the waist.
And insert a long piece of cloth between the waist and the thigh near the hand at the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth reach the most prominent part of both sides, and then roll over the thigh and waist any excess of the bandage.
And then apply strips of cloth over the waist at the location of the fracture, and place one of those strips over the bone of the thigh.
And fill the empty space between the hip bone and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be coagulated.
And then begin the binding tightly from the middle at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you distance yourself from the ligature site of the fracture, your binding should be looser, lighter, and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage down to the lower parts until it reaches the nail of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage is not displaced from its place.
And then place the binding over it in such a way that corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions do not occur on the limb; and if any cause of those should arise, immediately undo it and correct what has occurred as soon as possible, as we have said before.
But if in the bone there is a piece of bone that needs to be placed, you should then set it as best as possible; and if not, bandage over it and move it, and treat with whatever preceded the injury until it is healed.
And in some cases, this thigh fracture is tightened with splints as we have said regarding the assistant and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb done in such a manner, no lameness should occur to the patient; and if it is restored alone or with the application of the other hip, then it is necessary that the person will be lame permanently.
And know that the wound heals in forty days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of humors and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the lower jawbone.
Know that a fracture of the lower jawbone often occurs, but it rarely happens in the front part.
But if such a fracture does occur, it is usually just a crack or bruise in its parts, and this affects either one or several areas, and all of this depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that what is broken in its parts is aligned and joined as much as possible by means of adjustment, ease, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it over the round bandage if needed; let it heal above the structure as is appropriate.
And then consider all the conditions we have recommended for other fractures, just as in cases of abscesses and similar issues, adopt measures to prevent any accidents that might hinder healing until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture of the chest.
Know that in the chest there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the rib; the other is slender and is called the costal cartilage.
And it happens with some of the types of fracture that happen to both bones of the arm, and by this restoration is made just as restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if you break both bones together, the curvature is distributed to all parts.
And if the more delicate bone is broken, the curvature is converted to the forward parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it affects that below, and it is of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension and alignment and binding of the fragments according to that manner.
However, it is necessary if the fracture of the curvature is jagged with multiple fragments, that the extension be gentle and slower, and proceed with caution.
And in the curvature there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you align the fragments and complete the entire procedure; at that time, you will take pieces of wood from a tree that is straight below its causes which are straightened by nature, and made similarly from palm branches; attach those to the ones with slight curvature, and not too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the curvature, and leave an entrance end towards the most distal.
And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one at the side of the curvature on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let their ends enter at the lowest location of the body.
Between the two bones at three points of their extremities and in the middle point, because in this structure tilting to the right or left is prohibited, and it stands in a good position.
And now a piece of wood has been administered according to the length of the bone; and it is placed under the bone so that it maintains its ability to move.
And especially it is necessary that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly a case of such an injury.
And each day consider the bone and study it carefully based on previous studies, and you must guard it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then act accordingly until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the shinbone and of the bones of the foot and of the ones mentioned.
A complete fracture does not commonly occur in the shinbone; but fractures do occasionally happen to the bones of the foot; and very few fractures occur to those of the foot, and they rarely result in injury unless there is a predisposition for it.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and these bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground as described.
And then place one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then step on them, press, and bandage them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and place it above, and below the arch of the foot, place a small board with two flat ends.
And approach with care that part of the body which is to be treated, since you have wrapped that area in cloths and other materials for the purposes required.
And after three or four days have passed, you then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones either aligned, or broken or dislocated, and the procedure in these cases is as you know.
But if anyone says that they are broken, then you should restore them and align them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the bones of the hand. And approach the broken finger with a board according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly longer; then place this board under the part as I have recommended, and secure it properly.
But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then you should place a splint of appropriate length wrapped in linen on each finger, and secure the board below the base of the part, with one end of the board resting against the body so that it maintains good stability.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any eventuality with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the pubic bone in women and of the bone of the penis and the prepuce in men.
When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then perform a surgical incision if necessary, and then slightly separate the two parts, with one side held back.
Let the midwife fill the container with cotton, and let it be made in the container as described; then let the woman be shaken, and raise the buttocks of the child little by little, for all this is intended to expel what remains inside until it is before the opening of the vagina as described and the fractured bone returns.
Then place poultices on the back of it, and when he wants to urinate, move the cotton aside to facilitate it, and then let him urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to his first poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for he will be restored then.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie one end of a reed to its neck; then insert the entire bladder into his rectum, and then blow air through the reed vigorously until the bladder is inflated inside the rectum, for the fracture will return.
And then fill it with cotton and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pubis in a man or woman is fractured, then administer what we have recommended for the hip bone in its restoration and alignment.
And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has studied and practiced this and understands my book well; for such a fracture signifies to you in the major positions the right way in the restoration and in the constriction of it, and thus you understand well.
Take linen bandages when the penis is grasped, and place the penis in them; then press on its covering of cloth, and it should be wrapped up, and afterwards left for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when inflammation occurs.
It is convenient for the one to whom it happens that a fracture occurs with inflammation, especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the humerus, or similar to them, that you should cauterize and blood-let him immediately if the conditions for blood-letting are indicated for him as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you should proceed with restraint in that case, such as powdering it with finely ground substances, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess happens, then you should postpone the restoration until the ninth day, waiting for the abscess to subside, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause further harm.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and equalize it with your hands as easily and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared and the reduction of it with your hands, then you should reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the quantity of the inflammation; and for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these instruments in various sizes suitable for treating all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round, and let there be little grooves for so that it not be doubled over; place the compression upon it during the operation.
And let it have a sharp point at which there is a margin in its extreme parts; and let the upper part be thickening, and from the middle inward to the partitions.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum volans atelarem," which means a small palette.
So that the end of it may be raised up above the end of the prominent bone.
And press it into one notch between so that the bone returns to its place, and let it be equalized with some adjustment.
And thus strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken part is fine and does not take the instrument well by proper means, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument may have purchase on it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains on the bone of roughness and small irregularities.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will be of great benefit to the patient.
When you have completed the repair of the bone that you are performing, and now is summer, dip a cloth in black styptic vinegar, and do not apply cerate or any other substance containing oil to the wound, so that no corruption or putrefaction occurs there.
And immediately after you administer plates at the time of your completion of the bone repair, leave the wound uncovered so that you can excise any thrombus with forceps and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to allow the wound to become infected with the fracture, for many times this has happened due to the negligence of physicians, causing death or chronic illness in their patients, which is an injury. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear some of the harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not necessary to use plates; instead, make an envelop with thick cloths rather than plates and secure it there.
And after one day or two, when the wound begins to generate granulation tissue, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar, and immediately apply medications, such as those we customarily use for wounds, including tetramericon and similar remedies.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and it should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can drain downward with ease.
If several days pass after the inflammation and it does not consolidate nor is a flap made of it from which to cut away the swelling, then you should know that here you are dealing with small veins, because you can probe into the inflammation. And of those small veins, those that are separate and can be extracted, you should remove them. For those that cannot be separated and cause pain when the limb is moved, try to incise them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if the inflammation becomes infected or ulcerated, which is a sign of serious corruption and putrefaction, then you should proceed according to one of those methods that are suitable for treating this condition, as previously described in its chapter.
And concerning the matter on which my speech rests and you should bring your attention: when a large bone is broken, it protrudes like the bones of the wrist and fingers and resembles those in larger limbs, and do not assume traction or extraction of it because doing so might lead to death after forty days; instead, leave it inside as it will likely fall out on its own within about twenty to thirty days. And then treat the inflammation if you see fit, otherwise leave it be.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knots that occur as a result of some fracture.
This knot often occurs as a result of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is characterized by a deformation in the shape of the limb; it significantly hinders the normal function of the limb.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines that have styptic properties such as aloes, myrrh, mirra (which may refer to myrrh or another resin), serpago (a medicinal herb), acrassia (likely a compound of vinegar and honey), and similar substances; take some or all of these. Confirm with one stiptic or white of egg or something agreeable, and apply this over the swelling in lint, and bind it firmly on it.
And let there be an uninterrupted compression so that you do not loosen it for several days; then untie it and reapply it until the swelling is reduced; or bind a lead plate over it gradually, since lead has the property of reducing everything that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already become hardened and is causing pain, and there is a necessity to remove it urgently, then cut into it at its highest point of pus, and incise the excess that is prominent, or reduce it with some instruments until it is reduced; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently not contrary to its natural motion.
When a bone fracture is set and subsequently the limb is moved gently, this is done for various reasons: among which one reason is too much dissolution of the bandages and tying them not as needed; or excessive compression of the bandages preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or excessive application of poultices; or improper movement at an inappropriate time; or lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
For treatment, give food to the patient and make his heart tender so that blood may be multiplied in him; administer baths; and apply cautery and ladanum on him.
And apply plasters to the limb so that the plaster attracts nutrition to it, or continue rubbing with rose water, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed crookedly and prohibit the operation on them as it is not advisable.
When it happens to the limb that has already been restored near its healing from crookedness and prominence of the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to a change in the shape of the limb, but since the limb is not prohibited from its natural movement, then there is no need for you to accept the word of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
But there are already many false physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a shameful one, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be rubbed with rose water in which soft herbs are soaked, such as mallow leaves and bark of elm, and melilot, and similar to these; and a plaster should be applied that is a softening plaster, well-made like dyallachion; or take mucilage of elm bark and mix it with barley flour or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and grind them with dove’s milk, and similar preparations of medicines for strengthening consolidation.
And in some cases it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction which is applied to the most humid parts and movement of the member is administered to all parts at all times.
If tortuosity has already advanced and it has been made strong and converted into stone and provoked the necessity for treatment with iron, then one must ensure that the pus above is discharged and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let it be cut away what superfluous knots of that matter adhere to the bone with subtle instruments, and let ease be administered in this while solicitude and study are applied.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, by which movement is prohibited, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing great pain and severe injuries.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act immediately to reduce it and not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hardening occurs, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or keep the patient standing during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasms and severe pain.
However, when this happens, it is necessary to prepare for the incision of the affected area, and then allow time for the inflammation to subside; afterwards, the limb should be bathed in warm water and oil, and then reduction should be attempted with ease.
And all members should be treated with what will aid their proper restoration to their place.
Here are the bones set in order according to what was stated about fractures; now I enter the part concerning lesser wounds.
Chapter XXIIIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both mandibles are dislocated and cannot be corrected immediately; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their proper positions through slight manipulation, and somewhat softened; or they are completely and fully dislocated such that they become softened at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth, and the person cannot close their mouth or hold anything with it, and the tongue is wrapped within the mouth.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and full, it must be reduced promptly without delay.
And it is that the assistant hold the head of the patient, and the physician insert one thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers rest equally outside; and instructs the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move apart from each side; and the physician guides the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply warm water and oil compresses until a gentle reduction can be made for both without delay, as we have said.
And so when returning to the bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed and not softened, then pause on those powders of cloth with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rose oil; and afterwards let it be applied with ease by the soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be placed between his two ears, so that he does not turn to either the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; let his food be pureed until such time as when the pains have subsided and his jaws are no longer swollen, then allow him to eat what he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and he should not work against the opening of his mouth for eating and drinking and speaking, until such time as the jaw is healed and restored.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places is difficult, then fevers often occur and frequent sweats, and very easily the patient's belly becomes swollen, and very easily he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and very often he who suffers from this dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Clavicle and the Extremity of the Muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest below by its continuation to the arms; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this can be felt.
And for the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply the plaster and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which joins the spine and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to how you have prepared it.
And then apply the plaster, powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and moves outward at the lower parts below the joint, and more frequently in those whose flesh is thin; whereas in those with thick flesh, it remains outside with difficulty.
If it happens that a blow or fall befalls any person, and the muscle of the limb becomes inflamed with inflammation, and is damaged because it has already been dislocated.
Then proceed with what you know while being very careful with it, and now proceed to its treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation of it occurs at the lower parts behind the nodule; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as you notice a clear difference between them; and you see in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the nodule you feel the head of the muscle like a chicken's beak, and the injured person cannot move their hand to their ear or use it for any movement.
If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you will notice a clear and obvious touch, and it is not concealed.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the arm above the shoulder; then he places his fingers behind the nodule and elevates the joint with strength to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the arm, and extends it out straight; and then he keeps it still until it returns easily.
But if it does not return as we have said, and even after the initial days following the dislocation, then it is necessary to bathe the injured person in warm water and apply a poultice to soften and relax it as if for rheumatism, using ingredients such as rue seeds, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administer it.
Let the patient lie supine on their back and place beneath them a cushion of wool which is even between softness and firmness. Then let the surgeon place his hand under the patient’s head, raising it to an upright position, and hold the patient's arm so that it is not injured behind, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved, for it immediately returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side where the affected limb lies. Insert your hand beneath the patient's thigh and raise the thigh upwards so that the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant should hold the patient’s arm from behind their abdomen. But if the patient is robust, then it is necessary to cause them to be suspended by another means, so that they can bear it, because the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced in another way: drive a long post into the ground with its top rounded like a millstone, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the patient; then lay strong cloths over the round part of the post. The patient stands along the length of the post, and extends one hand behind to support themselves; and stretch out the body on the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a post that is two ells in length, four fingers in width, and its thickness should be tapered at the point like this:
And over the round head place linen cloths so that the wood does not injure the patient.
And let the patient's neck be supported by pillows, and let the arm or the hand be extended along the board below, and let the board be wrapped around the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And let the arm be supported on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and let the hand be extended below, and the other side be suspended from the other side, for the joint is within reach shortly.
And when the instrument is completed as is possible for you according to each manner, now it is necessary that you place below the neck a pad of woolen cloth of equal thickness; and then place plaster prepared with powder of moly and egg white over all the muscle, as has been described above, and then bind below the neck in an appropriate manner; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and it should be left like this, and do not move the patient's hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient's food be light until the limb is strengthened, for it is more conducive to their recovery.
And then food should be given more after seven or five days and one movement should be exercised; and when it is firm and not lax, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three tractions as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if it is done as described and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and strapping are reduced several times, and it cannot be raised and the arm cannot move upwards, then you know that the nerves which run to the end of the muscle have been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be set in its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the buttocks or the parts behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension mostly, until it returns.
And let the other strapping be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness and slowness in the movement occur near recovery, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly forward or backward. The dislocation does not hide from you whether it is caused by a fall or some other contact depending on its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated neck with your hand, this is clearly shown to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes an abscessed condition, for if it reaches the abscessed state, reducing it will be difficult, and even with much effort it may not heal completely. This is especially true when it involves the parts behind, because this type of dislocation is worse than all others in terms of severity and pain, and many times it leads to death.
And the restoration of it is such that if it can be reduced, then the hand should be extended on both sides and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be above the shoulder and below it, and he should press the joint with his fingers together, or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thusly that he bends the hand with his hand, until he strikes the shoulder with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it in such a way that it is not retracted due to the extension.
And then the arm should be rotated in all directions, as it is wrapped with folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this aids in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then press the joint with vigorous pressure until it returns.
And then the reduction should be followed by resting on a bandage that is firm and supportive over white cloth, and he should be wrapped with tight bandaging, and the arm suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint should not be stitched together, then now apply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; and afterwards loosen it.
And if it happens that there is great pain around the joint reduction and the disposition of the limb is in motion, then administer moistening through bathing and subtle friction, and compression until it is calmed; or place upon the joint something cold, which is an antidote to violent movement; and afterwards bind it, and leave it like that on the bone day and night. And afterwards remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it is soaked, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and afterwards apply something cold to it, which is an antidote to movement, once, and the second time, and the third time, in a bathing instrument until it is soothed.
And if you wish, place upon it a warm and moist cow's hide piece at the edge and stitch it; and do this several times, for it is moist and reduces to its proper disposition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is the joint between the arm and the hand. Note that there seems to be a slight inaccuracy in describing the joint as "between the arm and the hand," typically it refers to the elbow joint between the upper arm and the forearm. However, I have translated according to the provided text.
When the hand is dislocated in some cases, the reduction of the dislocation is easy, and the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the hour when it was dislocated, before swelling occurs or a harmful condition arises.
And the reduction of the dislocation of the hand is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extend the patient’s hand, and the surgeon places his hand or his palm upon the vicinity of the joint, and push it in until it returns to its place.
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already displaced toward the back of the hand; then the patient places the back of his hand on a table during the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be entirely on the table so that the surgeon’s hand can lie upon its vicinity.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; and if not, then bind it firmly while the swelling subsides and leave it as such; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, it will not endure nor can you proceed with the reduction of the swelling beyond these days.
However, the joint remains stiff according to its tortuosity; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but say that the hand is relaxed and cannot be bound for any reason; then you will know that the nerves are injured or severed, and at this time there is no remedy except to bind it with cauterization near the injury and strengthen it by applying some substance.
And so when it has been returned, then place on it the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left bound for five days; and afterward let it be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
However, if the movement of it is restricted and you encounter any gravity in it, then moisten that with warm water and apply friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joints.
In some cases, the said joints may be dislocated completely.
And when any of them is dislocated towards the back of the palm or towards the belly side, then hold the finger still and gently push it back into place with your fingers until it returns.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend that part and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap that part according to the narration, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated towards the palm side, and wrap it according to that method and perform the first operation in this way until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated to other parts as well.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
When one of the vertebrae in the back or neck is completely dislocated and the bones move from their positions, then there is no cure for this, as death is feared for the patient.
This is the sign that the patient voids without control and cannot retain it; often two or three fingers can soften certain parts of him or both sides of him or both arms of him, or one of these; or his vertebrae are displaced, because some are displaced and some are moved away from their place in four directions.
Thus it is displaced to the rear parts and is called herniation.
But the treatment for him is to consider whether the herniation occurs during childbirth, because then there is no cure and he will not be healed from that.
But in the case where it happens due to a fall or a blow or something similar to these, the Ancients have described the methods of treatment at great length, from which I will return only what is essential; but I have abridged that which is lengthy on account of my closeness to understanding and exposition, with which I have explained and formulated this from various instruments different from those by which I would show this and expand upon that.
And none of those is cured except the one that occurs properly as I have mentioned.
And it is that the patient lies on his back near a wall, extended below with a soft cushion so that his feet are not strained.
And nearby a straight pole should be placed, planted in the ground at one end near his head, and another pole around his feet at the other end of the cushion.
The minister holds the staff, and let it not be fixed in a hole; another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap a bandage over the patient’s head and let it gently press against it; extend the end of the bandage to the staff that supports the head and tie it there; then place another bandage across the patient's hips, covering their buttocks; and finally adjust all the bandages and secure them to the other staff that supports the feet.
And the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the staff; however, do not move the two staffs and their respective bandages from their places once they are positioned, as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns to its proper position, or he can place the patient on a table and then adjust the patient’s feet until they return to their proper position.
But if it does not return to its proper position by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where part of the table can fit. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and have the physician stand on one end of the table while the patient's feet are positioned on the other end, and pull gently until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, open the part that is twisted with your hand; and place yourself on the ground behind the head of the patient between the ends of two staffs, each one arm’s length, and behind the head of the patient another two staffs in the same manner. The distance between each staff should be a palm, and there should be a hole bored through each staff where it is twisted, and each should be securely fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
Let a round rod be inserted into the tube, and let it be rotated in the two grooves of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the rod is formed, the length of which is one palm and a bit that is rotated; and in the two other rods there is something similar to that.
And bind tightly the bandages that you have stretched on the feet of the patient in the groove which is behind it, and the bandages that you have stretched on the thighs of the patient in the ring which is behind the heels.
And behind each ring should be a minister who turns the ring with his hand, and the surgeon likewise moves the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned and the place is adjusted, it is now necessary to apply an astringent paste mixed with egg white, and then cotton; and on top of the paste, place strips of oak bark whose width is three fingers or around that size, and the length should cover the area of the inflammation, and extend over the part of the spine.
And then bind it with the bandages as we have said, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, it is now necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, as recommended for long-term use on the affected area; and a piece of lead may also be applied to that location.
And in some cases it happens that there is an impingement on the vertebrae of the back, and this is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already protrudes should not be treated with this medicine, for it would easily cause your death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment suffer only from dislocation, and do not experience what other joints with small movement and concavity might endure.
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that when you measure the leg of the affected side against the sound side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than on the sound side, and the patient cannot bend their thigh past a certain point, as if there were an abscess in the area where cautery would be applied for such conditions, because the head of the bone has already reached this location.
And the sign of one who has suffered dislocation towards the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to those mentioned above.
And the sign of one who has suffered dislocation towards the front is that when they try to straighten their leg properly, they cannot bend it without pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained, and their groin becomes swollen with an abscess, and they must walk on their toes.
The sign of the one to whom a dislocation has occurred in the posterior parts is that he does not expand the joint, nor can he bend it before bending the elbow, and the curve of it is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the end of the bone is out of place.
The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already been accustomed to being there. You then administer reduction and maintain it according to its position; however, at that point, it is not entirely cured, and therefore it should not be expected to be fully restored.
In the case of one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you should attempt to return the joint by extending it inward and outward, moving it from side to side, for it easily returns without needing further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong assistant and extend the curve of the joint from behind, either by hand or with bandages placed over the joint above the elbow. Another assistant should extend the arm so that their hands are on the sides of the joint. Then, tighten the bandage tightly over the limb, and have another person hold the end of the bandage.
And this extension should be from the joint or the inner part to the angle near the collarbone, or from the rear part to the side part.
And this extension should be done in one motion while the patient is raised off the ground and kept hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, it is now necessary for every kind what I will say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on their back; then place the bandages over the ridge of the breastbone at the point where the head of the collarbone and the part below the clavicle meet; then extend the bandage from under the armpit to the farthest part of the shoulder blade.
And then another strong minister should take hold of the arms, and firmly grasp the swollen area of the dislocated collarbone and extend it outward forcefully, for that will return to its proper place.
And this kind is easier to cure than the others when this member is reduced.
But if it is excused on you and you do not obey the regimen for this kind of treatment completely, then it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient tightly with a strong, lightweight bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each be four fingers, and let the injured limb be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended at the top of the post and held by the hand; and let the distance of the patient from the ground be two arms' lengths.
Here is the translation:
In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation to the outer part, have the patient lie on their back as we have recommended in the yellow book; and tightly bind the limb affected by the injury and its foot.
And place two boards, one under the feet and the other under the head; and place adjusted boards on both sides of the thigh placed upon it, wrapped in damp cloths, so that the patient is not damaged by the board being between their parts, so that the extension to the lower parts is not pulled.
And each assistant extends to their part, and the surgeon with his hand performs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the limb be extended quickly, and this method of narration applies while lying on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, and with that compression uses the other hand to extend it to the lower parts toward the side.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it does not require that the patient be extended to the lower parts, and they are elevated from the ground; instead, they should be placed on a hard surface, as required in the same manner if the hip is dislocated to the outer part, according to what we have said about positioning the patient between two boards; and it is on their face with the limbs extended, as we have said, without harm.
And let there be applied compression with a bandage over the place where you are joining.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of proper reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's limb and when you see them equal and the affected part extends its normal position and expands for its excuse, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and then you adjust two things and pause with bandaging so that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the plaster to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare one limb with the other.
Now, if you see them equal in appearance, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and bandage that area, and extend it as in your initial structure, and let it rest for three days.
And then loosen that area, and have the patient delay in walking on it for several days until it is strengthened.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
The knee can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the lower parts or behind; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
The sign of a dislocation is that you order the patient to apply pressure with their hand on the joint; at this time, you know that the bone is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is that you make the patient lie straight, so that they extend their hand; adhere your chest to the side of them, and place your feet between their legs; then immediately adhere the bone with your palms, and hold those between your fingers around the bone firmly, and another assistant extends their foot within so that the bone returns to its place.
The sign of reduction of the dislocation is that the patient's hand adheres to the joint without laborious effort.
And then apply a plaster to that and make the hand adhere to the joint, and immediately bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
And the patient should not use movement for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it is unnecessary for you, now administer extensive treatment with bandages as described in the preceding narration about the cure of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh sometimes is moved by slight displacement, and sometimes is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment for the removal of what is superficial should be easy and gentle, and it should be gradual so that it returns easily.
In the treatment when it is dislocated for a second time, you must make the patient lie straight, and have someone strong and capable stand behind him at the midpoint of his body.
And place your right hand on the most superior part of the foot, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two attempts, and then extend it with your left; and press the foot’s sole with your right hand gently while working.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then press the foot’s sole gently with your hand for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Therefore, if it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if the foot is placed gently, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a padded roller firmly on the ground, which fits between the affected parts, and you should wrap the area with cloth so that the patient does not feel discomfort.
And then have one assistant hold the patient's limbs, and another assistant extend the foot with their hands or with straps placed around the neck of the foot; and then each assistant should stretch it according to their position, and the roller should be extended between the patient’s parts, holding them in place so that the body does not pull back downward during the extension.
And so the surgeon holds the displaced bone with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy bone in position below, for the displacement returns easily.
And so when the displacement returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, pause and apply a plaster and bind it tightly with strong bandages, and tie the limb to the bed.
And be careful to avoid the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
And leave that for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, bind it again.
And then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, without ensuring that the displacement has not dissolved and become corrupted, then it will receive no cure.
And if an abscess requires cauterization, then you should proceed according to the instructions in our narration on that subject, in another section concerning treatment and application, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
And let the one who is dislocated be handled with some extension without labor; and what is not difficult is rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of both feet, then you should have the patient lie down with his foot on a padded surface on the ground or on a table, and be positioned as if standing.
Here you should stand at a distance, and pause the hand on what is above the joints, and then press that part with the hand vertically until it returns, so that you see the swelling equalized and not appear in one prominent location.
Then pause and place the foot on a table that holds the entire leg, which has two ends, and then press that part with proper tension and firmness for three days; then loosen it and allow rest from walking for ten days, until it is pressed and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with injury or fracture or any combination thereof.
When some cause of those occurs, and you commit to the treatment of it and the restoration of the limb, often such cases lead to death.
And because of this, one should not presume to treat it themselves but rather seek someone who is wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, cautious, not rash nor presumptuous; and use at the beginning medicines that reduce boils slightly, and leave the patient to divine judgment, except for one to whom you hope for salvation from peril, or relief from illness, where there appears some hope. And then strive to immediately perform the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes severely inflamed.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, administer a regimen that reduces severe inflammation and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among the dry remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones that are separated, then you perforate their membranes, and do what we have said about the simple diseases concerning what precedes in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that which involves the instruments in the ways of fear as has been preceded in my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more salutary for your true body, which will be perceived in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them. Amen.
