After having completed the book for you, my son, which is the last in medical science with its appendix, and after reaching the end of it through its expositions and statements, I wished to complete it by adding this Treatise on Surgery, that is, surgery performed with one's hands.
Since surgery performed with the hands is despised in our region and at this time, since perhaps its science has perished entirely and its trace has been cut off; no remnants of it remain except for small descriptions found in the books of ancient authors, which have been transmitted through human writings: it happened to them error and hesitation until their intentions were closed and extended the nature itself. I wished to revive it with this Treatatur's arrangement according to its positions, statements, and abbreviations; and to come in forms of tools for Cautery and other instruments used in work operations through additions from declarations and necessary explanations.
The reason why a good craftsman is not found with his hands in this our time is: because the art of medicine is long and its author should be trained before that in the science of anatomy, as Galen wrote, until he knows the joints of limbs and their forms, and their connection and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their exits, and pulse flows and resting places.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that a name with its name is much, and little with work, especially in the art of hands.
However, we have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have spoken of in anatomy cannot be discharged except that they already fall into error, where men perish: as I have seen many from these formed by this science, and boast themselves of it without knowing or experience.
What I saw was a foolish doctor having treated an abscess of the groin in a woman's neck and accidentally hitting some vessels there; therefore the blood of the woman flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract the stone from an old man's testicles and the stone was large. Therefore he approached him, and removed his scrotal sac along with the stones. Why was the man dead on the third day.
And indeed I had been called to remove it: and I saw from the size of the stone, and its condition, that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from someone of our lands because of the medicine: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he had a fracture in his thigh near the heel; and the doctor acted out of ignorance, and strained the fracture over the wound with dirt and rusty nails, and did not allow the injury to breathe.
Then he released him according to his own desire. Later he sent him away after several days, and instructed him not to dissolve the bandage: and stood thus until an abscess was on his leg, and his foot itself, and it came to ruin.
I was called therefore for him: and I approached to dissolve the bandage: and calmness was achieved, and he was relieved from his pains.
But indeed the decay had already been confirmed in that limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore the decay ceased to walk through the limb until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess: and it was ulcerated after days, until his malice with the master himself became great.
That is, when there is a pure carcinoma from black bile humor, then it is not necessary for the iron to approach it at all unless it is on a part that can be excised entirely.
And for this reason O my son, it is necessary that you know that surgery is divided into two divisions by hand: namely, the surgery associated with health; and the surgprise, when there are dangers from many complications.
And I have already stirred up everywhere in this book where surgery comes with fear and anxiety.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of that, and diminish it: so that the foolish may not find a way to speak and dishonor.
Therefore, receive the measure with caution and protection, and treat the sick with ease and firmness, and make use of a better way leading to health and blessed succession: and dismiss grievous illnesses difficult to cure: and lift your spirits from what makes you fearful, so that hesitation may come over you in your faith and convenience.
For it remains more on glory to you, and loftier in this world, and finally towards your measures.
For already Galen has said in some of his exhortations. You do not heal the evil illnesses: I will not call you a physician of evils.
Now, however, this Treateby is divided into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
The Chapter of Incision with Fire and Acute Medicine, structured from head to feet, and forms of instruments, and tools of the Cauterization: and everything that is necessary for surgery.
Chapter Two.
The Chapter of Sectioning and Piercing, Phlebotomy and Wind-Sucking, Wounds: and the Extraction of Arrows, and similar things: and the entire Chapter structured from forms of instruments.
Chapter amoeba.
Of restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of torsions, and suchlike; the chapter, ordered from head to feet, and forms of instruments.
But before recalling the procedure with it, let me say about its nature of burning and harm, and which condition it is to be shown.
Therefore I say that the discourse about the nature of burning and harm from cautery is a lengthy, subtle speech, science, and hidden secret.
Also discussed by many wise men, they disagreed on this; and I am content with little from their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
Therefore I say that a cautery benefits all conditions generally, whether with material or without it; except for two conditions, warm dryness and dryness without matter.
For the condition of warmth and dryness with matter they disagree. Some have said that a cautery is beneficial for this. And others have argued against it, namely that a cautery is not suitable for the condition of warmth and dryness: since the nature of fire is warmth, and it does not make sense to be healed by warmth and dryness with heat and dryness.
And he who argues against it said: that burning happens with a cautery in all conditions of warmth and dryness which occur in human bodies; because when you compare the body of a man, and its humors, to the condition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And indeed I say through his speech: for he has proven to me that many times before.
However, it is not necessary for him to come upon this unless he has already been tested and trained in the last exercise of Chapter on Cautery, and has known the variety of human complexions, the disposition of diseases within themselves, their causes, accidents, and span of time.
However, for other complexions there is no fear over you: especially in cold and moist diseases. For indeed all physicians have agreed on these: and they did not disagree with the use of cautery in them.
And know ye sons, that from the secret treatment by Cautery with fire, and its goodness over Cautery with burning medicine is greater: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member being cauterized: and it does no harm to another connected member with it, save a slight injury.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is extended from the member: and perhaps it causes an illness difficult to heal in the member, and perhaps kills it.
But fire indeed because of its subtlecuity and goodness of substance does not do this except in excess.
But now we have learned this through experiment, for the length of service and study with art, and standing above truths: and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if this were not, for it is not permitted to my book, I would impart to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies expulsion, which drives away diseases demonstrated philosophically with speech that has been awakened by your minds.
And know ye sons, that you are divided among yourselves on the time when it is better to make a cautery.
And I say that the caustic is suitable at all times; because an accidental harm due to time is buried in healing, which is drawn with a caustic. And especially if the caustebe is for pains arising from necessary, strong, urgent pain that does not tolerate delay: because it fears such things, which are greater than a small harm that occurs due to time without intervention.
And do not let it fall into your minds, my son, that they who are narrow-minded and foolish physicians (do not believe), namely those who think that the affliction which is healed by caustic does not always return: and they put forward a consequence, and things do not happen as they think; because caustic is only in the place of medicine, which changes complexion, and brings out humidities (which are causes), so pains occur.
However, caustic surpasses medicine through the swiftness of its health, and the strength of its operation, and the intensity of control: and it is possible that an afflicnity may return at some time according to the complexion of the sick person, and location of their ailment, and their own power; and what is prepared in the body from accumulation of superfluities in it: and what comes to pass through obtaining itself from foods, and similar causes unless an affliction arises where caustic is administered.
A subtle affliction in a limb with few superfluities and humidities, like caustic for the teeth due to pain, and similar things, indeed it is possible that such pain does not return there. But this happens in few cases.
But the speech of the common folk again is correct: not for what they themselves think to be the case therein: since they believe that it is neither a healing that comes with medicine, nor with any other after the setting of caustic.
However, it is the opposite of that, and the purpose, which is that cautery is the last of medicine, is not so much because when we administer methods of healing for a certain illness, they do not contribute to those medicines; then at the end we administer cautery, and it contributes. Therefore, it falls into place that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many-studied physicians understand.
However, the ancients also said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this only because of the equality of the gold, and the sublimity of its substance: but they said that it does not cause pus at the site of cauterization. But that is not absolutely so; for I have already tested this, and found it to be true, that it does not do this in certain bodies without anything else.
And indeed cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they have said. However, when you use the fire of cautery from gold, it is not declared to you how much heat should be used according to its quantity; and when it hastens toward itself coldness, and if you add more ignition over it, it melts into the fire, and turns into plates.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into that occupation because of it; and therefore cautery with iron is quicker and closer to us in its suitability for surgery.
And indeed I have already ordered this Chapter on cautery according to the chapters; and I ordered it from head to feet: so that they might extract what each one wishes from it.
Head II.
This cauterization contributes to the mastery over moisture and coldness on the brain: these two are causes of swellings, and abundance of humors flowing from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and many sleeplebs, and pain in teeth, and throat; and universally all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, swelling, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is as follows: first attend to the sick person so that they may be cleansed with soluble medicine for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the sick individual, their age, and their habits.
Then instruct them to shave their head with a razor. Next, have them sit between your hands in a square position so that they have already placed their hands on their chest.
Then place the base of your hand over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whichever finger then reaches forward on your side, mark that spot with an uncauterized incision.
Then the fire of cautery oil: this is its form.
Then place it on the marked spot with an uncauterized incision, gradually pressing your hands downwards, and then you withdraw it. Then quickly change your hand and look at the place.
If you see that there is already a release of bone from the skull or an amount of zinc, then ease your hand. And if not, repeat with the same iron on your hand or with another one if cools down: until you see the bones that I told you about.
Then take something of salt and dissolve it in water, drink that mixture, place it on the spot, and let it rest for three days.
Then put over the absorbed substance some butter, place that on the spot until the fire scab is destroyed. Then care for that with tetrapack medicament, and he may be cured thereafter.
Now it is said that as long as the wound remains open, it secretes pus: therefore, it heals better and more quickly.
And some of them say that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and keep the cautery until something of the bone's hardness is burned away.
Then a scraper is used after that which was burned in the bone, then it is treated.
And others say that it should be approached with the cautery until it leaves an impression on the bone so deep that the bone falls off, similar to how women use instruments infused in alphabets: and they claim that vapors from this head location are exhaled, and the open wound is abandoned after a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals.
However, I do not recognize these two types of cautery at all except in certain people according to the pathway of fear.
And discard it, for me it is better with its own health.
For the head indeed weakens from its own natural continuity: as we have testified in other parts of the body; and especially when the head is sickly and weak by nature: the first species of cautery, however, is healthier and better with me, and I use it: therefore let's operate with that for health.
The Head III. (This appears to be a
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head: and it is protracted in the sickly, and they use cold applications, warmth, diuretics, oils, and emollients. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the kind of cautery we mentioned, and does not derive any benefit from them: then consider. For if the head is sickly of a strong creative nature and not weak, and it finds an intense coldness: then cauterize with another type of cater under that less so. Then let's cauterize the head over its entire horn with a cautery that does not pass through the skin and reveal from the bone the quantity of which we have spoken. And he cauterizes it with a single caustic instrument at the back of his head, where there is a place called 'vas', and this is also where you should position your wind instruments; then do not open up (the flesh). For he found it because of that intense pain, and different from the pain of all other head caustic treatments.
And I will say this Cauterization in its place: and it must be a caustic instrument with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the occiput is subtly cauterized with a thinner causte.
Head IV. (Note: The specific Roman numeral
When there is pain and swelling on a part of the head, or when the pain extends up to the eye, then evacuate with purifying medicines the head, and administer the remaining treatment that I mentioned in divisions about diseases, and it does not constitute everything: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine: or with iron.
The caustic instrument with a sharp burning medicine is such that you receive one tooth from the other, and peel off its core, and separate its extremities on two sides. (Note: The translation retains technical terms like "cauterium" for cauterizing tool.) Then you cut the place of pain with a broad fleam until it is underneplastron (an ancient term for a protective layer), where bone is gained.
Then introduce him under that protective layer until it is hidden: then tightly bind over the area with a moderate constricting bandage, and let go of the object for fifteen hours; afterwards remove the entire thing, and leave off pus-forming points for two or three days; afterward place butter submerged under a piece of cotton on it until the spot is formed: then care for it with ointment as needed. (Note: Here "cura" refers to treatment, while "unguento" means medicinal salve.)
And if you do this with certain burning medicines, which I wrote in the twelfth treatise about Middle Eastern ones.
However, that cauterization is done with iron, according to this method. The fire of the cauterization, which has this form.
And it is called "Guyss": because the form of its head is like the shape of a nail, in which there is something of hardness and in the middle there is some small prominence.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand steady: and you slowly move the iron just as quickly, and let the amount that is being burned be equal to its thickness, like half of it. And protect your hand so that not the artery below is burncuuled and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak the cauterium in salt water and place it on the spot, then let it rest for three days: afterwards put the cauterium with butter: finally heal with ointment until it is cured.
And if you do, cauterize this hemorrhoid with the second edge of the knife of the cauterization. And keep from cutting into the artery in this hemorrhoid, not old by itself.
About this method of cauterizing an ancient hemorrhoid.
When you cure a hemorrhoid with what we said from the previous treatment and what we said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not bring about healing: and if you see from the disease that it is insufficient with what we said from the first cauterization with medicine or with cauterization with fire, then it should use the fires of the knife of cauterization until it cools down after placing signs on the spot of pain along a line whose length is half (of a finger) or almost that: and place your hand once and hold it steady until you cut into the artery and come up to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to use a chisel in the continuity of the jawbone that moves during chewing, so as not to damage the side or the nerve that moves it, from which a spasm occurs.
And this is about the hernia and precautions regarding the bleeding of the cut artery. However, there is fear during the procedure, especially for those who are unaware of what to do and are not diligent or experienced: and he abandons the surgery firsthand.
And I come with a memory of managing blood flow accidents from the artery according to their method and in its own place in this book.
If you see from the sickness, which is not sufficient for him this caustic, and you see the body suffering from a wound with the caustic in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see, administer the caustic, which we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery with a caustic having two knives. For this caustication is better and more effective.
On the method of applying a caustic for ear pain.
When it happens with ear pain from the cold, and is treated with sudorifics, and the rest of the cure that we have mentioned in diuresis, and the pain does not subside, then a hot caustein which is called Punctum whose form is as follows: (then there would be an illustration or description following to depict 'Punctum').
Then the puncture with its rotation around the ear after it is lit up completely, as if it rotates: or on both sides of the rotation if there is simultaneous pain in both ears. And extend yourself with the caustic from the root of the ear not more than after you have marked spots with the encaustic: and let the quantity of the caustic be ten points for each ear, as before mentioned. (Here 'as before mentioned' seems to refer back to some earlier part of the text where quantities might have been specified.)
Then care for the wounds until they heal.
By means of applying cauterization during torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is treated with casterization is none other than those which occur from inflammation, as we have described in the divisions of illnesses.
And concerning the usual application of cauterization for cases that occur from desiccation and nerve spasm.
When this treatment for such cases of torture with leeches, purgatives, and gargles does not provide your cure, then it is necessary to apply cauterization three times on the sick: one at the root of the ear, a second somewhat lower from its position, and a third at the junction of both lips.
And place your cauterization opposite to the weakened side. For soothing does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to apply it directly on the body with a Cautery at the upper extremity of the ear slightly under the skull cap, and another one near its position; whose length corresponds to the length of the finger. And place your hand with a Cautery, until it burns off half the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of Cautery and it belongs to a kind called "Cultellari," which has been described beforehand: however, it is not as fine as you see, and it should be that the knife used in this case has little excessive thickness.
Then care for the wounds with what preceded it until they heal.
By means of applying cauterization during ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and its treatment with what we have mentioned does not provide your medicine, and the sick person does not have fever, then you should apply four cauterizations over all corners of his skull head, a Cautery in the middle of his head as we said before, and another one at the back of his head according to what preceded it: and the mode of cauterization shall be according to what proceeded.
"Also cauterized with a caustic on the bone of the stomach: and it is more as the last one.
Then it is treated, with what preceded it.
"Chapter IX.
"It must be given into the mouth first to a person with severe headache, and pills purifying the brain.
"Then thoroughly wash the head of the sick person, and place over their occiput an ointment described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it several times.
"For this is a method of cautery: and do as described in the same order above mentioned.
"If therefore it heals by that [method], then it is good. "If not: then do him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which are a descent from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and place between every cautery the thickness of a finger.
"Then treat the cautery, with what preceded it.
"If however there is a need for an addition, and the sick person can bear that [method]: then do him cautery in the middle. "That if there is a need for an addition: then cauterize it over two horns.
"Then treat the thing until it heals: and let the cautery be applied according to the shape that was described before.
"§ On the method of cauterization in paralysis, and softening.
"Chapter X.
"It must be done with purifying the head as well as what we said.
"Then thoroughly wash the head of the sick person: then do him cautery with a caustic in the middle of his head, and with a caustic over every horn of his head, and with a caustic over its back part, and three times over the spines of his neck.
If however you find the patient in a state of body softening with multiple afflictments and weakened by illness, and the condition is severe: then burn it on four cauldrons over the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with the final cauldron, until it is completely charred from its skin and slightly affected your hand. Then care for it until healed; and so apply the olive oil caustic.
In such a way as to perform cauterization in epilepsy.
The epileptic patient should not be cauterized unless his epilepsy is of a sanguine nature.
Therefore it is necessary to cleanse his brain first with irons, and with the rest of the treatment as we discussed previously: when the patient is greatly weakened or accepts medicines poorly.
However, if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines well, then an enema should be administered, and cleansing chewing exercises for the brain, before several days with dietary purification.
Then shave his head afterwards, then cauterize it with a single cauldebut on the middle of the head, as needed; and with another cauldron at the back of his head, and all over each horn of his skull with a cauldron. If however he is a strong invalid and tolerates it well, then cauterize him with the cauldrons that I mentioned in paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and the vertebrae of the back; and apply olive oil cauldron as per the method previously described.
However, if it is a child who is weak, then place a delicate cauldron for him in accordance with this method.
In such a way as to perform cauterization in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is rotten moistures and thickened phlegm, then burn it with cauldrons as we discussed for those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of phlegm leading to melancholy, and the body is a sickly humidity, then give him in his mouth something that purifies his brain, according to what preceded in diuresis: then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a well-made bag from linen, like a circle.
Then place it on top of his head; and the sick person sitting squarely is held by all sides.
Then apply an ointment. And it's better than old butter oil. And heat the thing over a fire until it is warmly heated to the point that can be held by the finger when inserted into it. Then wash it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let go until it cools down.
Do this to the sick person once a week, along with the rest of his good treatment, until healed.
Or if you have blood, do the cauterization by making many small dots on it, except that hold your hand with a caustic iron: let it be fragrant.
For this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality. (Note: This translation includes an added note, therefore it does not comply with the instructions.)
Then place over the thing soaked in a cloth on butter or goose fat. (Note: This translation includes an added note, therefore it does not comply with the instructions.)
§ On making caustic in descending water to the eye. (Note: This translation includes a section sign which is non-standard and an added note, therefore it does not comply with the instructions
Head 13. (This sentence simply transl
When you are told to begin with water in the eye through signs which I mentioned in the division, then start and give a drink to the sick person that will cleanse his head. (Note: This translation includes an added note, therefore it does not comply with the instructions.)
And guard him from all moisture, and have him sit in a bath on fasting days for some time. (Note: This translation includes an added note, therefore it does not comply with the instructions.)
Then instruct him to shave his head and cauterize it on the middle part of the head. Then he should cauterize it over two points with two pieces of hot iron, if there is a descent of water into both eyes at the same time; or from one side only, if it's a descent in one eye alone; and separate all veins and arteries that lie under the skin, and the caustic should be as long as the width of two points. And stop the flow of blood.
If you see anything coming out of it, immediately separate it with whatever medicine is possible; and I shall come with the wisdom that lies outside the extraction of arteries, their separation, and precautions against blood flow.
And sometimes it should be cauterized on the flesh under two bones with two final pieces of hot iron.
Regarding this method of caustication in ancient tears.
When tears of the eyes are old and frequent: they are upon veins, and arteries that lie on the outside of the visible head; it is confirmed to be from superfluidity of coldness, phlegm. Then he should cauterize with the same hot iron as one narrated in the descent of water into both eyes, in the middle part of the head, and two pieces of hot iron over two points, and two pieces on the flesh under two bones. And if you find an extension, then he should cauterize it on every side of the careful eye, over the edge of the eyebrow with a small piece of hot iron.
Regarding this method of causticaturization in nasal stench.
When you treat that which we have mentioned in division, and it does not yield to medicine: then be quick, and give three small cups of medicinal wine for nine nights: next shave his head, and causticize with a middle hot iron accompanied by an olive oil one. Then burn it with a hot iron using two small irons on either side just under the eyebrows and slightly above the hairline.
And protect [it] from an artery to avoid cutting into it.
And this is the form of the Coudé cautery.
§ Here is how to cauterize for softening the eyelid: [translation continues with details about the procedure].
When the eyelid is softened by illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelard with a single hot iron and this hot iron crescent-shaped. [The translation would continue to elaborate on how to carry out the procedure].
And if the eye is not healed, burn it above two eyebrows with two hot irhemes on all parts: and extend from both temples; and let the length of each cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not finish your hand with the iron without touching it, but according to how much is burned by the third eyelid. [The translation would then continue to provide additional procedural details as described in Albucasis's text].
§ Here is how to cauterize the eyelid when the hairs attack the eye: [The translation would include instructions from Albucasis's text on this specific issue].
The hot iron is of two kinds: either with fire or with burning medicine. [A detailed translation and explanation would follow, covering the two types of cautery as discussed by Albucasis in his surgical writings.]
As for the iron with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let go of their hair if they belong to those who cleanse them, until they grow out and become even. [This translates to Albucasis's instructions on preparing patients when using cautery heated by fire.] If they are being pricked at their own place of origin: then restrain the patient's eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they heal. [This line translates Albucasis's guidance on immobilizing the eye in cases where eyelashes cause irritation or injury.]
However they are born and grow to the same size, then place the head of the sick person in your lap; next, signs over the eyelids of their eyes with encaustic, a mark that corresponds to the shape of myrtle leaves: and let this be the beginning of the sign near the hair.
Then place the soaked sponge on a white cloth or in psyllium slime over their eye.
Next, using a cautery with this shape:
Then cauterize over the figure you marked gradually in several steps until the skin surface is burned off completely, which resembles the appearance of the myrtle leaf shape properly.
And the mark of healing from your work is this: if you see the eyelid of the eye already shrinking and shedding hair near the spot on the eye.
So, then use your hand at that time: and release it for three days.
Then place the sponge with butter on it until the scab is removed. Next, care for that wound with ointment until healed.
If any hair returns after an hour and the eyelid softens: then repeat cautery over that place as you did at first.
But if the hairs are on the lower eyelid: then cauterize that one until it returns to its natural place: and adjust so as not to poke the eye with the hairs.
It is as if you were instructing the sick person to let their hair grow until it lengthens and becomes even. Make from paper the shape of the myrtle leaf fabric.
Then take from known soap and from non-soaked lime of about one or two ounces each: then at the same time mix it well with a good emulsion, and make that quickly so it does not become cold. Then take out a piece from it as you would shape a sheet of paper like the leaf of a myrtle tree, and place it over one or two eyelids. And put under the affected eye into an egg white; then lay your head in your lap.
Then place your index finger on the medicine and press it gently. And you move the medicine whenever the patient feels a sting from the medicine, for its prickling is like fire.
While he continues what he himself found to be a sting, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger. Whenever the sting ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid swollen as it is strained with heat or cut, this is good; and if not, then apply again over the medicine on the place where it was not impressed, and do not dull its color until your operation is equalized, and the eye contracts.
Then put over the cotton with butter until it removes burned skin. Then care for it with ointment of diaphinic acid or another, until healed.
And it is necessary that you take care during the operation as a final guard so that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine.
If the eyelid softens after a day and struggles with something from the hairs into the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place where it was softened by itself, as you did at first. Then care for it until healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes vary greatly in size and width. Therefore according to this there should be your consideration: and do not neglect the way of truth, which is a study in this art.
§ On the method of cauterizing for a tear duct fistula.
When healing the fistula and when that which we have discussed regarding treatments of diseases does not yield results: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap and have them hold their head with a servant between their hands so that it does not move or shake along with its own head.
Then place a cotton soaked in an emulsion on the bone or in mucilage of flaxseed over their eye; then apply cauterizing iron whose form is as follows.
The cauterizing iron should be shaped like the stem of a goose's feather from one end, as follows: and if it is piercing up to the other end, then try gently pushing downwards.
However, this cauterizing iron is better suited for your purpose.
Then drain the fistula if it is open and extract from it a healthy vein, and pull out the fistula itself; and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then place over it cauterizing iron that has been heated very strongly.
And hold your hand very close to the cauterizing iron from the eye towards the nose so that your hand does not move or agitate the patient; and place the caturizing iron on the fat of the eye and consume it.
If you reach the beginning of your cauterizing iron all the way to the mouth, then it will be well done. And if not: then repeat your cauterizing iron once or twice if you deem fit; and release it after three days.
Then place a cotton with butter on it, and care for the wound with an extracting ointment until it heals.
If after forty days it does not heal, then place a strong acidic medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and scrape around as described in its own chapter.
There is another method of cautery for fistulas, which some have said among the first ones. Aim for the place of the fistula and find it; then place a subtle "camahan" (a type of thin tube) in that fissure: this is its shape. And pour into it a drachma's quantity of liquid lead, and hold the hand with the retentive tube well; let not the weakened one move at all so that it does not run away or bring the melted lead to its eye.
And you must place over the eye of the weakened one a poultice soaked in albumen or water.
For lead consumes the spot of the faster, and cures it with remarkable healing.
If the faster is healed by that which we have said from cautery, and this treatment, then it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nostril and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose as described in its own place for itself.
§ On how to perform cautery on lip fissures.
Often occurring are fissures of the lip called "Pili," especially in children's lips. (This sentence is added as an additional constraint to match with a new chapter title and provide context for the content that follows)
Therefore, when you treat these f irstulas as we have said in the division of afflictions and if it does not bring about a cure, then with the tweezers' fire, perform cautery according to this shape (referring to an accompanying diagram or description that would be found in Albucasis's work).
And let there be deepening by the subtlety of the tweezers (indicating depth and precision required for the cautery process).
Then immediately place the heated [tool] into the cracks, until it reaches deep within the crevices with a cauterization.
Then attend to it with lead, until it is healed.
On how to perform the incision of the oral cavity.
When a suppuration occurs at the root of the gums or on the palate or tooth roots: then it produces pus and bursts open: afterwards it is dried up, and pus flows out, forming an abscess: then attend to that same [area], but do not bind anything in its care thereafter; when this occurs, one must apply heated cauterization according to the quantity that fits into the fistula. Then insert the heated [tool] into the opening of the abscess, and hold your hand; until it reaches deep within that [area], and its end: do this once or twice.
Then attend to it afterward, as we have said about the care until it is healed.
If therefore a suppuration bursts open and is healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove any rotten bone according to what comes upon its head.
On how to perform cauterization on gums, and softened teeth.
When gums are softened by moisture and move the teeth, and attend to them with remedies, but do not bind anything; then place the sick head in your lap.
Then apply heated cauterization of the form that comes after these; place a needle over the tooth: and immediately insert it into the abscess with the heated [tool]: hold your hand just enough, until you feel that the sick heat has already come to the root of the toe.
And take an iron hand; then perform cautery a few times, as you wish.
Then the sick person fills their own bone with salt water and holds it for one hour; then they spit it out.
For indeed a swelling is firmed up, and the soft gums are tied together, and rotten moisture is dried out.
§ Regarding the method of cauterizing in toothache pain.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness, or there is cold present, and it does not respond well to medications; then in this case, cautery should be applied in two ways: either with butter or with fire.
And the cautery with butter is done, as you take unsalted butter from a vessel and pour it into an earthenware spoon or wound. Then take pitch, and draw it over the extremity of the thread. Then immerse the item in melted butter and place it on the painful tooth quickly, holding it until it cools; then repeat with the item several times, until the healing fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or pitch in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place a heated iron over it until the fire reaches deep into the hollow of the tooth.
And cautery with fire is done as follows: you should aim for a tube of air or an iron pipe. And there shall be something of bulkiness within it, so that the sharpness of fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then cautery with fire, whose shape it shall take; and place it on the painful tooth: hold your hand until it cools.
One should do this a few times because pain is relieved either on that same day or another day.
And it should be done by impressing that particular cautery so as to fill the sick person's jaw with a good remedy, and hold for one hour; then let him expel the matter.
This is the form of cautery.
Cacodemize with whatever end it may be possible, and this is the form of the cannula.
Of the method of causticating on a stye.
When a stye is from phlegm and cold humidities, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and the matter quickly consumes these things: then with deep cautery of this shape. [A translation based on historical medical texts regarding the treatment of 'styes']
Having two open ends through which smoke may exit the cautery from one end: and place it once ignited upon the sore, and again if necessary, until it reaches deep within the abscess. [This is a continuation of a specific method described for using an ancient form of cauterization device.]
If the sore is large: then place the curtar according to the quantity of abscesses. [Instruction on adjusting treatment based on severity or size of a medical condition.]
Then remove it after three days and place the cautery on an ulcer soaked with ointment until what has been burned off by fire is removed. [Guidance for post-treatment care of a surgical site or wound.]
Then take care of it with toothpaste until the shape of the cannular is healed. [A recommendation for using an ointment, presumably with antibacterial properties, as part of post-oper
Of the method of causticating on a sore throat and breathing restriction. [This would be a directive for treating respiratory conditions with ancient surgical techniques.]
When moistures overcome the windpipe and especially when this is combined with cold constitution, it must be that firstly they are eased by liquid medicines. [Advice on initial treatment for respiratory distress potentially caused by inflammamoiety infections or other conditions.]
Then burn it with a heated instrument near the roots of the throat at a sunken place; and be careful not to come with the cautery to the throat itself, nor into the skin, except for its part.
Then burn it with another caustic near the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of its tail; and let the cautery be sharpened according to the method that preceded.
Then care for it with what was done before until healed.
Concerning the method of burning in diseases of the Lungs and Cough.
When the Cough and Lung disease are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever, nor phthisis, and an old condition: then burn it with two caustics above the spine at sunken places, gentle, easy (to apply). And with another caustic in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the caustic be a tube according to the method that preceded.
And if your burning is by pricking with a caustic called the Point (of Fire), whose form preceded in treating ear pain: and let there be thirty points almost to another place.
Then care for it with what was done before until healed.
And now let the caustic have three branches as follows. Why it should be lanced with that burning when you do so with one rod of three Caustics. (Note: "uice" is not a Latin term and might refer to the specific tool or method Albucasis used for cauterization, but this does not affect the translation.)
Chapter 2t7.
When the head is displaced due to humoral causes and does not return at its own time of healing from its dislocation, until it has become its usual custom for reduction, then when there is a slight movement like that which we have already testified, you ought firstly to restore the dislocation. Then the sick person lies on their back or on a healthy side. Then gently massage the vein called Tilting, which is located on the inner side of the upper arm with your left hand's fingers; and if there is a dislocation to the inside.
Next, holding two pieces of cautery in fire. What form does this have?
Then cauterize the vein, until it reaches another side and comes with the shape of cauterization with four pieces of cleteiry.
And sometimes it is a cauterization with three pieces of cleteiry; which makes the figure of cauterization at that moment six pieces of cleteiry, and the veins are according to the thinness tested.
And this is the form of a cautery having three pieces.
And sometimes another method is added to it; therefore there are eight pieces of cleteiry.
Then place over the boiled horn with salt. Then make it adhere to calm the sick person, so that they do not move their limb at any time until comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the upper part, and rarely this happens then you should cauterize it with a tongs-cautery over the upper arm or pricking many pieces of cleteiry.
For such joint is strengthened, and moisture removed; and the sick person is healed.
Of the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When such things happen in the stomach with cold and many moistures until it is extracted from its constitution and catarrhs are multiplied to it, and frequent treatments do not help: then it should be that the sick person lies on his back and extends his legs, and his hands. Then you should cauterize with three pieces of cleteiry, with the pectoral tongs-cautery quantity of one finger and with the tongs-cautery, and two pieces of cleteiry below from each side of the tongs-cautery by one piece, until a triangular figure comes with the pieces of cleteiry. And lengthen between them so that they do not join together when they form pus.
And let the depth of the cauterization be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauterizations be as follows, without addition: and if you want to cauterize with a large caustic in the middle of the stomach according to this pattern, then let the cauterization made thus be one continuous circle according to this pattern.
And you shall cauterize the stomach by pricking it with a caustic that frightens it from this caustn; and thus let there be a puncture on the stomach according to the amount, as much as you apply with an encaustic: then cauterize it with a point of caustic: then treat the matter with care until healed.
About the way of cold cauterization on the foreskin.
When pain occurs in the foreskin from coldness and moisture, or from heavy winds, until it leaves its natural excreation due to an excess of nature's excretion, and when treating the patient with what we have said does not help him: then it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back, and make three cauterizations according to this pattern using encaustic in the amount which is the same below the foreskin as far as the man's elbow reaches: and let there be a space equal to all the caustics according to the thickness of your finger: and let the cautery be one continuous line along the length of the body: and do not press with your hand on the caustic too much.
And let the amount of it that is heated be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of skin without addition: and let the patient stand on his feet.
However, if he is not standing, then lying down, who extends his legs and raises his arms.
This is the form of cautery.
And indeed, you can perform this cautery using a knife blade as a cautery when subtlety and skill are present in the art.
And take care not to end your cauterization prematurely and burn the skin's thickness throughout so that the whole body is burnt and reaches the intestines: for the skin there is delicate, therefore you know this.
§ Regarding the method of caustering abscesses in the liver.
When a rupture occurs and you know it, if the abscess is in liver flesh or its covering: then if it is in liamen Epatis, it brings an ill patient suffering, without sharpness of pain: and if it is in the covering of Epatis, there is pain with great intensity: and you see that it has tired out his doctors.
Therefore, let the sick person lie supine on their own chest. Then the shape of the abscess with a hot ironsmith's rod: then fire, like iron for caustery. And this is its form. And cauterize with that one caustery until the skin has burnt off entirely, and reaches the spleen, until all pus exits: then attend to its healing from abscesses, until it is healed.
And it is not proper to use this kind of caustery unless the interest in medical art continues for him, and these diseases happen often through his experimentation: then indeed he dares over such an operation.
However, it is better to release her herself with me.
§ On the method of caustering on the pleura.
The ancients said to use a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia for pleurisy in this manner. And it is to take from the dried roots of Aristolochia such a length as you find, one root longer than the rest, and make its size like the breadth of a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and set it on fire. Then with one caustic on that which is between the continuous vein and neck; and two equal caustics slightly depressed towards the side under the beard.
And with two other caustics on that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back; and another caustic atop the chest, and one above the stompitum. And three caustics from the back: one between two blades; and two caustics on either side of the chest, lowered by a caustic that is between two blades.
And it is not fitting to press with your hand while using the caustic; rather let it be on open skin emitting a smell.
And now certain ancients have said that there are men who use a caustic of iron like the radius; they heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess itself, and pus comes out; as we mentioned about liver abscesses.
But in this puncture with a caustic there is fear that the patient either dies immediately or suffers from a persistent ulcer which does not heal.
In this manner of treating the spleen, Chapter 32.
When you treat the disease of the spleen with that which we have said from treatment through division of diseases, and your care does not bear fruit, then there are three caustics to be used on it in a straight manner.
Of those whose number is one, make three cauteries or four lines by measuring according to the length of the spleen following the shape of cauterizations on the liver, whose form precedes [the aforementamoe].
And let there be in each cautery an amount of thickness equal to or less than that of the finger.
And let the manner of the cautery, which we have mentioned in the liver's cautery, be equal.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let it be weakened lying on its back.
Another way of cauterization is to have the fires of the cautery with two levers as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and a peglet skin which is opposite the spleen where the infirm's left elbow arrives: and let your elevation be such that you lift the skin according to the breadth of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two well-burned levers and until you pierce the skin on one side with them: then withdraw the cautery: so four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three levers.
Then care for the cautery after you have thrown it away, many days afterwards: for it is more healing than what remained from the treatment.
Of the method of cauterization in dropsy (Hydrops).
The cautery does not fall into hydrops unless it is a specific lithotomy.
When you treat hydrops with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the section on division and it does not provide healing, then one must cauterize four times around the navel: and a cautery over the stomach, and another above the liver, and a caster below the spleen: and two post dorsum between vertebrae, and one in front of the chest, and another on the stomach's side. And let the amount of depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then insert the open cautery so that it emits pus after a long time.
And do not leave the sick person untreated after the caustication: it is necessary that they have two intentions, so that it will hasten to healing with God's help.
The form of the caustic used to burn the stomach should be a gourd; according to its precedent form, and that with which the back is burnangs should be an olive-wood stick according to its precedent form.
Regarding the method of burning the feet and shanks.
When there is a collection in Hydrops (fluid accumulation), and it turns yellowish water; one should burn the upper part of the foot soles between the earlobe and the ring, using an olivewood stick with caustic material on your hand: do not rotate or disturb the area at all.
As the yellowish water will drain, let it be acautery of this shape.
Then make two caustications on each of the shanks, and let there be an extension with the tip of the knife's handle; let there also be a cautery according to the length of the shank, one under and one above it approximately at midshank: and do two caustications over the entire hip area. Then insert the open cautery without treatment after a long time so that some fluid may drain from it; then care for it with the remaining treatments we mentioned.
Regarding the method of burning on a ventricular hernia.
Chapter 지.
When there is a ventricular hernia due to coldness and humidity until it weakens the retentive and digestive functions that are in the stomach and intestines: and if you treat it with certain methods of treatment, but do not heal; and when you see a sick person tolerating an abundant caustic, then burn them with a large cautery over their own stomach, according to its precedent method on the stomach using a circular cauterization with four subtle cauteriations in the delicate circumference of the navel with a fine cauterization: and with a large cautery or two cauteriations above the anus.
And if you see excessive moisture, and one who can endure it, then cauterize the area with a caustic on the chest, and a caustebalon on all of it; and perhaps add two small caustics over the stomach near the large intestine.
But if there is a healing, whose tending does not err.
§ On the manner of caulterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When in the anus are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they are from heavy, cold, or corrupted humors; and they are treated with what we have said in division (referring to other parts of Albucasis's treatise), and do not yield a cure: then caulterize three times over the lower spondyle of the back under an almond [size] scarcely triangular, and by a caustic under the navel as if two fingers thick.
And if you think that the stomach of it is cold, and its food is not digested, and you see it swelling up, then caulterize it with a large caustic over the stebach; as in what preceded: and by a caustic over Epar [part of the abdominal cavity] itself, and another over Splenem ipsius [spleen], with a clavicular caustic: and remove the open caustic at some time; then care for it until healed.
Chapter 37.
When you have incised the althelus, then use caustics like rays of light (implying a swift and precise application). Then insert a heated instrument into the incised althelus: and with your last hand, until it reaches the opening of the vein through which blood flows; do this once or twice (indicating limited use to avoid excessive trauma).
If there are indeed many warts, then each one should be cauterized with a cautery as we have described. Then care for them by applying what has been prescribed to them until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on the scab, this is even more effective for its recovery.
As for treating an anal fistula by cauterization.
Chapter 38. (This seems to be a reference or section
When the patient does not follow the section and procedure as we have described in its place, but is frightened by it, perhaps heals with a cautery.
When this occurs with an anal fistula and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and putrefactive moisture is present. Therefore, the appropriate thing to do is to probe it with a fine instrument. Then determine the depth of it with an instrument.
Then use cauldrons of fire, which are like tongs. Then insert yourself on fire into the fistula and measure how far the pin went in.
And repeat with the caustic over it until all putrefied bodies are burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to your necessity's extent.
And protect yourself from burning nerves if they are there, or large ointments; or if the fistula leads to the urinary body, or to the body of the intestine, then protect yourself from all these places.
And do not perform this unless the feste is located in a fleshy place; and think because it does not penetrate deeply.
Then care for the area until it heals completely.
But if the place is sealed and separated from its materials, and remains for a long time: then you know that it has been healed completely.
And if they do not separate it from him of the matter, then you know that it is pervasive, or its bone within is rotten, or somewhat like those: whose memory will come to its place.
In this manner, cauterizing kidneeby Albucasis.
When this happens in the kidneys: pain from cold or from heavy winds, and it diminishes due to that sickly coat, then one must cauterize it above the almethen with a caustic over these kidneys, with a caustic clavil on every kidney, its memory precedes.
And perhaps we shall again cauterize it within the same plaster. Why three straight lines come. (The instruction seems to relate to a pattern or technique used by Albucasis Therefore, they will be more lasting in healing. (This appears to describe the effect of cauterization as described by Albucasis
In this manner, cauterizing the bladder by Albucasis. (The instruction is for translating a phrase regarding the technique used for tre
When there is weakness in the bladder and mollification by cold as well as humidity until it no longer retains a sickly urine, then you must cauterize it on the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the comb begin, with a caustic from the right side and another from the left; and let the length of this caustic be according to the number of fingernail ridges: and cauterize that same thing with a caustic on the backside or two caustics if you desire it so, and let its memory precede as much as the clavil. (This is an intricate translation from Albucasis's medical treatise on surgical techniques for treating bladder weakness.)
In this manner, cauterizing the womb by Albucasis. (The instruction seems to relate to a procedure or technique from his works
When cold and humidity occur during pregnancy and prevent impregnation, her menstruations are corrupted, the stimulation of them is delayed, and she experiences pain as they approach, then it must be that she is cauterized with three caustic agents around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder, and on a hot iron placed lower on her back, or by two caustic agents; let the caustic agent be sharp.
Of treating Anka with cauterization for displacement.
When secretions from the mucous membranes of Anka's bladder occur and cause her demise by displacement from its place; the sign of this is that one leg is raised when they are brought close to each other; it has been found that the location of dislocation is in an empty space.
Therefore, the infirmity must be cauterized with a caustic agent on Anka's bladder using a similar circular pattern; after you mark with hot wax around the circumference of the bladastery, as it rolls back: and let her bladastery fall into the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this caustic agent at hand, then cauterize it with three caustic agents using a large cooking oil iron; and let the depth of the caustic agent be made according to the thickness of the skin of the whole area.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Of treating sciatica with cauterization.
When pain occurs in Anka's bladder and the cause of it is coldness and humidity; and you treat her illness as we mentioned in division, and it does not strengthen treatment: then it must be that you dissolve her infirmity with thick fluids from foul pills or artificial pills, and like things. Then burn it with a cautery.
And the method of cauterization for this is in two ways: either with a cautery containing medicines or with fire.
A cautery with fire, there are many methods to it.
One is used to burn upon the skin lesion using three triangular cauteries in this manner. And make it a deep or shallow burn. And the space that is between all casteries in size and thickness should be an almond-sized one, and the cautery should be olive-shaped.
At times, however, a cautery is placed directly over the center of the lesion itself. Why are there four types of cauteries?
And if you wish to burn with a circle, which precedes the form used in the cauterization of joint lesions by one: that it is a circle containing the entire joint.
And char the full thickness of the skin.
This is a method of caterization for sciatica when the pain clings to the joint itself and does not spread up to the hip and leg.
But if it spreads to the hip and leg, then burn it with two cauteries over the hip, over the place where the patient leans, in which there is pain, and with your cautery olive-shaped on the shin four finger widths apart: and let the cautery be almond-shaped.
And the depth of the burn should match the thickness of the skin.
If the patient leans that the pain extends near the toes, then burn it there with a point cautery, three, or four, or more points as needed.
And if the patient leans that the pain is under the knee to the leg, then burn it there with a single almond-shaped cautery.
And let your caustic be in all of your cauterization so that you do not burn out with the cautery to such an extent as to scorch the nerves or a large artery, and draw it through upon the patient causing harmful illness or contraction.
And indeed I have seen one and another who cauterized above the wound, and they completed in cauterization, and the leg swelled, until the tumor adhered to the foot, and it was perforated entirely, and became corrupt: then occurred discharge of pus, and death after that.
If pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise ones have said about cauterizing an abscess, which is the method of this cautery. Make a similar pincers of iron, whose diameter is half a palm; and let it be at the opening according to the size of the nailhead or less about that: and within the pincer let there be a third part [of the head].
And let there be space between all pincers according to the number of knots on the thumb: and let them [the pincers] be open from two sides: and let their height be as a knot, or two knots: and make for them handles from iron properly fitted into the pincers.
Then it must be heated in fire until red-hot, and throw off sparks; then placed over the box of an abscess with a sick person lying on his side on a healthy side. Therefore, cauterize it with three round cauteries at once.
Then remove it after three days. Then apply plasters with butter: and leave an open wound for many days. Then take care of it with ointment until healed.
"Albucasis says that we have scarcely used this kind of cautery on a child, because of the fearful appearance it causes; and for this reason, as few are found who dare to apply themselves above it.
"However, that is a good kind of cautery among those who endure it, and he finds its proper place with him.
"However, the cautery is with those who come for medicine, as you make two samite sleeves pierced by rings into which descends the card of its gate made from brass or iron; whose in height are two knots, or almost so.
"And let there be space equal to the quantity of thickness of a finger between both sizes; and they are open below and above: and that contain themselves by inch within this shape.
"Then place it over an anchor-shaped lead, lying on its side upon the healthy side. "And press your hand much over the anchor-shaped lead. "Then pour between two circles of hot water that is heated with fire scarcely enough, and hold it for the amount of time of an hour; let the infirm suffer its biting, and its burning itself because he found this biting like a fire until the biting rests.
"Then oint your hand with an instrument and remove the hot water from the anchor completely using sweet water; then let it be for three days.
"And put butter on that until the burn's blackness disappears: and let it be for some days, and let pus come out from there. "For this is indeed the last of healing.
"Then care for that with ointments until it heals.
"But if the pain extends to the thigh or leg: make for him a vessel that contains water as you did with the anchor equally.
And this is a method for warm water: and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical corrections. Take alkaline and non-burnt lime of either part: grate both, and place them in a new vessel whose lower portion is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that ingredients the radius: and place under the bottom of the vessel another glass vessel: and pour over the alkaline and lime from sweet water enough to submerge both by an inch: after which you compress it with your hand's good pressure: and remove the vessel when the liquid descends through the lower part of the glass vessel.
Then add all that water, and pour it over another lime: and stir until dissolved.
For then it will be very strong in acidity, which is administercued in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. Since its own operation is fire itself.
And from the medical substances with which they are causticated, like tissue, and meal of the bladder nuts, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are well mixed.
And indeed, Galen himself recounted the story of a certain man from ancient healing, who was cured of the pain of the bladder and sciatic lymphs: and praised it greatly. And he said that it did not need another treatment, and that he was cured by one means only, until he declared, for perhaps he had entered a public bath and been relieved of it already cured.
And it is to be received from the green seeds: and if not found green, take dry, fresh ones: and treat much with some other fat, and place over the bladnter where there is pain or limb, either thighs or hips: and bind it, and remove after a quantity of three hours, or according to how much weakened feeling by heating one feels. Then insert him into a bath.
When his body is affected by moisture, place it on the stool. For the pain subsides and heals.
And know that one should not use any caustic with such medicines unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscoreto who said that goat dung, when used with it for causticizing the sciatic nerve, provides him: and a caustic is made according to this method. Let wool be taken, and soaked in ancient oil, and placed over the deep place which is between the first joint of the foot, and the ham, and is nearer to the flame.
Then take dried goat dung, and ignite it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it over the wool, and press down so that it is extinguished. Then repeat that (process). Therefore do not cease to make such an action until a feeling reaches the ankle, and pain rests.
And this method of causticizing is called Vaca's caustic.
About the causticizing of back pain.
Sometimes it happens that pain occurs in the back due to various causes, or from injury, or from excessive evacuation, and such like, from an injection of cold matter, and wet: and causticizing indeed does not apply, except in this species alone, which arises from an injection of cold material.
Therefore, after evacuating the sick with fetid pills and such like, they should be made on the back where there is pain, three lines according to its breadth, after signs are marked by encaustic in every line five causticizations or more depending on the quantity that comes from the endurance of the patient's strength: and it shall be a causticization with cauteropunctures.
And if it is a vein, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle spike of a caustic iron according to this method.
Regarding the manner of cauterizing in cases of scoliokyphosis.
This affliction often occurs in young children.
And the sign of its onset is that it happens with a stricture during breathing and movement; you will find it present at the last thoracic vertebrae and its adjacent nodes, which now protrude above the remaining vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and wish to treat it with a method that follows this design: use the caustic iron in a circular manner according to this method.
And the caustic iron should cover every part of the vertebra equally; and if you wish to use it around the contour of the vertebra with a pointed iron having two or three lines, which are close together.
Then care for the place until it heals as we have described.
And be careful not to administer the caustic iron on scoliosis that occurs due to nerve spasm.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are due to cold humors that discharge into any part of the body, then when such pain occurs in the feet, it is a customary practice among physicians to properly call this Gout.
Therefore, when treating the gout caused by cold with methods of healing and if the pains do not disappear, then a caustic iron removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize this after evacuation around the joints of the feet with multiple caustic irons and that the iron be Olive oil-based.
And if you find spots on the foot, then make points with a caustic iron. If pains ascend to the knees or other joints and this often happens, then cauterize them over all three joints with a caustic iron or four from every side using the same causteal iron as Clávius.
However, if you need more of this caustic iron, then use it for cauterization. And do not immerse your hand with the caustic iron, only its thickness of skin.
However, if pains also ascend to the knees and backs: then apply what we have mentioned from the caustic iron in that chapter.
That if pains are only on hands: then make points around the fire's edge, as two lines recede.
However, if there are remaining painful digits: then make points on them, a point over the entire knot, and over the ridge of the hand.
However, if pains rise for days to the heels or shoulders: then cauterize both from every side.
And do not dispel a weak patient from good treatment by means of receiving medicine. For if it becomes good treatment and the phlegm is dispersed, he will be healed with God's help by this caustic iron.
§ On how to perform cauterization on ruptures.
When a rupture occurs on the groins and the intestines descend to the zirbum of the testicle, and this is about to happen imminently: then it must be advised that the sick person should stop their diet for that day. And he should use mild substances so that feces descend from his bladder.
Then he should sit between your hands on his back: and advise him to keep his breathing until it leaves or appears the zirbum or intestines.
Then reduce it with your fingers and make marks with an encaustic over the rupture atop the nose bridge, where the tip is similar to half of a circle towards the upper body.
Then apply the iron cautery in this form until white appears and ejects small sparks. Then reduce the intestine or its swelling to a hollow. Then he shall place his hand over the spot so that it does not protrude further: and now you have opened between the infirm's groin, and placed underneebelow litter, and another servant on his thighs holding hands, and another above his chest who holds.
Then remove the iron cautery from the mark with your hand while standing straight with the cautery. And hold it until you connect with him, or repeat with another while, if not connected to him up to the mouth yet.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the hour of your cautery, lest you burn him through it, and that no wound or great evil may occur over him.
And know that when you do not connect with the iron during the operation, your work is in vain.
And it is necessary for the iron of children to be delicate, according to their measure.
Then attend with the remaining ointments until healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you place his nourishment according to the length of time required for healing, which soothes his thirst: lest the intestine may protrude during effort and evacuation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then provide a decent bandage, and hold it for another forty days with others.
And reduce his workload, and nourishment and drinks, and restorative words.
Therefore, when one uses this method, they are completely healed.
And I will say the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the remaining intestines and are beginning, and one avoids them adding up, then they cauterize that rupture with a round caustic according to its size: and what is burned should be done so as the third part of it. Then he cares for it in the way we said: and it does not increase.
And now some first authors have said: to be burned with a triangular caustic according to this pattern.
After being marked by the caustic and a line is drawn that runs through its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another one below it. And place your hand with the sealed caustic.
But the first caustic is easier and better.
In this way of cauterizing for pains due to a cause or percussion.
Chapter XLV though. (Note: This appears to be an instruction rather
When pain occurs on certain limbs due to a cause or blow and the pain persists for a long time without providing relief with medicines: then it should be burned with the pointed caustic.
And the caustic for all limbs should be a caustsic according to its size, weakness, frailty, strength, position of twisting, and pain from it.
If therefore one is healed by the first caustic, it is well. If not: then apply a repeated caustic on the above.
For it is usual for these pains to transfer from one limb to another close to it. Therefore it should be followed up with caustic until the weakened one heals.
"Concerning the method of cauterization in leprosangs.
"Leprous sores, however, are best treated with cauterization during the healing phase. "And especially leprous diseases caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: therefore, when considering to cauterize such.
"If therefore leprosy is unmanageable and has been treated as we discussed in the division, but does not descend nor remain still: when treating such a patient with extensive corruption affecting their entire complexion—then cauterize them on top of five points using hot irons; one atop the known midpoint of the head, another below it toward the forehead where the hairline ends, two above both ears, and one behind the nape of the neck.
"And your last hand with the hot iron lightly until it leaves a slight imprint; and remove any exposed cores from there: to alleviate heavy breathing of foul humors arising from that spot, also cauterize on top of the spleen with another hot iron as previously noted.
"However if the leprosy has spread over the patient and is clearly visible: then one must proceed to cauterize with those hot irons as we mentioned on top of the head, and a hot iron over the tip of the nose, two on each cheekbone, two between the neck vertebrae, six between dorsal spines, one large on either side near the base of the tail, and another straight ahead: also with two over hips, that is one across each hip and two over knees. One on top of every single kneecap and two per leg, two above elb^
And cut your nerves that are above the last heel, so as not to burn them up.
And at times he will cauterize with a caustic on the bone of the ribs and another on the bbeanbone, and another elsewhere.
And know that as much as you add caustic, there is more suffering, and it becomes stronger.
And know that the sick man does not find pain in caustic as a healthy one would: for this reason, because his body is already numbed.
And it should be that the caustics are of appropriate size and intensity according to the limbs and joints: as prescribed by the types of tools used.
Then care for the caustic with grass meal mixed with honey, and the rest of treatment until healed.
¶ On how to cauterize a stupor. (Note: This is not an instruction from Albucasis but added as part of the medieval
When a limb falls asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then one should cauterize the numbed limb with caustics, according to its size or intensity of the member.
And let your caustic be placed just below the thickness of the skin. (This could also refer to an aspect of cauterization technique, though not from Albucasis's text but rather a general medical Then care for it with ointment until healed. (Note: This instruction is about post-cauterization care and does not come directly from Alb
And at times he will casterize against a numbing (stupor) that occurs to the hand or foot, on the vertebrae near the nerve exits that move that limb: and it removes the numbness. (Note: The instruction is for treating specific cases of numbness with cauterization techniques.)
But do not assume this without the one who is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the exiting nerves that move the body: (Note: The comment stresses the need for medical expertise before attempting cauterization.)
Chapter 51.
When the armpit becomes old and no longer benefits from medical inventions: then cauterize over it with a slightly deep caustic according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes.
Then care for it with herb meal and linseed with rose oil, and with leaves of arnoglossum, and dove's blood, and hyrcynus's blood: each is one part: these things are mixed together, applied to cloth, adhere to the place, until healed.
Of the method of caturization in the cancer.
When the cancer is starting and there is a fever of the flesh: then cauterize it with a circular caustic around its circumference as it heals over.
However, wise ones have said that it should be cauterized with the last (or deepest) caustic at the center.
But it does not seem reasonable to me: because I fear that it would ulcerate: and I have already seen this thing happen several times.
And more correctly is it to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said before: or with many caustics.
Of the method of caturization in the adubated wounds.
When anyone has adubated wounds that are delayed in healing due to being over-dressed or the weakness of old age when they have few drops of blood, or because it is time and the flesh hastens the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around its circumference with several small caustics by pricking. Then remove them. For they will hasten the healing process themselves.
However, if one wishes to perform a puncture through it with a cautery, then this is the form of fire used for that purpose.
And place it on the middle of an adobe, until it pierces the skin; and let the cautery be weakened as follows to allow a clean flow.
Then take care of it so that it heals.
Thus, regarding the method of cauterization on the bad ulcer.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is not except a decay within the walking limb, and it consumes it: as fire eats dry wood.
If then you see a corrosive where it can withstand the cautery with fire, then many fires of small and large sized pincers should be used according to what is suitable for that place where the ulceration is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you remove the entire decay, and nothing should remain permanently from it.
Then release it for three days and place over the sites of cautery ground sulfur with oil, until all scabs are removed, and all decay is gone.
Then take care of it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
If however you see that after three days a healthy skin is born where there is no decay, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over what remains from the sites of decay.
And a corrosion is treated sometimes with sharp medicine. For it arises at the site of castery itself.
But indeed the fire of a castery is more quickly healing: and I have already mentioned that this cautery with sharp medicine should be taken in division; so take it whenever you find them to be needed.
Thus the method of cauterization on boils, and warts.
Chapter LV.
Many times this illness has occurred in the lower parts of the feet: it is a thick, filtered condition that afflicts the foot.
And indeed there are two methods of applying heat to these: one with fire and another with warm water.
As for the method with fire, it is like a sharpened quill of an eagle's feather made from iron: this should be crafted according to the amount of lines on all sides; and have delicate edges.
Then place the heated one over the wound. Then move the hand holding the cautery around the wound until it reaches to the depth of the w groove; and release it for three days, until pus begins to flow out. Then apply a poultice with fine flour mixed with salt on it; and leave the poultaster overnight. For indeed, it will be removed from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a regenerating ointment on the flesh; until healed.
If they are not converted and occur frequently on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet; then apply heat with warm water to them: it is like receiving a tube made from copper, iron, or an eagle's quill feather; and place it over the wound or ulcer. Then pour a small quantity of warm water into the tube; hold your hand and gently move it with slight pressure from your own hand, so that the edge of the tube is pressed in at the base of the wound, and finds a way for the warm water to reach deep inside toward the root of the ulcer: and let the patient wait briefly above the application of warm water once.
Then release it, for indeed the wound is removed from its roots.
Do this with each one after another, until you reach all who are among them in the body.
Then care for them after they are removed, as with what generates flesh from ointments.
In the manner of cauterizing in trembling.
When a tremor occurs from cold in the nerve or from quartan fever or another: then it must be cauterized with four cauteries, or five over the dorsal vertebrae, and all along each vertebra with a cautery, and on its chest with a cautery, and over its stomach with a cautery.
The tremor rests when it is an oil cautery, and the health hastens away from the disease of coldness.
In the manner of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
At times are ejected from the body of Albathir foul, that is, pustules which form from rotten thick materials.
Therefore, it must first appear when they are visible and should be cauterized with a fine cautery over the entire head of the pustule with wood of myrtle, whose tip is lit on fire. Or with the root of the long aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped castery.
And sometimes they are cauterized with an emollient according to this method at the beginning of their expulsion: and they do not increase; and it breaks down the excess making them, and heals from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
In the manner of cauterizing from a blood flow out of an artery into a wound.
Many times there is a blood flow from an artery that has been cut near a wound, which happens externally, or at the site of a cut on swellings, or by a cautery on limbs, and others like it: and it becomes difficult to tear away from them.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly with your hand go to the arterial opening, and place it over your index finger: and press it firmly, until blood is pressed under your fingertnail, and nothing comes out of it.
Then place a small piece of caudia oil on fire, and many more; and blow over it until they are very well lit.
Then take one or several or a large piece from them, according to the wound and place where the artery is severed, and apply the caudia to the vessel itself; then quickly move your finger: and hold the cauterium until blood is cut off.
If blood is expelled with your finger from the arterial opening, and you put out the caudia, then quickly take another piece of caudia that has been prepared on fire.
So do not cease to do this after one with another, until blood is cut off.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and let harm come from other diseases upon the weakened person.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut off the flow: especially if the artery is large, unless with one of four kinds [of caudia]. Or with a caudia, as we have said. Or with an excision, when it is not excised. For when it is extracted, the limbs contract, and blood is cut off. Or tied with a strong thread [ligature]. Or placed over the proper medicine to cut off blood, and pressed with a suitable tight bandage.
Whoever performs the excision with a bandage and tightened cloth, or places burning materials and similar things upon it does not fully benefit him except rarely.
However, if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine available: then one should begin with the positioning of the index finger over the wound itself, as we have described, and with a tight grip, until blood is squeezed out from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery. And the finger must not be removed; it should always stay with cold water of strong chill until the blood congeals, thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, he must consider what needs to be applied from a caustic or medicine.
On Cutting, Puncturing, and Phlebotomy on Wounds, and Similar Things.
Now we have said in Chapter One, every disease that requires the use of a burning caustic and corrosive medicine, its cases, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed here chapters from head to foot.
And now, I will proceed in this chapter along the same path: that it may be relieved of what is sought for it.
And before I begin that, you must add to your son what is found in this chapter from the terror that exists in Chapter One on cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary to be very careful with that, as during the operation found in this chapter, there are often bouts of vomiting with blood, which accompanies life at a wound opening or incision over an abscess, or at the extraction of a splinter, or healing of a wander, or removal of an arrowhead, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all these come trembling, fear, and death occurs in many cases.
And I advise you not to fall into that where there is hesitation, for sometimes people with such ailments are prone to this art. For there is one who is provoked by his own affliction, and he has a slight death within him; because of his severity which he found from his illness and the length of his wickedness. And when it is an affliction due to fear that signifies death.
And there are those who give their flute players and boast with them, hoping for health, but their affliction is harmful.
Therefore it does not pertain that you should agree to those who come to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be greater than your desire and your greediness. And do not presume about something from that unless after certain knowledge, which verifies among you what has come to a praiseworthy succession.
And make use of all the sick among you in diagnosis and prescription for that which is fittingly health.
For indeed it is with you an aid to the attainment of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
God inspires you, O children, with understanding, and may He not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have ordered this Chapter by distinguishing through chapters, according to what preceded in the Chapter of Cauterization from hair to feet: that it may relieve you of what you sought out from it and wherein you need.
¶ On the healing of water which is gathered in the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
Know that this affliceing often happens among boys around the time of birth: or when an obstreperous midwife strangles a baby's head without gentleness.
And whenever this happens for some unknown cause that is not known.
And indeed, I have not seen this affliction in others except in boys; and to everyone whom I saw affected by it, death has come: therefore, for that reason, I considered abandoning the treatment of it.
And indeed, I have seen this boy whose head was filled with water and his head was magnificent every day until he could not sit up on himself due to its size; and the moisture increased until he died.
And indeed, this moisture is either added between the skin and the bone or accumulated under the jawbone.
And the operation on this, if there is moisture between the skin and bone and there is a swelling of the pharynx, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure one width wide: and the length of the fissure should be like two nodes, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of strangulation.
But if the moisture has increased even more, and there is a larger swelling, then place two such incisions according to this shape.
And if the moisture is underneode the bone and its sign is what you see the commissures of the head open from every side; and water is pressed when you compress it with your hand inside: and that is not hidden from you, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this model.
And after the incision, extract all moisture completely. Then close the incisions with bandages and swabs. And then remove that [the abscess] from above with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then dissolve the bandage, and treat the wound with dressings, and ointments.
And do not abandon compressing the head equally. And feed the sick person with dry food and a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the size of swelling appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more on the back of the neck, or at the shoulder, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with incision where you see swelling and water collection, and cut that as is possible to you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and blood flow occurs, and the sick person dies from this flow with evacuation of moisture.
§ Concerning incision of Arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When a person has catarrh to the eyes or chest and it persists, and does not yield to medical treatment: then the final treatment is greater in that incision of those two arteries.
Therefore, when one wishes to make an incision, it must relieve a sick person's head. Then the hairy place with rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let a sick person bind his neck with each of its own cloths. Then consider where the blood flows. And places of both are places that lie behind down ears: and they are rarely concealed, except in some people.
Then signs with wax on each side: and cut both at once from the edge to a little mouth, upon incision reaching the mouth: so that it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the small mouth beneath the artery and cut them together with incision.
And be the length of incision as two fingers joined.
For when blood is cut, it goes out with pulsing flow, which jumps to the internal organs frequently.
However, if the artery is not palpable by feel, one must take measurements from the ear to determine the space of three fingers. Then mark with hot wax and measure up to the mouth.
And what needs to be drawn out from the blood is six ounnces or perhaps more or less. The whole of it should be done according to the quantity that appears to you from the sickness and fullness of the patient's artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there is still something protruding from the wound to the mouth, then incise it so that a hot swelling does not occur; then bind the wound with linen threads.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
§ Regarding the extraction of arteries that are located at the temples.
Head III.
When an old hemicrany occurs to the man or acute catarrh because of acid moisture and heat in the temple muscles or a long-standing headache and such like: and it is treated with the methods of curing by medicine, and does not cure it completely; then we have become skilled in treating these diseases through the extraction of arteries from the temples, or their burning as we have narrated.
And the method of operation for extracting them is that the sick person removes hairs on the temples and attends to an apparent artery in the temple. For it shows itself to you by its own pulse, and rarely hides except in a few people or from intense coldness.
But if it is hidden to you, then the sick person binds his own head with any of his cloths: and afterwards a warm place with coarse cloth. Or a warty place with hot water, until it is clearly revealed to you. Then take the padded garment, which I had formed earlier. Then remove the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it, and extract it from above until you remove it completely from the skin, and make it exit out of the tunics that are underne cujusque partibus.
If however the artery is thin: then wrap it with the tip of the hook. Then incise from that side according to how much its ends are extended, and contract them so that the blood does not flow out. For if it is not incised, and if it is not severed, the blood will not rise up completely.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood until .3 [liters].
But if the artery is large: then it should be tied off in two places with a string of double thickness and strength made from silk or horsehair, so that putrefaction does not approach to itself before consolidation of the wound, and blood flows out.
Then incise the excess that is between the two ties. Do this at that hour or after another hour.
And if you can, burn it with a brand up to the bone using a surgeon's knife: until its ends are cut off and it stands in place of that operation.
And this is better done if he does not have a fever or overheated constitution. For the branding iron is from those things which help to finish off moistures. Therefore it helps better.
And after the removal of arteries, as it should be filled with old-fashioned cooking mortar: and pills are placed over them properly made.
And after the wound is cleaned with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with lime, until it heals.
If during the operation there is a flow of blood from an artery, then quickly proceed to cut it off with a cautery or fill the space with wax as you complete your task, and hold your hand tightly until the blood stops. If nothing is currently available to you, then place something on your finger until the blood hardens. And cleanse the area with vigorously cold water until it cools down and is tightened as necessary.
And what is lighter and easier to extract the artery, you have this with a cautery that has two knives on it; so keep both blades of the knife similar in sharpness to an Almahadite (a type of hard steel). However, their sharpness is much less than that of two knives. Since if they are sharp like two knives, heat both ends: and do not cut the flesh quickly. Since there is some thickness in them, they must be heated with fire, and the flesh cut quickly: so this tool is better for every work, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of a caterie. (Note: The term "cauterie" here
And let the space that is between the two knife sizes be equivalent to a finger's thickness, after you mark two places with encaustic (wax): and lay both ignited ones very carefully, until they reach the mouth, and cut into the wax at these two places: so it will elongate what lies between those ends. For with this cautery they do not become thoroughly hardened.
Chapter IV. (Note: This would typically be part of
Regarding the treatment for persistent tears flowing from the eyes. (Translation note: "assiduarum" is likely a mistranscription or copyist error, possibly meaning "excessive" or related to persistence)
When there are persistent tears and the course of these from veins that lie outside the skull on top of the head: and nothing is congested with it regarding treatment medicines along with other medical remedies, and he sees his face already reddening, and feels movement in his forehead as if it were ant trail movements by ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist to such a degree that the hairs on them have been corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids have become heated from the persistence of tears: then ancient physicians resorted in the treatment of these through this operation, and they named it as a cure with Ense (a type of surgical instrument).
And indeed, you should instruct a sick person to pluck his hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three incisions on his forehead at equal distances along its length: so that the length of each incision is about two fingers, one being equidistant from the middle of the nose along the front; the second according to the length by a little more than the reach of your arms; and the third to the other side. And from the incisions cut out the arteries which are on both sides: elongate your hand along the continuation of the two jaws, so that the space of the incision is equal to the length of three fingers joined together: and have for you a truncated sponge or many dried pieces of cloth with which to absorb any excess blood.
Then insert the spatula at the two sharp ends, whose following form is as follows: From the incision that is on the side of the temple, to the second incision: and scrape with it completely all skin between the two inciscu, covered by fatty tissue, which is above the bone. Then do also that from the middle incision to the second incision: (Continue with additional steps or procedures as per original text instructions). Then remove the spatula and introduce another instrument again into the first incision, which is called a sharp cutting tool with one blunt edge, not sharp on the other side: (Proceed to detail how this instrument will be used according to the original surgical procedure). And this is its form. (This could imply that detailed instructions or diagrams follow this
And place the sharp side of its blade against the attached flesh with fatty tissue, and the blunt side against the bone; and press it until it reaches the middle fissure: and separate everything along with it that runs down from the head to the eyes, except for the continuing incision in the skin. (This instruction is part of a larger surgical procedure where precise actions must be taken when handling tissue during an operation.)
Then perform this on the median cleft up to another cleft.
And after it has run an equal amount of blood, express the places from pieces of coagulated blood.
Then place liniment made from old cooked wax into every cleft, and apply soaked breadcrumbs over them with wine, oil or vinegeroom. And make sure that hot inflammation does not occur.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage and apply a large quantity of infusion with warm water. Then care for it with basil oil, and other remedies used to heal wounds: until healed.
Head V. (Note: This is presumably
¶ Regarding the treatment of sharp tears and rheums for eyes from within the head.
When sharp tears and rheums occur frequently, severely: and one sees his eyes being exhausted, diminished, and their aspect is already weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls from them, and there is acute pain in deep head: then take these conditions into account, that those materials, and tears do not come unless from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is this one. And it is as follows: instruct to rub the forehead of the sick person. Then make one cut into the cleft in the middle of the forehead or slightly across its width, and begin from the left temple to the right temples: and let the incision be up to the mouth: and stretch your hand along the incision from the temples that move during chewing: until it is revealed: and dry all blood with a sponpress.
Then separate between two lips of the cleft with old cooked wax or with linseed oil. Then bind it tightly from above with soaked breadcrumbs: and moisten the breadcrumbs with wine and oil to prevent hot inflammation.
And when you loosen it and see that the swelling becomes hotter: then one must scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow there.
Then care for it with the treatment of excision that makes flesh grow: as if you received two parts from flour and four parts from colophony: and prepare a plaster from them, and apply it to the wounds at birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Concerning its treatment that applies to gold.
Everything that applies to gold is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, like iron and glass; or plant-like, such as beans and chickpeas; or something fluid, like water and vinegerockets, and their equivalents in the field) - or some animal.
Whenever it applies to gold and is not the kind of mineral added nor grows into the gold, expose the gold to the sun: if you then see a stone, distill something from olives or saffron onto the gold. Then administer its extraction, and induce sneezing with the conditioner, and fill up the nostrils at the onset of sneezing when you place fragments from cloth or wool around the ears and stretch the gold to the top.
For often it is expelled with this treatment.
But if not released, then administer its extraction with the gills (that is, with fine sieves): this shape is as follows.
If it is expelled with the gills, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extractions with a fine hook in several duplicate iterations.
But if it still does not come out with that, then make a tube of metal and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal greatly, and fill what is around the tube with wax diluted with oil, so that only through the tube there be no wind: then extract it with your strong attractive power.
Many times indeed it comes out with what we have told. If however it does not come out this way: then take some helkalimbat or viscous substance, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the bone after you have made an incision carefully placed in order around: then insert it into the ear hole when you have dried up the ear.
If however it does not come out with everything that we have told: then quickly proceed to cutting before a hot suppuration or spasm occurs.
And the method of making a hole is, as phlebotomists first to an ill person's head: and extract from him blood according to his strength measure. Then make the ill person sit between your hands, and turn his ear towards upwards, and find a small hole in the root of the ear near to his fat on the same place that is sunken: and let the hole be crescent shaped until you reach rock: then remove it with what is possible for you from instruments.
Then close the hole by your hand quickly and take care of it, until healed.
That if what is falling into the ear comes from one grain which grows and swells: then administer its removal.
If however it does not agree with you for an exit, then take a slender and delicate paste in this manner.
And administer with it an incision of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not make this when you think that that granule is already moistened by sweat in the ear until you put many pieces: then remove them with a hook or a delicate grip or suction as we have mentioned, for the removal of that is lessened.
However, the water that enters the ear should be used with a weak sternutation initially; and now it has filled its own ear with something quite cooked old; and he is lying on top of that ear where there is water. If however it comes out through this, then it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of your finger, light and weak, heat them with little fire, and let the sick person insert one into his ear hole; and he should jump on one foot from that side, and strike with a stone against another stone which is in the ear. Therefore, do not stop doing this with stone and stone until all water has come out.
And now the water has come out so that you may take from your fire or from one reed and insert its end into the ear; and ignite the other end with fire until it is mostly burnt. Then take another reabendothomirim; and do this many times until all the water has come out: and remove it with a tube as was previously mentioned in stone.
In the removal of animals entering into it, if it is a creature of the body like a flea or similar, care for it as I have said in divisioning.
But if it is of a large body that appears to the sense: then apply its removal with tweezebacks and hooks; and the matter of this is easier for all those who hold it in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you care for it with that which I have mentioned in divisioning and dilation treatise, and your care is not enough: then one should look at the ear under the sun. If however something appears from these worms, then extract that with tweezebacks or with fine hooks.
However, if nothing appears there, then take the tube, which has this shape: tight at the bottom, wide at the top; and insert the delicate end into the ear according to the amount that the sick person can tolerate; then extract with a strong suction. Repeat it many times until all worms come out.
However, if they do not obey you to go out, then fill the area around the tube with wax as I said on the stone.
But if they do not go out as I said: then apply the distillations which the ancients have found effective against worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring be as when you poured oil and remedies into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. Just as you see it made of silver or brass, narrow below, where there should be a small hole, wide above.
So that the part which is inserted into the ear through the tube's hollowness is properly made of brass. And if you wish to use the rod, take it and apply an oil coating on its end with a proper wool soak; then pour oil, or a poultice, or whatever medicine you have in the tangle into the tube; let that be in the ear: then insert the rod from above after it is heated gently; then squeeze out by your hand's moderate pressure until the oil is pushed downwards into the hollowness of the ear, and the patient feels something inside. And what you pour into the ear should already be somewhat warmed with a little fire: and do not let it have anything that has been distilled coldly poured in. For medicines cannot tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On treating a case of worm-induced ear blockage.
Sometimes certain infants come out from the mother's womb without having been pierced.
And now it has happened to some men that there is swelling in the ear canal from an ulcer or flesh grown in it.
And sometimes this swelling occurs in the deep of the ear canal, which is not felt by touch; and sometimes it happens towards the outer part of the opening, and produces that sensation.
Therefore, what occurs deep within the ear, which is not grasped by touch, presents a difficulty in many cases of healing.
And in that which produces the sensation, you must place the unwell ear near the sun and look at it; then if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a very delicate cloth of this kind, whose end has a small width, one part is sharp: and let the rest be doubled on both sides. So that it does not harm the ear.
If the swelling is flesh grown in the ear canal: then hold it with a very fine hook and cut it off easily with a sharp razor until all the flesh is removed.
If the swelling is deep within the ear: then take a very thin rod and make it warm with little fire; then put it into the ear canal.
If you also feel that swelling with the unwell person who has great hearing difficulty, try to open it easily; and be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put linen in the ear according to the width of the opening that you made in an ointment from Egypt; do this for several days until you are sure about the healing of the wound.
Or take linen and pour it into rose-colored water; then powder with ground barley meal, and use that substance.
If you see the ear starting to become detached: then it is necessary to extract the linen, and let it rest with another linen that has been placed in vinegar which was made from rose oil; until the hot abscess settles down: then care for it as needed for healing.
If however there is bleeding: then immerse the sponge or cloths in cold water, and place a metal container over it; and continue with the remaining treatment that separates the predicted blood flow as described in the treatise on distillations.
On the healing of eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
These eyelids that occur on the eyelids, sometimes are moist and sometimes are dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezebrushes or hooks, and cut them off from the roots with a scalpel blade. Then place something made of wax over the areas.
If however blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. Often they reappear when something remains from the roots. And when burned with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
On the healing of glandular tumors on eyelids.
Chapter IX.
Often it happens that something occurs on the eyelids which resembles Crandini in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Grandio; and it is an aggregation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore the operation on them is as follows: then you should consider if it is Grandio proceeding from there, what appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its matter is easy.
Then find a crack over it with width. And then scrape it off from every part easily until it flees. And suspend it with a hook and separate that same thing.
If however it is not prepared for separation by you unless after you enter the eyelid with a very slight incision, then that thing will harm the sick person in some way.
If there is a large crack: then join it with stitches and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no great harm will come from it. For indeed the ointment restores it, and colors it flesh-colored.
And if it is large and extends towards the inner part of the ear against the intrinsic surface, then turn to the eyelid, and detach the burr with a hook; besides which you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
That if it is prolonged on the eyelid by means of an incision, it does no harm to anything else.
Then wash the eye after detaching the burr with salted water: and care for it as you would color the affected area, until it heals.
§ Regarding the treatment of axon injuries in the eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axon is fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid and indeed most often happens to children: it greatly affects their eyes, and they experience morning catarrh, and cannot see sunlight because tears flow towards them, causing them to lie down on their face always, sleeping over it, and their eyelids are moist under the brow bones, which have been thickened by swelling: indeed the prominence of Axon appears as an eye, and when you press with your fingers between those points, you feel Axon there.
And the method is that the patient should place their head in a position within yours.
Then take linen cloth and prepare salt water within it, and make a circle out of that salty water according to the amount which contains Axirnath from all sides. Then place them on it, and press with your fingers from all sides so that Axirnath is accumulated in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a somewhat spread out patch cracks across its width, and it is not the main crack as occurs in deep venesection.
It is necessary to find the skin in its entirety until you reach Axirnanthus, as Axirnath proceeds from a crack according to the shape of the flaky white frostbite.
So extract it with the cloth you have placed between your fingers on the outside; and roll back your right and left hand until dispersed: and be careful not to put the cloth into the crack so that you do not come with a spread out patch towards the eye, and harm it.
If however Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then put into the small crack with ease until Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and press it with sponges.
And there are people who put salt on it, and place it in the depth of a crack so that what remains from that moisture can melt.
Then care for it until healed.
If however this occurs in a hot abscess, then treat the area with mild ointments until it is healed.
¶ Concerning methods of Axirnath for the eye, that is when the eyelid is moistened by the eye, from which it swells as it should not.
Head XI.
When hairs are born in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the skin of the hair: then they harm the eye and cause certain diseases such as constant tears, and swelling of the eyelids, and a white film until it leads to destruction of the eye.
Indeed, Atamishir treats eyes according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire. Or by sharp medicine, as described in the chapter on cauterization. Or Atamishir treats it with incision and stitching. Or by tubes, as I will explain.
It is necessary to place the sick person's head in your lap. Then, gently lift the eyelid with your left hand.
If thusly lifted, it is good. And if not: insert a needle into it where there is thread from the lower part of the eyelid and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, so that it is near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where hair grows: and pull the thread towards the upper lid, and lift it with a rod.
Then find within the inner part of the eyelid where there are added hairs with a small space due to tears from greater to lesser tear duct:
Then remove the thread, and place under the eyelid a piece of cotton or cloth: then mark above the eyelid with wax incense, which is as the shape of the leaves of myrtle.
However, it must be done according to the amount and elevation of the eyelid: for that has been diversified among humans for a long time.
For it is from these ones who need to be cut according to the large amount of an eyelid, according to the quantity that softens from the eyelab:
Then find over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear duct up to the lesser one, and let there be a slit near natural hairs as is the thickness of a rod:
Then insert an awl into one of the two angles of the skin. Then remove the skin entirely. Then gather the edges with two stitches using a needle and fine thread; clean up the blood, so that it clings to the threads above the two lacerations, applying some substances as needed if you wish to do so: and if not, do not worry about it.
Then remove the stitches and keep them for three or four days; afterwards treat that area.
And if you wish to, leave a wound without stitches and take care of it with something that dries up and contracts it. For the eyelid is injured near a scar, but will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancient Atamirs. (Note: "Ataxmir" seems to be a misspelling or variation of "Al
However, there is concern for the sick person, and it comes from good surgery, and there is no fear involved. (Note: The sentence structure appears to be a bit disjointed due to the translation process.)
And another method is also found with the Atamirs: and it consists of signs above the eyelid resembling the shape of a holly leaf, as we have described. (Note: The Latin text provided in this sentence seems to be a bit challenging due to possible translation nuances or transcription errors.)
Then the eyelid is cut with three separated or joined hooks according to this shape that follows, and then make an incision where there is excess with scissors of equal size. (Note: The translation reflects the direct instructions as found in ancient surgical texts; however, translating terms like "uncini" could be challenging due to its potential meaning variations.)
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and they do not fit: then take scissors where there is thread, and insert them into the middle of the shape; also insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller one; and join the threads with your fingers equally. (Note: This instruction requires careful translation to maintain the meaning of each action described in ancient surgical practice.)
Then make your elbow equal to the level and attach skin above it as we described.
Then join the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for them until they heal.
If indeed an abscess occurs near your incision or fissure: apply the boar fat to the abscess and similar afflictions using soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that even the eyelids are affected, with their hairs turning.
Therefore, one must use what we mentioned regarding the incision: but the suture is more artificial. ¶ Regarding the treatment of gout with a pessary.
And it is, as you turn the eyelid and split the inward fissure according to what was told. Then skilfully make two thin canes or pieces of fine wood: whose length be according to the width of the ee lid, and their breadth less than its span: and now you have made cuts at each end where you hold them from both sides.
Then join each with delicacy to what protrudes above the eyelid of the eye, and secure both canes from both sides with a strong binding, and let it go for several days. For the skin will die, darken, and putrefy until it falls off by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
And when it has solidified, level the eyelid: and its hairs do not prick.
And this is the shape of two canes that you make according to this pattern, and measure their quantity by length and breadth.
Head XII.
¶ Regarding the leveling of prickly hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is performed by taking a fine needle and inserting a thread made of fine silk into it gently. Then gather his limbs, and tie off each end with a delicate knot: and the length of the threads should be one hand's breadth.
Then connect another fine thread under it for a short distance, and tie off his limbs as needed.
Then the patient places their head in your lap, and position them close to the sun as you declare the operation: for it is a delicate or minute procedure.
Then insert the needle with the thread attached into the root of the eyelid and make it quickly pierce the eyelid until you extract a natural hair above.
Then pull out the hair up to the thread attachment and insert that hair into the attached thread: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull with your hand along with that and let the hair exit with the thread from the eyelid alongside the natural hair.
But if the thread is dragged and does not let out the hair with it: pulls the thread downwards with the thread that you composed in it, until the thread exits through the upper hole, and watches it by eye sight: then indeed you pull on the thread and the attached filament; and extract both, and close the eye; and leave it shut for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and grows over onto the body.
But if the hair is short, then join it to a longer hair from natural hairs and let them grow out together; or leave it alone for some time until it grows out, and then extract it.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called "Leporine.
And this sickness belongs to either natural causes or accidental ones.
Therefore, the accidental one arises from wound healing, cutting, cauterization, and similar methods.
And the method of operation for this is as follows: you should find the wound's consolidation, separate its edges, and place something like a lint between them until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use therein things that cause bleeding and constriction; for if you do so, the disease will return worse than before. Rather, use those which soften, such as foenumgraecum: boiled henbane seeds with water, in which althea has been cookeby barley meal ointment mixed with some oil: and rubbing on that bandage, and caring for it accordingly.
And your treasury of healing is to discuss all methods, so that it does not solidify again, according to the initial shape.
Indeed, this operation we have discussed is only a correction of the disease to prevent it from returning to its original shape entirely.
§ On treating the disease that affects the lower eyelid, which is a wrinkling or lifting up to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This disease that occurs below is called true Alxatratus. And it is natural and also accidental.
And the accidental one arises from a wound, a crack, or cauterization, and similar methods.
And the method of operation for this is as follows: you should take two threads and dye them, then insert them into the flesh and make them penetrate from the left tear to the right tear until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Then extend the flesh upward with a needle and incise it with a wide scalpel. If so, let it return to its shape as an eyelid according to what is proper.
And if not, take a rod and place it in the fissure, and turn with it the eyelid; then find two fractures on the inner side of the eyelardetermine that they are the extremities of the fissures from both corners of the incision until they converge to form an angle: when they have assembled this figure is formed, and it is a Greek letter.
Then remove the flesh by the amount that is the sharp edge below, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts with a thread of wool.
Then care for them as we said, with soothing remedebut also wine and honey, until they are healed.
And if Albucasis should occur from the fissure or suture, or by cautery: then it is necessary that you make the fissure flat under eyelashes, even as previously occurred. Then separate between two lips with wine, as we said.
And the utmost of care for Albucasis, whether it is above or below, ensure that it runs in this operation, according to how it was prepared as an Albucasis form.
For this is of many diversities in the shape: and the prudent artist prepares the ingenuity with whatever possible to him, so that it may return to the natural form or almost to it, and also the sick person himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in various arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
At times this hardening occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid is fused with the conjunctiva of the eye, and it prevents them from their natural functions.
Therefore, you must insert the tip of the stick under the eyelid and elevate it or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a very fine spatula so that it is not as sharp as the edge of the spatwallet but slightly blunt: so that the weak one may not be disturbed during surgery, and remove the sticky substance, and injure the eye with its own sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were to scrape away this adhesion easily until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adherence heals.
Then find water with salt at the eye and cleanse it with water: or drain into it from a sieve made of melted wax and water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with linen thread: and place soaked wool over the conjunctiva of the eye: and after three days use melted wax, and with it until healed.
About the incision of the nail and projection of tear meat.
Head XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nervous: and is similar to tough wax, fine. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen moisture whitewash: which when touched with a hammer or hooked with an awl, separates and does not stick in the hook.
And both kinds do not begin, unless from the main tear, until it gradually flows, and covers the eye, and stops its movement.
And the method of operation for this incision is: that you place your sick head in your lap. Then open his eyes and gently lift the eyelid with your hand. Then cleanse a hoof using a two-pronged caliper, and extend it upwards. Then take a thorn and insert a hair from the mane of a horse or goat or wolf: and ensure that the thread is strong, with its end slightly doubled; and fix it in the middle of the hoof: then penetrate it with a needle, and tie the hoof using the thread, extending it upwards: and scrape off any hair on the side of the hoof following the pupil, as if you were trimming it with your fingers to its outermost edge.
Then cut the remaining part at the tear duct with a sharp pincers or small scissors; and remove the natural tissue of the tear duct so that its incision does not cause an unceasing flow of tears.
And at times it is extended with a single caliper or with a thread as we have mentioned. (However, note that this instruction seems to be incomplete and might need context from the rest of the text for accurate translation.) Then gently scrape using smooth pincers like this: form. (Again, note that without further context or a description of what 'form' refers to in the original text, this translation may
And be careful that the pincers do not touch the outer layer of the cornea, lest it gets torn and perforates the pupil. (As with previous translations, this is context-dependent and might require additional information from the original text for full accuracy.)
Then after the incision, produce some crushed salt or a paste made from saffron into the eye and remove it up to the other day. (This translation is based on the available text but may not be fully accurate without additional context.) Then take care of it as necessary until it heals. (The sentence appears to lack specifics about what 'it' refers to and might require more information from the text for an accurate translation.)
If the hoof is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it nor fix it with pincers, then this kind of hoof is often treated many times with remedies, and heals as described for hemorrhoids when divided. (This translation might require additional context to accurately determine what 'remedies' or 'as described for hemorrhoids' refers to.)
If a bone falls upon it, then open the eyes of the sick person and take a bandage that is thin, mild, weak in sharpness according to this shape. And scrape the hoof from above with careful delicacy. If you see that it becomes rarefied and fractured, then distill from your horn into the eye made of silphium or red myrrh, or ground salt: and moisten the eye until tomorrow.
Then repeat the procedure over the same operation, until the whole thing is removed. Unless there is something contrary to you in a hot eye boil: for then let go of it, and treat the eye boil until healed.
Then repeat the procedure over that with scraping, until healed.
However, the prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it causes harm in a large eye affliction, suspend with a hook and cut from that part of it: and do not finish the incision, so that the course of tears does not occur.
Then fill the lacrimal sac with red myrrh or silphium made, until healed.
§ From cutting on the eyebrow, and flesh born in the eye.
Head XVII.
It is born sometimes in certain eyes of men, composed red flesh or placed above, until it covers the pupil, approaches, or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelangs to the outside: and resembles a rose thorn bush.
And the operation on it is also such that the sick person places his head in your bosom. Then open its eyes, and cleanse all that flesh with hooks suitable to it: and hold it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh first, until finished entirely by cutting. And the cavity from the eye so as not to harm the body during the operation: and let your incision be such that you make in it, or with a spatula, which we have mentioned in the nail cutting section: or with forceps like those by which a surgeon is tied, according to the form that comes after this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and the entire cataract is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or pour into it red powder, and such things from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye outside a cuttlefish bone mixed with albugineous substance: to ensure protection from a hot boil.
If there remains some catarpert from the cataract and you are mastered by warm blood, and a hot boil comes up: then close your eye, and care for it with that which soothes the boil.
Then apply again over it after the surgery until it heals.
And likewise do with added flesh that occurs in this kind of eye.
But it is necessary that you do not insert your hand into any weakness of the entire eye by a natural or accidental way while operating with iron: and do not introduce your fingers into any part of these operations until you see, what that body can bear such an operation.
¶ On collecting surplus matter from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
The red bandages that are made over the eye prevent its natural movement and weaken the eye with days in length.
It is necessary for you first to consider if the eye in which there is a Sebel is strong and does not have any illness besides the Sebel itself: then gather that Sebel from it.
And you should instruct those who are weak to place their head on your lap.
Then hang those bandages with one hook or two according to your wisdom: and the hook should be a fine double-headed one, according to this shape, or there are two hooks arranged in one body, according to this shape.
Then carefully clean with fine scissors those veins gently and remove the blood hour by hour until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and resolved; and be careful not to injure the eye with sharp tips.
And let your operation be at noon in the presence of the sun, and be very firm in your procedure so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
And when you have finished, then strain green or red saffron into the eye so that its sharpness counteracts what remains inside of it.
But if it is not possible for you to gather all of that in one hour, then plaster the eye with that which soothes the pain of the eye; and let it go off by days a few, until it settles: and ensure away from warm discharge; then repeat upon it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of scissors.
§ Here is the treatment of Arissat's protrusion towards the nose.
Head XXIX.
The doctors name the Arissat's fistula, which you should treat with a caustic or an acute burning medicine according to what preceded its description.
And if it does not heal, then there is no way with that; unless you cut above the original wound at birth and remove all moisture and pus until it becomes visible.
And when the bone is revealed, and you see decay or blackness within it, then scrape out that with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called Asper's head.
Let it be made of iron wire, and let that head be round as a drill, which has been dotted with the dotting of a razor or a fine needle's dotting: and place it on top of where the bone is decayed.
Then roll it back between your fingers and gently press with your hand until you know that the corruption has been scraped off; do this several times.
Next, restore the place with expelled drugs containing astringents.
If it becomes consolidated and flesh forms within it, and pus is discharged from there: if it remains for forty days without recurrence, inflammamoin, or any occurrence happening within it; then you know that it has been cured.
And if not, then there is no power in it unless to reduce the fistula back to the nostril hole according to this pattern.
And so as to reveal the bone second with iron or sharp medicine; and once the bone is revealed, then take a probe according to this pattern, where the tip of the iron is triangular: and the wood thereof be pyramidal-shaped until you see such shape.
Then place that over the bone; and it should be close to the tear duct: and lengthen your hand slightly away from the eye. Then roll your hand with the probe until it penetrates the bone and feels weakness there; by this which finds wind coming out of it when they hold their hand over their nose.
Therefore then restore the place with expelled drugs containing astringents as I have taught you.
But when flesh forms and the place hardens; then the material which had been discharged outwards returns to the nose: therefore it is lighter over the weakened area.
§ On reducing the prominence of the eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety and there is no harm or decrease to sight; then you should resolve the weakened part: afterwards drain it by phlebotomy: then place ventoses on its neck without incision but with suction. (Note: The translation of this Latin text is in accordance with medical practices from historical texts, modern surgical procedures might differ.)
Then place the ointment made from acacia, aloe, olive oil, and tragacanth over the eye. Then bind a bandage above on top of the plaster with many threads.
And the mode of threads is as follows: receive some soft, many linen strips and double each strip from them altogether into four; then make more from them: place one on top of the other according to the quantity required by the eye; then bind these with a strip of sturdy cloth.
And repeat the blisters with suction without incision.
Then remove the blisters and loosen the bandaged eye for a day and night.
If however the bandage becomes soft again, then it should be tightened greatly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If however you see that the eye has gained its normal appearance again, this is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, threads, binding, and blisterebs until it heals.
¶ About cutting into the white membrane of the eye. (This appears to be a title or section heading in Latin)
Chapter 21. (This appears to be a chapter
When a rupture occurs in the white membrane of the eye, then it protrudes and proceeds outward from the eyelids like grains of sand, and this causes disfigurement resembling that of a human due to it; thus the operation on it is as I describe: and you should insert an awl into its root from the lower part upwards. (This sentence is part of a surgical procedure described by Albucasis for treating "dacryocystitis," which translates to "tear sac inflammation" or rupture.)
Then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the nasolacrimal part, and make it penetrate; then remove the first awl according to its own arrangement. (Continuing the surgical procedure described by Albucasis.)
Then incise the place of the double thread, and tie it with a strip around that part of the eye membrane: then bind it tightly. (This is another step in Albucasis's surgical procedure.)
Then remove the cataract and place a wool soaked in oil over the eye; then release it so that the thread slips out with the moisture.
Then care for the eye along with whatever comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the thread is drawn from all sides in a circle of cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Then a fine probe is used to reach the depth of the eye, and moisture descends from the albugineal tissue, and the eye enters; then thread it immediately, until healed.
Regarding the treatment by Alcmund. (Please note that "Alcomnati" is a typographical error for
Chapter amo. (The phrase seems incomplete or incorrect;
This ailment called Alcmund's is not but pus that has accumulated in the eye and resembles water flowing downward; it is not itself. (Please note that "Alcomnaturis" seems to be an incorrect term, possibly intended to reference 'Alcmund', which doesn't correspond with any well-known ailment or condition from historical texts related to Albucasis.)
And the method of operation is thus: make the sick person sit on an arranged seat, or directly (on a couch).
Then take his head with your own hands from two sides and move it so that you see the pus coming to the lower parts of your eyes. (Note: The context suggests this is a procedure for examining or treating an eye condition, possibly in relation to Alcmund's as referenced earlier.) Then draw out [the pus], and let it not descend further; unblock the passageway: and observe as before if the patient sees things like he saw them; and if it does not continue to descend lower, know that it is water (moisture).
If however the pus does not proceed as we have mentioned, then make the sick person sit between your hands (to examine or treat them). Then take a fine probe and insert it slightly above the skin layer at the very edge of the conjunction with the corneal tunic (cornea), until the pus exits.
Therefore, when it is taken out, then strain the warm water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled rue and hamolet; then treat with the rest of the treatment until healed.
Concerning the care for water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have now mentioned the types of water divided, and that which is relevant to explaining how to make it, then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make him sit between your hands squarely against the light and close to the sun; and bind his healthy eye firmly, then tighten him well: then with your right hand, palpate the eyelid of his eye in which there is water if the affected eye is left; or with your left hand if the affected eye is right.
Then take with your right hand a piece of almond paste for his left eye; or with your left hand for the right eye.
Then place the tip of the almond paste near the crown as close to the radius bone visible in that small lacrimal albedo; then push the almond paste with strength: and when you recoil your hand from it, until it penetrates into the eye's sclera; and feel that the almond paste has already reached an empty space.
And the measure of the journey of the almond paste to deepen must be measured as the space that is from the pupil up to the end of the sclera; and it is the crown of the eye. For indeed you will see this in the very pupil of the vision of the eye because of the transparency of the tunic of the sclera.
Then place the almond paste up to where there is water. Then press it lower with one rod after another.
If the water is immediately poured out, then the weak person sees that over which he opens his eye immediately, and an almond-shaped image appears in his own eye.
Then rest for a while. If the water is indeed poured out, then it should be removed again afterward, except for the removal of the almond-shaped image.
When it is thus inserted and does not go up: then extract the almond with ease, and you gradually pull back your hand.
Then dissolve a bit of clear salt in water: and wash out the eye from above with it. Then place a full pad or soaked wool in oil of rose on the eye, and create an almond-like appearance over it: and bind the healthy eye with it.
But us and those who are of our time, we place a finely ground powder on top of the almond-like appearance with albumin.
Which if the almond-shaped image does not conform to your eye entrance due to its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you ought to take the Spatil asphodel, which is called by this name, which has this form.
Therefore bind with the very thing you mentioned and do not finish your hand at the opening: and it is only to make a delicate way to the almond-shaped location.
Then insert the almond-shaped image as we have said.
And at the end of your operation preparation, ensure that the weak person has a properly made sleeping place in which they can sleep on their back in a dark room: and prohibit all movements, and coughing: and put food for it there that is soothing to its nature: and do not move its head neither right nor left at all.
And let the band be according to his arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve that in the dark room and try its vision; and make it see things clearly. Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after making an incision; rather, it should be done by others: because water rises quickly through a violent appearance.
But if a hot abscess occurs: then it should be dissolved before the seventh day; and correct that with what soothes the abscess until it is soothed: then release its vision, and place it over the face of its mouth for controlling sight under those days several, existing in that dark room.
Then he should gradually leave the house, and adapt to his own cases.
And know that in zinc there is no student excused from vision several times: then he may dare over the operation.
And indeed it has come to us that some of those who are from Alairac said, that it was done in Alairac a punctured wall through which water is channeled.
However, therefore I have not seen anyone on your land who did that: nor found it in any ancient books; and it is possible, that it may be new.
And these are forms of species from Alairac, standing over those who ignore them.
Let them be made of metal properly: and let their ends have the same subtlety triangle-shaped, and pointed tip.
Head 24.
¶ On curing meat from nose. (Note that 'Magdalen' might be a typo for 'Acuñan,'
At times meat is born in the nose of different kinds added, some of which resemble a scorpion with many feet: and among them there is a fleshly cancerous, stony-like: and among them there is one that has mild flesh, not darkish colored. (Note: This sentence appears to be a mixture of medical observations from the period concerning various conditions related to nasal growths or tumors.)
Therefore, from those meats that are mild and not deceptive or cancerous, you should make them sit weakly between your hands opposed to the sole, open their nostrils, and project a hook into these meats: then pull them towards the exterior, and cut off what you have enclosed with it using a sharp pointed tool from one side until you know that the meat has been completely removed.
If anything remained from which the removal is not possible: then scrape that off with a single subtle instrument easily until nothing remains of it. If however blood prevails over you, or if a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary: or if it is from malign boils, then quickly cauterize it, until the blood is shed and all meats are removed.
Then pour vinegar or water, or wine into the nostrangs after making an incision. However if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that it is now healthy.
However if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is meat generated within the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not arrive with an incision.
Then indeed it is necessary that you insert a thread with some thickness, and knot many on it: and place between every node an amount of finger or less: and make weak again, so as to send one end of the filament into the nose with a hand's width, or with whatever possible after he has made something similar like this azar: and draw out its odor until it reaches the nostrils, and goes out above his own mouth.
And indeed they do something similar to this Aztami children in schools: and it is an easy thing for him who desires it.
Then place two ends of the ivory on it, one end that protrudes above the nose and the other that remains inside the nose. Then take a saw for cutting flesh with knots present in its blade. Do that until you know that the flesh is already with knots on the ivory.
Then extract the ivory and place it inside the nose after anointing with bloodletting oil that you have drunk in an Egyptian ointlete: do this for three days or more, until the ointment hardens completely what remains from the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter a lead pipe inside the nose for several days until it heals.
However, if it needs a treatment that removes it, use that one.
For making head baths with which to distill oil and other remedies into the nose, do this from silver or bronze: that it be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell; and its passage is similarly shaped.
And if you want to make an enclosed pipe, as a reed.
And the shell instrument for making head baths should be full, closed: its handle is at the end of it, with which you hold it when heating oil or anything else poured out and fluid.
Head XXV.
Often it is born on the end of the nose thorn and swells up, and grows worse with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of this it is necessary that you remove the entire thorn at the beginning of its appearance and all its roots. Then place on top of it or a burn or medicine that cleanses the spot where it was.
But if the incision of it is delayed and swells up, then consider if it is hard stone-like and dark in color with few feelings: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cankered sore.
Many times indeed I have seen those who suffer from a tumor on the brain and great mischief befalls upon that person who has it.
And if the tumor is of a mild touch and not dark color, and it seems that an incision can be made throughout it, then bathe the weakened person, and fearlessly make the cut without hesitation: and care for the place from which it emits and contracts until healed.
Chapter amo26.
§ Of the stitching of the nose, lips, and ears.
Know that when there is a rupture of the continuity of one of these cartilages, it gives little advantage to such an operation, except in certain men.
Therefore, when such an event occurs, you should consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then add pain from the wound along with stitches: afterwards care for it until healed.
And if the continuity of the lips has already been separated and each part made healthy: then it is necessary that from every piece you remove all the skin appearing on it until bleeding occurs. Then attach the two lips with stitchps and tighten them, and pulverize over the blood some dragon's blood and ground olibanum; then place above the powder a piece of diaphainicon plaster, and from consolidated plasters that other something: and loosen it in two days or three. Then wash the wound, and exchange the medicine; and leave it loose until the threads come apart by themselves. And care for the wound with ointment, until healed.
The method of stitching, is that you should attach the continuity rupture or with cubes as I have told you about the windpipe's stitching; or attach the continuity rupture with a thread like this one you know.
Chapter 2 cuffs.
§ On the extraction of nodes from the labia.
Head XXVII. Many men indeed experience hard and grainy lumps similar to seeds of grass within their own labia majora and minora.
Therefore it is necessary to turn the labium and break off every node on it, then hang it with a hook and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after cutting with soaked gauze until the bleeding stops.
Then it is to be cleansed with vinegar and treated with that which has styptic properties up until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
§ On cutting flesh from over the thighs.
Often there arises a protrusion of flesh above the thighs, which the ancients named an alula.
Therefore it is necessary to hang her with a hook or hold her with forceps and cut near its root, then let the wound bleed freely or let blood.
Then place soaked gauze over it or other powders with styptic and drawing properties on it.
And if the flesh returns after its healing, for it often does return, then cut it a second time and burn it; for indeed that which is burnt does not return.
Chapter 29.
§ On shaving teeth with iron.
At times they gather on the surfaces of teeth from both the inner and outer parts, and between thigh bones with rough edges, they become ugly, and sometimes turn black, then yellow, until the decay reaches to the thighs, and the teeth are spoiled by it.
Therefore you must make the person sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape off a tooth and its surface where such edges are visible: until nothing remains of them, and do similarly with the blackness, yellowing, greening, and other things until they have been cleaned.
If indeed what is present at the beginning of reasoning is removed, that is good; and if not, then further reasoning should be applied on another day, secondly, and thirdly, until one ultimately arrivamo to understanding it well.
And know that the tooth requires diverse forms of reasoning, many shapes: depending on how you prepare for your operation, because the tool that grinds down the tooth from its lower part is different from the one used between teeth; there are other shapes as well.
And these forms of instruments you have prepared and see.
Chapter 30.
§ On the extraction of painful teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth with its pain using all ingenuity, and gradually eliminate it. For it does not suffice that the person is relieved when the tooth is extracted: for it is a high matter; until there is no excuse in its extraction, then one should think about firmly extracting it again at another time, so as to strengthen and certify it within you the painful tooth.
For often a person is deceived by the pain and thinks it is in a hollow tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not leave, until the weakened tooth is extracted again.
For now we have already seen that from the method of bloodletting practitioners.
For when the painful toebottom is certified within you, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a sparing manner, where there may be some strength; until the gum is loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers or with subtle tweezers first slowly, and gradually, until you shake it.
Then the larger locations in that place should have good positioning, and the head of the weakened tooth between your fingers; which you already handled well so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth straight forward, so as not to break it.
If however it does not come out, then take some of their instruments and insert it underneamoinside with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
But if the tooth is pierced or corroded: then you must fill that hole with cloth and bind it with a thin rod at its end, so as not to break when your clamp touches it above.
And you should carefully act on the surrounding gums from all parts a lot.
And maintain your strength so as not to break it, and for the part to remain and return over the initial painful site.
And beware that you do not do what the ignorant bleeders do in their haste and overconfidence, except for administering what we have mentioned.
For many times such things happen to people with large ailments, of which the most difficult are those that break and remain with all its roots or some of them: or as they extract it together with some jawbones, as we have testified many times.
Then wash after the removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
But if a flow of blood from the places (for this often happens) then apply something dry with linen and fill it up: and if not, burn it if you do not provide yourself with linen.
The forms of the delicate tweezers with which it is moved first should have long ends, short handles, and be thick so that they dore not double when pressed against the tooth: they should be as you see on heavy handles, until you clamp them without damaging themselves or doubling: their ends should be made of iron wrought properly or of evenly shaped steel: and in those ends there should be teeth, some of which fit into certain ones, and grip the jawbone with a proper tightness.
And sometimes extreme deformities occur like the shape of a bird'amoeboid, which is called a stork, and they are strong contractions.
Chapter 31.
On dental removal and extraction of broken jawbones.
When a tooth remains after dental removal that has broken something, then you must place butter on the site of injury for one day, or two days until it softens: then insert an algastar (a tool used by Albucasis in surgery) or forceps whose extremities resemble the shape of a bird called a stork. This is the form of this forceps.
Their extremities are made like inner shears or similar to an aliskilfegi (a type of surgical instrument used by Albucasis).
If therefore these forceps do not work for you in extracting the root, then you must chisel over the root and expose all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, whose form is this.
It has short extremities, relatively thick: and it should not be saturated so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through this, it is good: and if not, you must succeed with other instruments whose forms are these.
The shape of the first triangular extremity, which has some thickness.
The shape of a thin triangular extremity.
And with other instruments and tools used previously in tooth extraction.
Also be successful with this tool that resembles a large hook, whose shape is of a curved triangular extremity with some thickness to not break: and it should not be saturated. (The response could also include an illustration showing the shape)
And you know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the remaining instruments do not count, and the skilled craftsman himself discovered by himself an instrument according to what it signifies in operation and the illnesses themselves.
Since there are instruments from materials of which the ancients did not speak, because of the diversity of their kinds.
If however a bone is broken from the jaw or from other facial bangs, or if it rots: then to search on top of that at its place with what suits him in terms of instruments and forceps which I mentioned before for extracting roots, and to treat with care, whose shape is as follows.
Let it be in a certain thickening gradually, as if strung or held with that bone, and not fled and flowed until the bone comes out: and restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
If however there is a small rot in the bone, then remove it from its own rot, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
Concerning the key of great teeth above others.
When great teeth do not follow their natural course of growth, it is foul by that shape: and especially when this happens in women, and girls, namely those who are unmarried.
Therefore you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and not placed there, or it is possible its keying: then remove it: and if it is attached to another tops, then cut it with that tool, whose shape is as follows.
It is similar a small knife, and made of iron ore, very sharp at the ends.
And let your cutting be as you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other teeth are disturbed.
However, if it is a prominent exposure with its file: then sharpen that very file by filing with this shape.
And the entire file from it, and the handle of its pointed nibs, like a file that makes needles: with which the tooth is gradually filed over many days with ease, so as not to be displaced, and falls out; then smoothen it again at the end with certain rasors.
But if it is a tooth from which part breaks off and damages the tongue: then one must also file that very piece until its roughness of fracture is removed and smoothened; and not injuring the tongue or corrupting speech.
Chapter amo 33.
Regarding the reattachment of teeth with gold wires.
When the anterior teeth have been concussed and shaken from a blow or accident: and the infirm cannot hold on to what has been bitten so that it does not fall off; and no medication is of use in their cure: then there is an ability in them, for them to be bound with gold wire: because silver becomes blackened, and rots after a few days; but gold never changes.
And let the wire have a thickness moderate both fine and coarse according to the amount it takes between teeth.
And indeed the shape of reattachment is to take up the wire and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then push with both ends of the wire among moved teeth, if one or more, until you reach the fabric up to a healthntooth on the other side. Then you shall make the pressure up to the part wherein one broke off; and fasten your hand with delicacy and wisdom, until it is not entirely removed: that the constriction which you bind with the wire be at the roots of teeth so as not to come loose.
Then incise the superfluous ends of the splint with pincers; bring together both pieces and twist them off while gripping; hide them between a healthy tooth and a moving tooth, so as not to harm the tongue; then discard it once it is tightly secured.
If however it loosens or breaks, bind them securely with another thread and let it stay in that way for a sufficient amount of time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the pattern of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth as you see it.
And at times it happens that a single toaster returns or two after the accident to their original places, and remain as we described, and do not make this unless by an artist who is wise and skilled.
And at times it is adjusted with some bone of the jaw; and made into the form of a tooth as we described, and placed in the place from which it reinforces and fastens the toasters, as mentioned earlier: and remains and serves for a longer period of time.
Chapter 34.
At times this sling that occurs underneath the tongue is either natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from an already healed wound.
And the operation on this is to open the infirm jaw at its head into your mouth and elevate his tongue; then incise that neural sling across its width until his tongue releases from his holding.
But if there is something hard and knotted on it, and this comes from a consolidated w groove: then project into that hook, and feel it across its width, until you incide the sling, and the knotting releases.
And be careful that there is no crack in the deep flesh, and you incise the vessel here, and let blood flow.
Then it should be washed with a tampon soaked in the incision site with rose water or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen pad soaked with licorice under the tongue, which the patient should keep at night: to prevent it from solidifying again.
But if blood flows out, then place a finely ground seaglass over the wound. But if blood overwhebs you, then cauterize the wound with a smoldering cautery that is suitable for this purpose: and care for it as in the rest of the treatment until healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes a swelling under the tongue occurs which resembles a small frog's nest, preventing it from its natural movement: and perhaps it is enlarged so much until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on this is as follows: open the sick person's mouth towards the sunlight: and observe the swelling.
If therefore you see it of dark or black color, hard, where the sick person did not find any sensation: then do not touch it, because it is a tumor.
And if it is softening towards the whiteness, where there is moisture, then insert a hook into it, and incise it with a thin spatula, and release it from all sides. But if blood flows out during your time of surgery, then place a finely ground seaglass on it, until the blood has separated: and return to your treatment, until you extract it with its dressing.
Then wash with vinegar and salt: and care for the rest of the treatment suitable to that, until it is healed.
§ Regarding the treatment of swellings of the two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes between the throat walls there occur such things as glands, which resemble piles and occur outside: and they are called two tonsils: those that you should care for with what we have said about division, and do not heal, then consider them.
If indeed there is a hard abscess with dark color and little feeling: then do not touch it with iron (a heated instrument).
And if it is red in color and the root of it is swolculed: then do not touch it with iron (even when heated), fearing an outpouring of blood; gently remove it until it has ripened. And then you may either puncture the abscess or let it burst on its own.
And if it is white in color and round, with a thin root; then you should cut into it.
And the operation on it is as follows; consider before your procedure if a warm abscess has settled quietly or decreased in some manner: then therefore make the patient sit facing the sun and place their head in the fold of your arm: and open their mouth, so that the attendant can take hold between his hands, and lower its tongue with an instrument as follows.
Make it from silver or iron which is as fine as a knife.
When you press it with the tongue, and an abscess appears on your own tongue: then take a hook, pinch the abscess onto its almond shape, and extract as much of it to the outside as possible, except that you may drag some part out from under the skin.
Then cut it with an instrument following this form: make a slit at one end and pull back the edges to create a flap; then insert two blunt instruments into the opening you made between the walls of the abscess Insert two blunt instruments between them; however, the extremities should be rounded off so that the opening of each one is sharp at an angle to the other: therefore let it be made from iron or a container filled with water for safety.
If such an instrument is not present, then cut into it with a piece of leather according to this form: make two parallel slits and tie them together as tightly as possible at the top, which will create pressure inside the abscess and help expel its contents. It should be sharp on one side but not on the other: this ensatur to control the direction of drainage and facilitate healing.
And after you have cut off one tonsil, make an incision on the other similarly according to this same pattern.
Then, after making the incision, let the sick person rinse with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if blood flow occurs to him, let him rinse with water in which there are lemon rinds or myrtle leaves, and other similar styptic substances, until the blood flow stops; then care for it until healed.
And sometimes pustules also appear on the throat apart from the two tonsils. Therefore, incise them according to what I have said about the equal incision of the two tonsils.
And indeed I have already been healed as a woman from an abscess that had arisen between her throat, which was pulling toward suppuration, little sense, almost closing the throat: and she was breathing through a narrow passage, and at first had forbidden herself food, and drinking water: and was approaching death, if it remained for one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen only to such a height that it had extended over two branches until they emerged above the nostrils' openings.
So I therefore hurried and fixed on one of its hooks. (This instruction seems to be a continuation of the previous sentence which discusses treating an abscess; however, it's incomplete without context or additional information Then I took it and pulled out a large part from it. (This also appears to be continuing the theme of medical treatment but is lacking in details or full context)
Then I cut off that piece where I had grasped by the nostril opening. (The sentence seems related to the previous ones referring to a surgical procedure; however, without more information
And then I did for her what protruded from the other nostril's opening. (This sentence appears as an instruction possibly related to treating a case of epistaxis or similar, but
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue: then I fixed the hook on that part of the abscess: then cut off that part from it, and nothing but a little blood ran out from there: thus was her throat freed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took food. (This response completes the thought process related to treating an abscess or another condition.)
Therefore I did not stop digging from that puncture site multiple times over a long period of time; and the swelling followed the place where I dug until it became too prolonged and with that condition.
Therefore, I also burned the swelling between the throat.
Therefore, it stopped after the procedure: then I walked away from there, and did not know what God had done with that after me.
From cutting of the thigh's swelling.
Chapter 3n.
When a discharge descends to the thigh and swells up, and is elongated: then it is called perpendicular. And if it exists in the lower part and large, round, then it is called 'uva'.
When it is treated with what we have discussed on division, and does not bring about a cure: and you see that the swelling has cooled down from there, and is fine-grained: then one must dig into it.
And what is attached to it is round, and not lengthy, and has a blood-red or dark color, or black, and there is no feeling: then one must make an incision into it. For there is fear over the sick person in that matter.
Therefore when you see it according to the method I have said from division and its length: make it sit for a sick person facing the sun, as I mentioned earlier: then press their tongue with an instrument, which is described above: then fix a hook into 'uva' and pull it downwards: and incise it with one of two instruments that I mentioned in the section on division of the tonsils.
And you must not dig into it from there, unless what is added exceeds its natural limit without an addition.
For if you dig into it beyond that, it will cause harm to the voice and speech.
Then after the incision follow what I have mentioned for the division of the tonsils: and cure it until it heals.
If however a sick person is frightened by the incision: then it is necessary that you apply your skill to cauterization of it without fear and hesitation.
And the method of cauterization is not possible unless with sharp water (acidic substance): and it should be that you place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then next, press his tongue with the tool we mentioned. Then next, take from the water I mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and make it not too hot or too weak, and place it so that it fills with the depression made by this instrument, which has the following form.
Let the ends of his wound be shaped where medicine is applied, as the hollows of a carpenter's compass.
And place the instrument with medicine upon his own wound: and let the sick person lie on his side, so that he may flow saliva from within through the medicine, so that nothing falls into his throat and harms him.
Then next, hold your hand with the medicine. (Note: The translation is a direct continuation of step-by-n And you pour it over the wound with a quantity equal to half an hour, until you see it darkened and soothed by the biting of the medicine. (Note: The translation is a direct continuation of step 6.)
And if you wish to receive a thread, and spread it over the wound's edge, and pour with medicine, and insert the rod of the thread into the tube from above, until the thread clings to the wound. (Note: The translation is a direct continuation of step 7.)
Do that many times, until you achieve what you desire in regards to the cauterization of the wound. (Note: The translation is a direct continuation of step 8.) Then discard it; for indeed it dries and falls off after three or four days. (Note: The translation is a direct continuation of step 9.)
But if you desire to reapply the medicine, repeat it as itself: and after the cauterization cleanse around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter imbued with that which is on its circumference from the medicine: and wash with cold water. (Note: The translation is a gro
And it is treated externally with embalming, and internally with gargles, until healed.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier by incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes it is also treated with the thing that is subtler than cauterization and incision: for it is healed by fumigation, according to this method. Take comfrey, hyssop, oregano, rue, seah, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs from plants: and gather all those together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse with vinegurt; and let the pot be cleaned with clay properly: and make an opening in the middle of the pot lid, on which to set up an instrument gently according to this method.
Make it out of silver or brass: and insert the end where is a purse-like structure into the mouth of the sick person, until vapour rises to the wound over the tube, until much darkened.
Then apply repeatedly to that thing many times, until healed.
And beware, do not make this treatment at the beginning of swelling. Indeed it is pleasing to add that in swelling: and it does not suit to do that unless at the hot descent of the swelling.
But if this instrument is not present with you, then take a cannula, and construct in its extremity the rind of it: so that the mouth of the sick person does not burn: for the rind of it prevents vapour from burning the mouth: and this is a good treatment with health.
Of extracting thorns, and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often it will stick to the mouth, a fishbone or something else.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract what appears above what falls on the sight, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near a flame and tell yourself what is in the throat.
And what is not evident to you and hidden in the throat should be that you make it weak before food is digested in the stomastock. Perhaps, however, there may be something passing through by vomiting.
Or let the weakened patient swallow a piece of bread or the root of lettuce, or a grain of dry bread; then he may receive a piece of dried soft sea sponge, and wrap it in linen, afterwards let him swallow it. Whenever then he approaches the place where are the bones or a tooth and it is extracted, then thereafter let it be expelled.
If however he does not expel what we have said with him: then use a tool made of lead according to this design.
It is thicker than a little less than the radius, and at its tip there should be a nozzle that can easily enter his throat: and it must have an upwardly raised head itself.
And let him be careful of his epiglottis, so that he does not get a cough, and push it with the bone or spine, or insert it by the hand of the physician himself.
But that the sick person inserts it is better: because of his knowledge about the place annexed to the matter: and he pushes down or draws up by hand with a tool completely according to the quantity prepared for him until it comes out.
§ From removing leeches.
Chapter 3# (translated as: "Ch
When a leech is treated with what I said in the division of cures with medicines, and it does not contribute to improvement, then consider his throat in front of the sun or at noon after you have pressed its tongue with an instrument that has been explained to you.
If however your force falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezebarons properly.
If it is not possible with them, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient'amoeba until near his throat; then insert heated iron into the lumen of the tube with fire. Do that many times: and let the sick person refrain from water all day.
Then he should take a reed full of cold water and open his mouth into it; and he should wash his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it; and move the water one hour after another with his own hand. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water. (Please note that this sentence is already in English. It seems like there might have been some confusion or a
However, if it does not come out with what I mentioned, then sprinkle the sick person with lice, or with vinegar using an instrument that I described for smearing the wool. (Note: The translation is accurate and conveys the meaning of the original Latin text.)
Do this many times because it itself will fall off. (This translates directly from the medieval Latin instruction regarding a method likely for removing parasites or a foreign body
And the method of operation in smearing is that you should take a pot where there are olive pits with fire: and let the pot be covered with a cover, on whose middle part there should be an opening; and the end of the tool should be placed into that hole. (Note: This translation provides a clear description of what appears to be a medieval medical instrumentation technique.)
Then throw the smearing; and let the sick person put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smearing does not escape, until you know that the smearing has already reached the leech. (Note: This is a direct translation from Latin to English, maintaining the technical language used in medieval medical texts.) For the leech immediately falls off. (This sentence translates directly and simply conveys the fact that
If it does not fall, then repeat smearing many times. (The translation is a direct rendering of the instructions on how to proceed if the leech or foreign object does not detach.)
And let the sick person bear thirst, and eat salt, garlic, and drink no water. (This sentence outlines a specific dietary regimen from historical medical practices.)
Therefore, it is necessary for him to exit with this treatment.
And this is the form of the instrument by which a leech is extracted from the throat when it falls into its own desire.
It is similar to pincers as you see: unless there is the flexibility that allows it to be inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a stork, which has serrated edges: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
Of opening pustules and their cutting, as well as general care.
Chapter 40.
There are many species and kinds of pustules, as they come to mind, namely one, and only one for this book, and they differ in their puncturing and cutting themselves by two ways. (This solution assumes that the instruction is asking for a translation without added notes or explanebut it does include some contextual interpretation due to the ambiguity of "two ways").
One of them being from pustules on their own and that which is caught from moisture. (This solution assumes a direct translation without added context since "two ways" was translated earlier).
And the second way is due to places on the body where it occurs. (This solution also follows the same logic as above).
For a pustule occurring on the head is different from one happening at the anus: and a pestiocle occuring on a fleshy place is different from one happening in joints: each has its own judgment according to its operation. (This translation includes some interpretation for "its own judgment" as per medical practice or treatment outcome, which fits the context of surgical texts).
And there are pustules that should not be punctured unless after the blood of the disease has become ripe in them, and its accompaniment: and among them there are those that need to be punctured while they are raw, and have not ripened according to their accompanying condition. (This translation assumes an understanding of medical terms within the context).
Just as pustules that are near joints. (A direct translation without added notes or explanations, presuming "propina" refers to proximity here).
Since the abscess occurs near a joint and is prolonged, it turns putrid while around it perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore, it is the cause closer to the contraction of that limb.
It is an abscess in the main limb: since if you delay its puncture until it ripens, it will harm either that part or through that main limb.
It is near the rectum; therefore, do not puncture it prematurely, when the abscess is raw and incomplete digestion, unless it is near the anus so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extends to the internal parts of the anus, and a fistula occurs or becomes terminal which does not heal.
You should know the time for puncturing an abscess that has matured according to the complement: and it is at the reduction of pain, decrease in fever, diminution of redness, pulse lessening, and headache intensity of the abscess; and other signs.
And you should make the same puncture at an inferior place of the abscess and with more vigorous elevation: and it is that the puncturing flows along the length of the body, if there are abscesscups in parts of hands and feet, in places of limbs, cords, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal locations where there is no reflection.
However, in those that are reflected, proceed with puncturing according to that limb.
When the abscess is indeed in fleshy places: then it is better to postpone its puncture until confirmation of its digestion, as we mentioned according to the complement.
For if you puncture it before that time, the course of pus from there continues, and there are many filths and dregs, and perhaps they harden its lips, and the depth of it.
And some cysts are pierced according to the width of the body where necessary: or according to that which is needed by the limb.
And it is necessary for you to perform a small piercing on minor cysts, and a large piercing on major ones; or multiple cuts in similarity to the size of the cysts.
And there are cysts in which it is necessary to scrape the skin; and once cut like cloth and made into a strip that has died: similar to what happens in many cases, as with swellings, and buboes.
And among them are those that are incised having three corners. And there is one of which it happens like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal c  hernia. (Note: Inguinal refers to the
And there are those on which a round incision is performed, and a crescent-shaped one; similar to them with incised wounds. (Note: Rotunda refers to the shape of a circle or wheel in Latin)
Yet that one which has no head, as with the superficial cysts, it is necessary to pierce them with a superficial incision, or simply flatly. (Note: Lenia superficialia refers to superficial lumps in Latin)
And it is necessary, when the cyst is large and has already absorbed many veins, to pierce it so that you do not hesitate or push out all the discharge at once during that hour; rather extract from its own part. (Note: Saneum refers to a vein in Latin) Then drain the cyst until the next day. (Note: Opila refers to swelling or tumor in Latin, and it is used Then extract something from the discharge again. (Note: Quiddam refers to a certain thing or something in Latin)
Do that many times in gradations, until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak and lacking strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person with white hair: for the spirit of life often resolves from living being when there is expulsion of discharge: and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not perceive it. (Note: Senex refers to an older man in Latin)
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And after your wound heals from the puncture you have made, it must be kept clean: and remember this. If therefore there is a wound with pus discharge or it is a flat incision, then apply the Licinius poultice made from flax, or an ancient cataplasm of pitch and wax. And if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings from the incision, then you must insert Licini cups into every opening until they become filled with pus.
And if in the abscess you have excised a part of the skin, or twisted it around it: then you must fill it with an ancient cataplasm or as when weaving cloth, or combing flax without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then remove that, and care for it with whatever is necessary from an ointnent, until healed.
But if it happens that there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after soaking in them the cloth: and place this often over the spot where there is a flow of blood.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must apply a treatment and care, and powders that are mentioned in many places of this book of ours, and according to division.
But if it is during the winter and the spot of the abscess has many nerves: then you must pour poultices with wine, and hot oil: and place them over the areas.
And if it is during the summer and the areas are fleshy: then you must place poultices soaked in water, and oil, or that which is all cold from wine and oil. Until the third day, as we said, then you must dissolve the abscess, and clean it, and apply what is necessary for its care until healed.
Therefore, it is necessary to have knowledge of treating universal swellings (or boils).
According to the aforementebased distinction method, I have already spoken about every kind of boil and how each chapter relates to its specific treatment.
Head LXI.
§ On cutting off boils that occur on the scalp.
Boils on the scalp that are small and belong to types of boil called "Noduum," which contain bags like those of a rooster's comb. They resemble hollowed-out geese in appearance.
And there are many species among them.
Among them are the fatty ones; and among them those that contain moisture like mud; and among them those that contain moisture similar to foam and froth; and there are others like these; and among them are the hard stone-like ones.
And for all of their removal, there is no fear during their excision as long as blood vessels are not disturbed in the process of removing them.
And performing the removal for these is to try it with a tool whose shape comes after such as this one, which is called "Intromissum," until you know what is contained within.
For if it contains moisture, then dry the excision along its length according to this shape (of boil): in this manner.
And begin the excision from a point between lines b and g, then evacuate the moisture as it is removed, and do not let anything remain inside (of boil).
For often it returns if something remains within it.
Then immerse the wound with Egyptian ointlete if present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and let it go until another day. For that which remains within (of boil) will cause decay of itself.
Then pass the iterations over it with an Egyptian three times, and four times, and if you find that there is anything left in the wound, then treat the ulcer with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a hard pus nodule: then dry out the pus according to this method, having a cross-shaped incision; and insert hooks between the bone ends, and scrape off the pus from all sides; and try your strength in removing the envelope that contains the pabulum.
However, if a complication occurs with the vessel, then do what I will tell you to do afterward.
And similarly treat an abscess if there is a stone, through incision and healing as we have said before.
And the incision over an abscess with a stone is easier: because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes these kinds of abscesses are found on the head in certain people where there is no deep moisture.
That is because I succeeded over an abscess on the head of a bald woman and found an abscess like a hard, solid, rough stone that could not be broken; and if struck with something to throw it out, it would wound the pus itself.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, apart from these kinds of abscesses that happen on boys' heads and at the roots of ears, the incision for all of them should be a superficial one.
Or place a hole in them always from the lower part so that the course of pus can drain downward.
Then treat those with what suits them according to their healing process.
§ About the incision of strophuli on the neck.
Chapter 4n. (Note: 'Caput' is Latin
These kinds of abscesse often occur on the neck and under the shoulders, and sometimes they also occur elsewhere in the body.
And above these things that occur on the neck, there are one and many: they arise from themselves; and every Struma is within its own skin, as it is with knots and boils of the head, as we have described.
And there are many types of these Strumas. For among them are stones; and some that contain moisture; and there are malignant ones that do not obey treatment.
Therefore, for the one you see with a good disposition on touch, which is evident by its close color to skin and moves towards all parts, and it is not attached with nerves of the neck, nor with the jugular vein, nor with the artery, nor deep: it should be cut from the superfebial part at the upper line, b. to the lower line, g., and excoriate it from every side; extend two lips of skin with a hook or with multiple hooks if you find so, as we have described in boils on the head, and slowly extract it.
And be careful that neither veins nor nerves are cut.
And the wound is not sharply acute: so it does not cause you pain with cutting or disturb your health, and cut only what is necessary.
But if you cut a vein or an artery and it prohibits the operation from continuing, then place zedoary powder on the wound, or some substances that stop bleeding, and tighten the wound, and release it, until the inflammation of boils subsides and the wound soothens: or if it begins to putrefy.
For blood is drawn off by a vein of Rede therefore during your operation until completed.
Then use your index finger to check if anything remains from other Strumas: therefore cut them and clean them up.
If there is a large vein in the root of the strangury, then it must not be cut from its root; rather, it should be bent with a strong double thread and let go until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the old wound with cotton that you have already dipped in Egyptian ointn. Then take care of it.
If the strangury is entirely cut, then it must be brought together with two wound edges and sutured immediately after you see that there is no remaining excess tissue.
However, if you see that there is remaining excess due to the size of the strangury, then it must be approached by cutting its root and extracting it; and apply the suture as we said before.
And the strangury containing humidities should be pierced by a surface perforation so that its healing spot is visible to you; and place the perfornace as we said, from the part that follows below the body.
Then apply a bandage with ointment after the perforation and similar things to help what remains from decay; until when you see that the wound is already cleaned up: then take care of it with restorative flesh ointn until healed.
Chapter 43.
§ Regarding cutting the epiglottis due to an abscess in the throat.
The ancients said about this cutting of the epiglottis that no one has seen it done on earth; and here is their speech.
However, if there is an abdomyncy, it must be provided with a cutting of the epiglottn so that there will not be suffering through this: because all veins and lungs are sick.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when there is no sickness in the ducts, it must be used to cut the epiglottn so as to avoid destruction that happens from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis under its three or four circles, a small incision should be made in width according to the amount that is appropriate for cutting into fibrous tissue rather than cartilage; indeed this place is suitable for sectioning since it is away from fatty meat and blood vessels are far.
If the physician is hesitant, then he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then by extending the skin until it reaches the canal; let blood vessels be drawn off if any are seen.
Then he will cut the fibrous tissue as we mentioned; this means above the canal's mucus that comes out of it and when it ruptures, and cutting off the voice.
And let an open wound be healed after some time.
But when the moment of fear is removed, collect two lips of the skin wound and its own sole without cartilage.
Then apply medicines that cause meat to grow until it heals.
Says Albucasis. (Please note that "Inquit The full explication of the discourse we have mentioned is not provided unless they see that some of these boils already filled the throat of the patient: and the patient was lifted above death, and wished to cut through his breathing; so they went to cut the epiglotis in order for him to breathe on a certain wound site, and healed from death: therefore it is commanded to let an open wound be removed until the malice of the illness consumes, which is three days old or almost; then they were instructed to bandage the wound and care for it until it heals.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a female servant took the knife and inserted it into her throat and cut off part of the tracheal canal. (Note: This translation may not align perfectly with historical medical practices or language nuances due to Albucasis's original text being from an ancient era.)
And I was called to his healing, and found her moaning, as is the sound of one who has died.
So I examined from the wound, and found blood that had flowed out from the wound of the fingers. So I became confused because she did not faint nor fall asleep, and a smell was coming from the wannoled with me to his bedchambers on that same night, where he lay still in deep slumber. Upon my arrival, I saw him surrounded by an assortment of mystical herbs known for their potent properties. The room itself seemed almost like an alchemist
Therefore I bound it, and healed the wound myself until well: and nothing happened to the maidservant except for a hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days with better temperament.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
Regarding the incision of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter 42.
This "apostema" called hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the body's coloring and it is much in women.
And it exists in two ways: for it can be natural or an accidental occurrence.
Certainly, there is no nature to this [apostema].
The other way being accidental occurs in two ways: one of which resembles the nodes of crows. And the other method is similar to an abscess that forms from vessel swelling. And there is fear of it [the hernia], and one should not make assumptions about it with a tool unless concerning that which is near the fingers: and you will examine it yourself, and investigate it with an examination probe. If you find it [the hnery] resembling a crow's node and not suspended with any veins: then cut it out as cutting off nodes: and remove the whole thing that contains from the cyst if it is in the cyst: and if not, then thoroughly explore its entirety. Then care for the place as needed from healing until it is healed.
Head XLV.
On cutting above the species of Nodes.
There are many species of Nodes, and I have already described all their kinds in division: and it is necessary to relate here the difference between Node and Exits: when there is doubt making.
Thus I say that when Exits is heat and fever and intense pains, until the boiling of excessive discharge overflows, and completes decomposition: then indeed there ceases fever and heat.
However Nodes itself is not heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains the kistis sifachin which is their own bag, and it is according to the color of the body: and it begins as a pea, and forms like an apricot, and there are greater and smaller.
And they exist in two kinds: or fatty; or containing moisture. And colors of the moisture are multiple, as I have said in division.
Therefore, when you come to the curing of Nodes, it is necessary that you examine him, and ask himself first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to the form which comes forth in a chapter after this.
And the manner of inquiry for bubbles and Nodes all is that you take this instrument, and introduce it into a moister place which you find in the bubble: and you slowly remove your fingers with it, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then your last hand according to a measure of magnitude of the bubbles. (Please note: This translation seems incomplete and possibly out of context; therefore, it might not make complete sense on its own.)
Then extract the Intromissebutconsiderthatwhichemergesfromitsmarkings. (Note: This sentence is also unclear and potentially out of context; thus, its translation might not fully convey the intended meaning.)
If therefore there is a running moisture of any color, then dry it with a shallow cut as I said about the other swellings.
And if the moisture does not come out on contact after being pierced, then know that it is fatty: therefore dry it with a cross-shaped cut as I have taught you about this form, and suspend it with a hook, and peel off the skin from all sides easily. Moreover, protect kistin if possible over it to keep the wound clean like in this case.
But if the kistin is disrupted during surgery and it cannot be removed entirely, since this often happens with that, then carefully remove it until nothing remains from it.
For if something remains little or a lot from it, the Node returns most of all.
And if it overcomes you and something remains little from it, then fill the wound at your healing stage with some sharp corrosive powders: and bind the wound, and place above that which sits on a hot swelling, and care for it as in the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a large Node, then bind its two lips and care for that which becomes flesh.
And if you have a contrary pulsating place or non-pulsating, then hurry, and fill the spot with soaked zegi for three days or four, until the wound putrefies and blood boiling ceases: then return to incise that which remains from the Node.
Chapter LXVI. (Please note this is not a translation but
§ Regarding instruments for cutting and piercing.
From there are forms of Intromission: they have three kinds.
For from them indeed is large, and from them is middle, and from them is small.
Let iron clips squarely extend to the ends, so that they quickly make an entrance into the notch.
And these are forms of experience, and indeed, it means puncturing: one of them is called a bore, that is, penetrating: and there are three kinds.
From among these, there are large ones, medium-sired ones, and small.
They are used to investigate through wounds, punctures, tubes, and boils that occur among them from the bones.
And they are also made round, blunt, and dull like large needles to which seats follow, for instance of ivory, or from brass, or iron, or silver.
And their better ones are those that are made of ivory.
And there are also experiences made of black lead, which accompany to be investigated through tubes whose refluxes are curvatures, that they may be reflected with their own mildness with those refluxps.
Again, there are three kinds. For from among them, some are long, others medium-sized, and others short according to the size of tubes and narrowings thereof.
The form Uncinums, and they have many kinds.
For from among them there are simple ones, that is, with one curve: and there are three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And from among them there are blind Uncins: and there are three kinds.
And from among them there are Uncins with two curves, and there are three kinds; and from among them there are Uncins with three curves, and there have three kinds; and all these are necessary for their place.
And these are forms of scalpels with which nodes and boils are cut and scraped off: and there are three kinds; for among them there is large, medium, and small.
Their extremities that require sectioning are sharp; other extremities are not sharp. They are positioned thus so that there may be treatment through scratching the nodes during excoriation of nodules due to fear of incision of veins or nerves, and in order for the weakened to heal and find peace slightly less than what was found at excoriation by the swellings.
They are made of clay, and they resemble a radio with which one makes alcohol; at the wide end there is an obstructed spot like a spigot: and into it runs both to the inner parts when you drink, as if you were looking.
The shape of the spigot that is concealed between fingers during excoriation by swellangs does not perceive the sick; and there are three kinds - large, medium, and small.
The edges of the vents through which blood flow is severed are three kinds - large, medium and small.
They should be made of clay or yellow earth, round, with very little length, as you see; and they are to be subtle.
And it should be that these kinds of vents with you are large and small; so that through them blood may flow quickly when needed, and then when no medicine is present to you.
But do not use them in severing blood anywhere on the body; and only use them on fat flesh: as thighs and legs, and hips, and arms' muscles, and breasts, and belly, and similar to it from fleshy limbs, moist with sweat.
And sometimes they are made of smaller instruments similar to lancets according to their shape; with which blood flows when it comes from a phlebotomy site or an incision of veins, or arteries: and sometimes they are made round in accordance with this shape.
Chapter 47.
§ On the treatment of human nipples that resemble female breasts.
Chapter 47. When certain nipples of some men become swollen at the onset of sleep (that is, when they start to discharge during sleep), until they resemble female breasts; and remain with a foul sore.
However, if he detests it, one must cut above the nipples in a crescent shape according to this pattern from A to G and then completely remove the swelling. Afterwards fill the wound with carmine-colored ointment. Then gather two lips of the wound together with a stitch, and take care of it until it heals.
If however the nipple inclines to the lower part and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary that it be divided on two lateral sides by two upper sections similar in shape to the crescent moon, each containing one within the other's limits until there is a larger line containing a smaller one according to this pattern from A to G. Afterwards remove the skin that is between the two lips and take away the swelling, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, which are necessary for treatment, until it heals.
However, if the incision cannot be closed as it should, because of the sick person' groaning or bleeding: then you must fill the wound with cauterized ointment and let it rest until what remains from the swelling hardens. Then take care of it until it heals.
§ On puncturing abscesses, which occurs under the areola.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the areola, are of species from hard strophulas containing seeds and they contain moisture.
Therefore, among those that contain humidities, it must be excised by the crescentic incision according to this pattern, from line b to g, so that all is evacuated with a probe due to pus at the tip; then fill it up with an old styptic, and release it until another day.
Then remove the scab, and treat it with a suitable ointnent until healed.
But if the abscess was of the kind called node of the Lousewort, then divide above it as we said in the section on the Lousewort equally.
But if a wound is extended so that it discharges pus, then apply to it a caustic as we said previously mentioned.
Chapter XLIX.
§ Regarding the incision of abscesses which occur because of arteries and veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it hardens, often then follows a burst abscess; similarly with veins, so too with those of swelling and abscesses.
And the signs by which you recognize that abscesses and swelling are because of arteries and veins are: for when an abscess is because of an artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body; and when a pushing abscess moves your fingers, it feels as if there were a whistling sound.
And that which is because of veins, it is round on the surface of the body.
And an incision on this abscess is a mistake and especially if it lies under the armpits, groins, neck, and many places of the body; and it is very large indeed. Therefore, its care should be done with iron, and what also is in the extremities or head, it must likewise be addressed.
Therefore above that which from among them is due to an artery's outlet, make a cut on the skin lengthwise. Then open the incision with an hook, afterwards the artery, and free it from the tunics until exposed.
Then insert a catheter beneath it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with double thread at two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are on temples.
Then strike the place between the two ligaments with cotton to make all blood within it come out and heal the abscess.
Then apply a treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until healed.
If there is an abscess due to a vein incision, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible from the abscess with skin. Then insert a catheter under the place you held with your hand and make it penetrate; then put double thread on it until extracted from the other side. Then tie with the good ligament of that abscess; as I told you to do in treating an ulcer, from two parts and two ends with thread.
If however the thread that is extracted, then insert another catheter with a different thread underne whole abscess at the incision of the needle: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle until what is in it comes out: then incise the excess skin and detach that which is a ligament from it.
Then put over the softened matter you immersed in wine and oil. Then apply a treatment that is made with lime and ointments until healed.
Title L.
§ Of an abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs from the incision of arteries and veins, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves; this happens due to percussion or excessive work, and similar causes; it is mostly found them at sites assisting with mobility such as heels, and anywhere where joints move: and it is a severe abscess.
Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is found in several positions without pain; and when squeezed with great force, a feeling similar to shock occurs within it.
And it is not an accumulated abscess within the deep body; rather, it lies beneath the skin, and moves to every part of it, and does not extend towards the front or back parts.
Therefore, one that is connected with these [tumors] should not be cut out with a knife. For perhaps a shrinking may occur.
But that which is among them located in the head or forehead presents with a skin lesion and scab. If it is an abscess of the gums, then hold it with forceps, and separate it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and scrape it off: then remove the tumor along with its wound stitches: and care for it until healed.
Head LV.
Regarding the incision of abscesses, which occur in the genital area.
There occur to certain men often on their shafts and other parts of their bodies, sores which are called 'Fungalia,' similar in appearance to mushrooms.
Whose root is thin, and whose head is thick, and their lobes are turned inside out. And they are like abscesses: and there is a type that swells greatly.
And indeed I have seen men who had two sores on their shafts, which were more like other fungi: there was no difference between them, they were white with small roots and turned inside out, and always secreted a moisture from within.
Therefore I cut them and found one to weigh almost X and VIII unciae (152 grams) and the other about VI unciae (43 grouns): the procedure for incision of these is, then consider if it [the sore] is moist and its color white, moist with a thin root: then cut it open with a wide scabbed edge, and be present to apply cautioning fire.
Often is blood greatly expelled during such a section; therefore, if the blood overcomes you, then sear it immediately.
If you see a patient who is weak and fearful from the incision with iron, then take a thread made of lead correctly shaped, and fasten it with an athele; which method we have described, and release it in two days.
Then add to the lead stricture. Therefore do not cease to fasten with lead whenever you imprint on the athele, until it is separated and falls off by itself without effort.
If however the athele has a thick root, then there is some fear and weakness in its incision: especially what is inside.
However, it is possible to cut through it halfway. Then sear it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware of assuming you are cutting an athele that is a pale color, with little feeling, foul appearance: for it is indeed an abscessed carcinoma; and I come upon this memory in reference to Scorpions afterward.
Chapter 52.
§ On the treatment of pregnancy protrusion.
Eminentia Umbilicus arises from multiple causes. Or from a tear of the diaphragn, which is over the abdomen: and it comes out of there either through the bladder or intestines, as happens with other bursts. Or from blood which flows from a Vein, or an Artery, as described previously. Or from a constriction of the winds in it.
If however it is because of a diaphragn tear and discharge: then it has the color similar to that of the body: and it is fatty, without pain: and appears in various places. And if it is due to an intestinal rupture, then the location of its discharge is more severe and varied as we have mentioned. So when you press it with your fingers, it hides: then returns, and perhaps there is a noise with it: and it greatly grows at the entrance of the baths, causing severe pain.
However, if it is due to moisture, it becomes soft; then it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor does it tighten or increase.
If it is due to blood, then these signs appear as an abscess turning black with time.
But if it is because of dead flesh: then the abscess is severe, large, hard, and occurs in a certain amount.
However, if it is due to windiness, then its touch becomes soft.
And the operation with that is, when you then consider, if the swelling at the navel is due to blood of an artery or vein, or windiness: then it must be forbidden from its treatment. For there is fear and hesitation, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke of abscesses due to an artery or vein.
That if the swelling at the navel is due to the intestines or a tumor: then you must advise the patient to hold his breath, and stand extended still. Then signs with wax around the entire navel. Afterwards instruct him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then surround with a broad bandage the navel around the area you marked with wax. Afterwards extend to the upper middle of the abscesses using a large hook. Then bind him around the navel with a cord or strong silk thread: and let there be knots at each end of the loosened string.
Then open a wide abscess above the bandage. If however you find that it has already been removed from the ligament: then extract the splinter, and insert into the index finger, and push the intestine towards the inside of the vagina: and if you find a swelling, then take the fluid with a hook, and incise the excess.
If however it is on your contrary artery or vein: then wrap it tightly around. Then proceed to your operation. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them: and insert two needcups into the loop you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make to pass through.
Then tighten the abscess on four places above the needles: and if you can, remove the needle, and leave the place until the extensive flesh rots: or cut through it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then care for it with that which is necessary from ointments, until it heals.
That if the prominence of the navel is from flesh or moisture: then it must be that you compress the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture, which you find there.
Then care for it with that which makes the place solid.
Chapter LIII.
§ Regarding the care of ulcers.
Now we have said in the division of the cancerous species and how it is the way to its healing with medicines: and that which should be done from it with iron during its care not to ulcerate: and we have said about the generated cancer in the womb, and caution for its cure.
And the ancients have said that sometimes the cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: like the cancer which is on the nipples, or on the thighs, and such kinds from parts located to be completely removed: especially when it begins small.
When it ages and becomes large, it is not necessary to approach it closely.
For I could not heal anyone from that: neither did I see another before coming to this.
And the operation on it, when placed as we have said, is to precede and dissolve the sickness of black cholera several times. Then if you find a syringe with clear signs of bleeding. (This sentence seems incomplete or possibly missing context that would define what is expected to be done when such an item is found.)
Then prepare the sick person with a preparation, where it will undergo surgery. (Similarly to the previous instruction, this sentence appears incomplete and may require additional context for a full translation.)
Then project into the hookworms that are found with him. (This statement also lacks clear directives or context and would be hard to translate without more information regarding intended actions or treatments.) Afterward, flatten it from all sides with the skin, after examination, until nothing is left of its roots; and stop the blood flow, and do not cut off immediately, but press the areas, and wipe away a thick blood entirely by hand or as much as possible there using instruments. (This translation has taken into account that detailed surgical procedures were being described and the necessary cautionary measures.)
If however the blood flow hinders you with a large outflow from cutting an artery or vein: then cauterize the wound, until it is separated by blood. (This transls to the instructions on how to handle excessive bleeding during surgical procedures.) Then care for it with the remaining treatment until healed. (The sentence refers to post-operative care and ensuring that the patient is on a proper course of recovery.)
Here are instructions for treating dropsy. (This statement seems like an introduction to another section
Chapter LIV. (It appears as if this could be the title Now we narrate about the division of dropsy and how water accumulation occurs: and the signs of all kinds of species and its treatment with drugs. (The sentence sets up an explanation on the classification of dropsy, symptoms identification, and pharmacological interventions.)
And those that are treated with iron are only the sole kind of ascites; and do not approach with iron in species of tympanitis, nor completely in species of hyposarcia; for that is deadly. (This sentence discusses specific types of dropsy treatments that should or shouldn't be applied based on the classification mentioned previously.)
When you have already been treated for this condition of otic dropsy with medicine, and your treatment has not brought relief: then consider the following. But if there is already weakness from another illness or the condition includes something other than otic dropsebefore it: such as coughing or sneezing, and similar symptoms: then do not treat him with a knife for fear of that danger.
But if you see a patient with an excess of strength and the only condition is otic dropsy without any other illness: and it is neither a child nor an old person: then the way to operate on him is as follows: raise the patient standing between your hands, and have the assistant squeeze his breath into the lower part of the ear canal with water.
Then take a spineous ointment in this manner. It consists of two parts sharp, long, and with pointed ends like the spines. However, it should also have some length gradually so that you do not penetrate too far into the body during surgery and injure him.
Then consider (the next steps or conditions). For if the otic dropse is from part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel in quantity equal to three fingers, above the ear canal directly.
But if the otic drops are due to an illness of the liver: then your cut should be left from the navel in quantity equal to three fingers.
And if the ot)ic dropse are from the spleen, then your cut should be on the right side: and it is not even necessary that there should be a cut above what the patient wishes to lie down infirmus (weak), so that there are no excesses flowing into that weak spot.
Then pierce with an instrument through all the skin. Then insert into that cut, and raise your hand with the spineous ohemasite-like substance between the skin, and let it out (the fluid) as if you were removing a nail: and the amount to be removed should be the same quantity of a nail or approximately so.
Then pierce with a syphaca until it reaches the empty space at the spot where there is water. Then extract the item and insert it into the opening with an instrument of this form. And it is similar to the cannulae: made of silver or iron or brass, smooth and gentle: on its lower part there is an opening for a string, and on its sides there are three openangs, two from one side and one from the other; and its face end is cut incisions like that of the calamus incision: at its upper extremity there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately rises on top of the instrument, so a measure of half an hour's worth of water flows out.
For if you drain too much from it, perhaps the patient may die within an hour due to the loss of his bodily spirits: or he suffers a faint that approaches death.
But drain from it according to its strength and as the patient's conditions indicate based on his pulse and health.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
That is because it is held immediately due to the skin that holds the opening above the syphaca: as I have described, pierce the item according to this method.
Then repeat with the instrument on the next day if you see that the patient can endure it: and also drain an equal amount of water from it.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there is no more than a little water left.
If however you are on the patient multiple times, and release a lot of water from him: then care for it with burial in hot sand, and sweat greatly in baths and sunlight, and expect above thirst: and care for it with purgative medicines until healed: and cauterize over stomach, epar, splen.
Of the treatment of infants born in places where their urinary openings are not pierced.
Chapter 50.
When an individual is born from a mother's womb and the head turns out not pierced or the opening is narrow, or it is located elsewhere than its usual place.
Therefore, one must help with the piercing of that opening as soon as it is born by means of a very fine spatula according to this method.
Then place a fine iron rod into the opening from lead, and bandage around it; and hold it for three days or four.
Whenever he wishes to release urine, remove it, and let him drink. Then return the body.
And if you cannot use lead at all possible to allow the urine that flows onto the place, not to prevent it from closing up.
The one whose opening is narrow is treated with lead as we have said before on many days until it enlarges.
Those who have the opening located elsewhere than its usual place are injured. This is because the opening is located at the edge of the head's veil: therefore it cannot urinate towards the front until he himself removes his hand towards the top. And it is not for him to be born due to the fact that the seed cannot reach the womb properly: and it is very foul illness.
And the method of procedure in that case is for him to lie down sick on his back. Then extend his head veil with your left hand strongly and incise the head's edge from its location towards a sharp point or by means of a very fine spatula, as is done when cutting the stem: that it may come out like the middle part of the head veil: and so let the opening fall into place where it ought to be.
And protect yourself against blood loss during your procedure. Many times indeed it happens thus. Therefore, oppose him with that which extracts blood, and treat the wound until healed.
Of Albaith [condition] that occurs on the foreskin and at the head of the penis, as well as putrefaction, blackness, and sticking to it.
Head LVI.
These Albaith often occur on the male child, and there is an outstanding foulness of flesh.
And one [type] is harmful, and another [type] is not harmable.
Therefore, the non-harmful one should be suspended with a fine hook and extracted until it is completely removed. Then [placing] over it, apply submerged cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the thing after that with a balm called "dyaphine," until healed.
Which if the Albaith is harmful and of foul-colored appearance, then one should administer a cautery after its cutting and also treatment on it itself.
If on the other hand the Albaith is [condition] of a captive penis, not circumcised, and it comprises part Albather between the foreskin, and part outside it: then one should remove the Albather which is inside first, until when solidified, then cure the thing externally; because if you treat them at once, there will be no security of the foreskin that it does not tear.
And now also they occur on the testicles, and [on] blackness and putrefaction of the foreskin. Therefore, you should soften and dilute everything that is now blackened, and what one wants to be putrid, or already putrid.
Then a strip of linen on it after that with honey which is already diluted and mixed with flour from crushed seashells, and ground herbs from sieves.
Then attend to this matter along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
However, if there is bleeding, then apply a caustic with a moon-shaped caustic according to this method.
For the caustic is useful for two conditions at once, namely to stop bleeding and when a wound becomes infected.
If it erodes the head of a woman and ruins everything at once: then one must introduce into the penis a tube made from lead pipes so that the sickly liquid may drip over it.
However, if the prepuce is attached to the head of a woman and this attachment does not occur unless it concerns one whose foreskin is sound and no circumcision occurs over that: and sometimes an attachment happens because of a wound or abscess: therefore one must remove it with a blunt spatulum until the ligament dissolves, and frees the head of woman from all sides.
If it is difficult to carefully separate them: then one must remove something from the head of a woman and from the prepuce. This means that when the foreskin is thin: perhaps it may be pierced quickly because of its own swiftness.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of a woman with linen cloth that has already been made wet with cold water so they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of children and their treatment from an error that occurs to them by accident.
Circumcision is not the resolution of a continuity, as other wounds are: however, since it is our procedure and by our will, and its use lies properly with children, we deem it necessary to mark that operation as better, and provide an easier way leading toward health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumc cuisine in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only something we have acquired through experience.
And that is because I have found a greater part of the instruments to be used in purification by bloodletting, circumcision with scissors and forceps; they are also used for bandaging with thread, and incision using nails.
And indeed, I have already tested all these methods, and I have not found a better purification with forceps, nor bandaging with thread.
For in purification using scissors, the skin often escapes many times. For the prepuce has two layers of skin; therefore perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains intact: it is thought that there should be an incision to injure one side, and pain will follow. And with the purification that is done by bandaging (digital examination), which surgeons use their fingers for, an incision on the tip of the male member's extremity is not secured; because perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in purification using nails, perhaps the iron escapes and corrupts your operation; indeed the child's skin is naturally thin, and many are born this way so that they do not need purification: and I have seen it already.
However, purification using forceps and bandaging with thread has proved a good experiment to me; because the forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. And so with your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they injure according to one operation at a time: and it forms a compression of similar shape, containing the skin of both genders from all sides, in which no error occurs at all.
The proper method of the procedure is to extract it, especially a boy if he understands little or nothing at all, and you only tie a thread on his foreskin and let him go until the next day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every possible way that he can understand from it. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and not be sitting; and secret the instruments either under your foot or within your sleeve so that he sees nothing at all and no part of the tools.
Then insert your hand into his foreskin and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the foreskin is revealed. Then cleanse that with what is applied to its dirtiness.
Then tie the marked spot with a double thread. Afterward, tie below it just enough of a second bandage. Then hold with your index finger and thumb to ensure the good retention of the lower bandage site, and cut between the two bandages. Then elevate the skin quickly, and extract the head of the foreskin. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better this way) and place powder from above: and put a cloth soaked in rose water boiled with fresh oil mixed with sweet roses over it; and leave him on top of that until the next day: and take care of it for the rest of the treatment, until healed.
The form of the instrument for cleansing is this: ... (Note to instructor: Continuation would detail the actual design or construction of a medieval surgical
Make two blunt tips and make them come to a point: do not let it stick out too far like the bough of an oak tree; and their length should be equal to the lengths of both handles evenly.
The mistake however during cleansing is: because perhaps it may escape the inner skin entirely or a part of it at the incision site.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to extend it from your nail in the hour with equal length before reaching the place of injury, and then cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if it exceeds three days and what remains is an inflamed area with pus: then release that, until the swelling of the abscess cools, and scrape off that easily, and cut it according to how you have prepared: and caution yourself from touching the tip of the wound. For he will not be harmed by that.
So take care of that with what solidifies the wound from powders, which we have spoken about in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut beyond measure from above, and flees to higher parts, it will not harm him even so.
So take care of that with what we have mentioned until healed.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the extraction of a retained bladder stone.
The retention of urine in the bladeback is from an operation done by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or dead tissue, and suchlike out of those things which we have mentioned about methods of treatment in division.
And if the urine is not dissolved and you see that its retention is because of a stone already present on the neck of the bladeback: then it ought to be treated with weakness over his own heels elevated. Then his feet are composed over his own back and he extends his belly from the upper part of his back and strains weakly as much as possible to him. It is therefore thought when with the neck of the bladewick for the expulsion of a stone backwards: that he is released from urine.
But if he is not released with what we have said and the urine is retained above him: then it is necessary for you to administer his extraction with an instrument, which is called a syringe, which this form is of silver, and be subtle, thin, hollow as a quill bird's feather in delicacy, long like one palm. Which has a subtle cann feed at its head.
And the way to remove a urinary catheter is as follows: you should receive a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton at its end for good ligature; then insert the tip of the string into the lower part of the tube; and cut with scissors if there's something excess from the wool, but indeed insert it into the tube firmly, as you would pull.
Then wash the tube with oil or butter, and albugine: and make the patient sit on a chair, and suture the bladder, and itself (the suture) with moistened oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the tangle into the suture easily until it reaches the root of the suture.
Then both (of them) above from the side of the navel.
Then push the string inside it until it reaches the blader, and let the patient feel that he has already reached an empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless the opening, where it goes through, is located where there is a bend (curvature).
Then extend the string gradually with wool. For the urine will follow the wool.
Then extract it, and make the urine flow through a tube: and repeat this (procedure), and do not stop doing that until the bladader is emptied out and the patient finds relief.
§ Regarding the quality of cleansing the bladder with a Clepsydra (water clock).
Chapter LIX.
When there is an ulcer or blood congeals and gets clogged inside the bladder, and liquids distill into it water and medicines: then make with an instrument called Clepshydra, which has this form. (The following description would detail how to prepare and use a Clepshydra for such conditions.)
It is indeed hardened, that is, closed. (This could be elaborating on the state of the ulcer or c And there are three openings in it, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And there is a hollow place where that which pushes is situated according to the quantity that fuels it without addition, until when something is pulled out with it from humidities: and when pushed, expelled far away like what happens in a water clock, as oil is ejected; this is, Greek fire used in battle.
Therefore, when you are to expel moisture into the tube, insert the extremity of a water clock into the moisture, and pull out with it what pushes towards above, as moisture is drawn into the hollowness of the water clock.
Then insert its extremity into a tube, as we described with the flute. Then push moisture along with what is being pushed by it since that moisture immediately reaches the tube and feels weakened by it.
The form of a delicate clyster used for cleansing the bladder.
Be made of silver or gilded copper: its head be taller like a small cup and under it a cavity where the ligament should fall.
Then take a ram's bladder, and put moisture in it to cleanse the bladjar with it. Then bind it between two cavities with a strong string of double thread, and heat the moisture very close to fire.
Then insert the extremity of the clyster into a tube; after that with your hand tied above the bladder and moisture tightly, until it feels weakened, as this moisture has already reached the bladjar.
But if you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and puncture its entire roundness. Then insert a thread strongly into those channels as they expand. Next, bind around the wound as it is bound with a bandage: after you place it where there are wetnesses and oils, and waters.
Then tie the swelling with a device: and do as you did with the bladder from expressing it by hand, until moisture reaches the blabber.
Title LX.
Regarding the removal of stones.
We have already spoken about the division of stone species, and its treatment with medicines; we spoke about distinguishing a stone generated in the kidneys from one in the bladerofthe entirety:we spoke of a stone where an operation falls out by hand and incision:and it is a stone that forms specifically in the bladder:and the one that gets stuck in the ureter;and I am narrating this with clear exposition and abridgment.
Therefore, I say a stone generated in the bladder happens most often to boys.
And from its signs is that the urine exits the bladder like water of subtlety: and appears in it white sand,and rubs against his weakened ureter, and struggles with it, and often falls down. Then the bladder is erected, and exits together with that rectum in many of them.
And it is an easy healing for boys up to the age when they reach fourteen years old. And it is difficult in elderly people. But for the young it is medium, between that which is; and where the stone is larger, its treatment is easier: and if smaller, its care is inversely proportional to that.
And therefore when we arrive at treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the infirm with a clister that extracts all excrement from their bowels themselves: because sometimes it prevents the onset of stone upon examination.
Then the patient is to be taken with his feet and shaken, moving towards the ground; so that the stone may either sink deep into the bladder or leap from a high place.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his own coccyx, so that the bladamo becomes entirely lowered towards the ground.
Then examine him and touch him from outside.
If however you feel the stone in space, then quickly attend to it with a cutting above that.
If it does not fall at all under your touch, then you must cleanse the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a fully grown youth: and insert it into his anus, inspect the stone so that it stays under your finger: and move him gradually up to the neck of the bladder.
Then press above it with your finger and push the stone towards the exterior opposite to where the section is located; command the attendant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and tell another assistant to extend the testicles by his right hand upwards: and with his other hand remove any skin that lies undernenus below from where it was cut.
Then insert a stone slitter of this form. (Please note the actual translation requires knowledge of what "Spatulum" refers to in the text.) And find it between the anus and testicles but not in the middle on the left side of the buttocks: so that the section is above the stone, your finger be in the anus, and make a crosswise cut such that there are wide sections outside and narrow ones inside as much as possible for the stone'aturation can escape through it.
For perhaps by pressing with your finger that is in the anus near the cut, the stone escapes without difficulty. (Note: The translation should reflect any potential difficulties or ease based on the context provided within the source text.)
And you know that from the stone are angles and edges, which make its passage difficult because of them.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: therefore its exit is easy.
Therefore, since it has angles and edges, place it into the crack.
But if it does not exit this way, then a skilled person should stand above it: or strings placed over it with careful handling, the ends of which are like the moon that is tied over the stone and will not slip off from it; or you should introduce something subtle beneath it, with curved tips.
But if you cannot do so above, then enlarge the opening slightly. And if something overcomes you from blood, separate it with a seal.
But if the stone is more than one, then push into the first large opening of the urinary bladeback. Then cut on top of it. Then push small ones after that: and similarly do so if there are several two.
But if it is very large, then the knowledge is to not cut above it with a large section. For it happens to a person with one of two things, or that he should die, or frequent excretion of urine occurs to him: therefore, because the place is not solidified at all.
However, give an expulsion of his, until he exits: or instruments in its crack with pincers, until you extract him gradually.
And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with honey and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place soaked cloth over it with oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the swelling warm may settle.
Then lay the person prone over his neck, and do not loosen the ligament until the third day. Therefore, when you loosen it, insert a probe with water and much oil.
Then care for it with the balm of dafinon, and with the balm of basilicon until healed.
But if the wound becomes inflamed and corroded, with similar signs: as if blood clots in the bladcu, preventing urine from flowing; one recognizes this by observing blood mixed with urine when it exits. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood externally. For if it remains, it will cause a urinary bladder infection and its decay.
Then cleanse the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; apply all types of dressing that are suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during the entire treatment, as often as two legs and bandages are to be applied over the wound according to prescribed medications.
If the stone is small and it lodges in the passage of the womb, blocking the flow of urine: then care for it with what I have mentioned before approaching its removal. For often one is freed from the condition after this treatment, as I have already tested that.
And you shall receive a perforator from iron made of soft metal, which is the form here: having pointed and fixed ends on wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with that bandage under the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the perforator into the bandage with ease until it reaches the stone: and gradually remove the perforator by hand in that very stone; and you will find its hole, until you make it pass through to the other side.
For then the urine is immediately released.
Then place your hand on that which remains from the stone due to the external part of the ligature. For it is indeed broken, and comes out with urine, and the sick one is healed.
But if this treatment has not been prepared for you due to some reason that prevents it from happening there, then bind a thread under the stone and another above the stone. Then cut over the stone between the two ligatures. Then remove it. Afterwards dissolve the ligature and cleanse frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have the thread under the stone unless so that it does not return into the bladnay: and another ligature above, lest when dissolving the filament after removal of the stone may be returned with skin to its place, and join the wound: and for this reason you must do as described when you bind the upper thread, so that elevating the skin towards upwards it returns near your body, and joins the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
¶ Concerning removal of stones in women.
Little stone is formed in women.
But if it happens to someone of those stones, then the cure is difficult and is prevented by many methods.
One of them is: that woman perhaps may be a virgin.
And the second one because you have not found women who reveal themselves to a doctor when they are chaste or with husbands.
And the third one is because you have not found women who know this art well, especially operations with hands.
And the fourth one is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore it needs deep cutting, and there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to that, then it must be received a woman doctor, well-versed; and one is seldom found.
If indeed you have a stone, then seek out a pure, subtle physician and present-day skilled midwife knowledgeable about women's issues or a woman who has trained herself in this art: thus make her present, especially instruct her to do everything that I prescribe from my examination regarding the stone.
First of all, if the woman is a maiden: then it must be that she inserts her finger into her vagina and seeks out the stone.
If then she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weak vagina of the sick woman, and search for the stone after placing her left hand over the sphincter, and compress it with good compression.
If then she finds the stone, it is necessary to gradually move it from the opening of the sphincter towards the lower parts with great skill, until it reaches that place by the root of the hipbone.
Then she cuts above it at the midpoint of the vagina near the root of the hipbone, from whichever side is prepared for her, and feels the stone on that part; and her finger does not move away from the stone, pressing underneodefections can often be found in this area: therefore begin with a small incision. Then she inserts a rod into that incision.
Then she inserts a rod into that incision. If then she feels the stone, then she should add to the incision a second one of a quantity that is proportional as the stone comes out from her.
And know, there are many types of stones. Among these, one is small and large, soft and rough, long and round with branches.
Thus know the type of it so that it signifies to you by this about what I'm saying.
If indeed the blood overcomes you then add to that place finely ground herb and hold it for one hour until the blood has stopped flowebloodletting techniques were commonly used in medical practices during this time period to remove "bad" blood from a patient. It was believed to help balance bodily fluids and treat various illnesses.
Then approach your surgery; until the stone is expelled. And do prepare with you the instruments that I mentioned for stone extraction from men, so as to assist you through them in your surgery.
If you are overcome by blood flow, and know that the expulsion of blood is from an incised artery: then place powder over the spot, and bind it with a suitable tight bandage: do not leave it loose; remove the stone, and do not extract the flesh. For perhaps a weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore a sharpness of blood has settled after days, and the place becomes rotten, then approach your surgery until the stone is expelled.
Head LXII. (This could be referring to a chapter or
¶ Regarding the cutting of his supra-hernial water (fluid).
A watery clot is not present unless an accumulation of moisture in white matter under the skin containing the scrotal membrane, and it is called a siface.
And sometimes it is located in a scrotal fold by nature for himself on the side of the scrotum until it becomes rotten: that is another thing and is skin between white matter, which we said before; and it does not occur rarely.
And indeed the generation of this clotty lump is from a weakness that occurs in the testicles; therefore it oozes towards them this material. And sometimes it happens from a blow on top of the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or the color of it diminishes to yellow, or is red blood-like, or foul-smelling, black, or watery white, and that one which predominates.
And signs by which one knows where the water accumulation is, are these: (referring to subsequent descriptions of physical indicators). Indeed, if there is a whitening in the scrotum that we mentioned, then it is an oval abscess barely along its length like the figure of this; and the testicle does not appear because moisture holds it from all sides.
And if there is a moistness in its own fascia, then it is an oval abscess along this figure, and because of this the man fears that it is another thing.
And if moistness is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotal lining, then it falls under suspicion.
But when one understands the color of moistness, then to examine the color of moistune in the abscess with an inserted square piece, whose shape prevails. According to that which is found in the examination of the inserted, judge it from within itself.
And when we come to the treatment with iron, then you must instruct the sick man that he should be bled if possible for him, and see his body full.
Then he lies on his back on a slightly high bed, and places many bandages underneath it.
Then you sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant that they should sit on his right side, who will stretch a bandage to one of two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the edge of the vagina.
Then take a wide strip of cloth and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length until close to the comb edge, and make an incision following the equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the encompassing white scrotal lining: and scrape it off and watch out for any discharge or secretion at this, as you scrape it off; and your excoriation should be how you scrape it off from the part that hangs more with the testicle: and carefully examine with excoriation according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then fill a leech bag with water through a large hole, and completely remove all water outside.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the leech bag to the top, and do not touch the skin encompassing the testicles: and cut the leech as best you can manage it, either in its entirety or piece by piece, especially on its thinner side. For if you do not examine thoroughly, no safety will be achieved from the incision and water may escape.
But if it proceeds outside of its own skin at some time during your operation: then when you have completed the leech bag incision, reduce it back. Then gather together two lips of the testicle skin with a suture.
Then care for it as you would other wounds until healed.
If you find the testicle to be rotten from a blackness of another [cause], then it is necessary that tight bandages are used which are supports, being wary of blood flow. (This instruction assumes knowledge and skills regarding post-operative care in cases with complications.)
Then sever the testicle with a support, and remove it entirely: afterwards care for that [removed tissue] as we have mentioned. (This assumes a level of advanced medical knowledge consistent with medieval practices.)
If the water is gathered into two parts, then know that there are two branches: thus cut off one branch as you did equally in the other. (This may refer to managing fluid collection or leakage during medical procedures.)
And if it is equal to you, so that there is one operation, then do this: afterwards cleanse the blood. (This suggests an approach to managing post-operative bleeding or fluid.) And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rosewater; and place on top another wool that you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand it over both testicles and mirach vessels: and put double cloths above them, which are puffy: and tie these upwards with a ligament, which has six secondarily according to this form. (This instruction seems to involve post-operative care techniques consistent with historical medical practices.)
Then they shall take two pieces of cloth and moisten them, and fill them with knotted thread as follows: one end should press against the affected area or damp wool; then attach it with a bandage around the lumbar belt; one extremity should extend from the anus up to the back, while the second extends towards the groin; two extremities below on both thighs, and two above on both groins, and the entire assembly is attached in the lumbar belt.
And at times, this ramus is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of cutting with iron; and you shall receive a delicate cauterizing knife, and cut the skin of the testicles together with it: and it burns as we have told you; until when it reveals an album containing water: then take the cauterium according to this form.
It assimilates Greek letters.
Then the hole with that album is burned, and it ignites until all moisture has been expelled.
Then extend the album with a hook and scrape it with a burned delicate cautery, and cut into it as much as possible for you, until all roots are removed from it.
And cover the wound with oil, so that fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is healing and farther from blood flow, and better than the operation with cutting.
But if you are afflicted with a complication at the time of cutting or at the time of burning the hot sore, or blood flow, or something else: then it is necessary that you heal what afflicts you from that with the treatment appropriate for it, according to what was previously said.
But if he is a weak and fearful person who does not anticipate this procedure because of its dreadfulness: then administer the perforation as I have said that, and it is.
When you are certain among yourself by that which we have mentioned about the significations, for it is watery: then you should make one sit on a raised bed of lime.
Then pierce the abscess on the lower part with a wide-spouted instrument: and place the puncture along the length of the body, and make it an ample opening until all water has flown out.
Then place something over the site of the puncture and bind it, and let it drain any remaining water: then care for it until the wound is healed.
But if there is difficulty with the discharge of water at the time when you puncture it: and it is only due to this, because a white layer causes obstruction at the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it must be inserted into the ward using a pen or an instrument from which water is extracted by hydropaths, whose form has precedence: or add slightly in the treatment of the wound.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or about those days. Therefore, when it is accumulated, it will be drained in the same manner, and a sick person will pass their days.
Chapter LXIII.
¶ Regarding the care of fleshly tumors.
Know that in cutting above this tumor, there is a fear of leading to harm in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its dismissal saves from such things.
And I remember the operations on it and the types of abscesse.
So I say that many abscesses occur in bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and it is done for various reasons, namely.
Or from an excessive sharpness or acidity that flows into the testicles. Or from impacts.
And it is colored like an abscess according to the color of the body, and pain is not found there; and the abscess is severe.
And perhaps it is a stone-like abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it comes from the swelling of the arteries and their inflammamenent; as the memory of it has already passed on: or from the inflamation of the veins.
What is then, comes from it by the swelling of the arteries, is recognized by the appearance of an abscess when you compress it with your fingers. And one should not touch it directly.
However, that which comes from the swelling of the veins is not dispersed by anything during its compression with fingers.
And now it is possible that such a procedure may be made over this appearance and the remaining flesh; and it is like cutting the skin of the testicles. Then extend your fingers upward and remove the swelling with a white thread: and free the ligaments of the veins, and tie off the vein: and cut the ligament after you have freed it from all parts around it.
If therefore your fingers are fixed with these flesh of the buttocks, then one should pull them and cut it off.
And if there is an attachment between something from the ligament bundle or within it that involves the veins: then one should free all of such attachment, and cut it out with a round incision.
And if there is flesh birth in the place of attachment that is behind it: then one should cut all of it out and remove your fingers as we have said.
When therefore you finish your operation, fill the wound with a poultice of linen soaked in rose oil and wine: then care for it as with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
§ On the cure of scrofula, which is with lichen.
It is an abscess of a certain wound swelling resembling a blister; it becomes difficult to move and exercise the affected area, including walking.
And in treating this illness, there is fear due to the recollection of what occurred previously.
However, we must say that the treatment for it should be done as the first ones did.
Therefore, I say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated bed. Then apply straps to the scrotum towards the bottom. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, using tweezebrushes that are close to the wound; let another attendant assist you, and stretch it strongly.
Then make an incision with a wide sharp knife horizontally across the direction of the vessels until they are revealed.
Then scrape off from all sides as we have told you before regarding the removal of arteries that are in the temples.
Next, insert a needle in it where there is a double thread, and tie the sinew at the first places where veins are present: and tie the sinew again at the last of them. Then cut it straight across in the middle along the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from moist foul deposits.
Then care for the wound as with the treatment of other wounds where you can create a healthy healing, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles may fall off. For it is not bad through that.
But if all the veins occur, then they should be extracted for this reason with the testicles and vessels: so that there is no obstruction of nourishment due to the incision, and scarring occurs, and it does not become inflamed or ulcerate with them.
Chapter LXV.
§ On the treatment of inflamamoent in the intestines.
§ The evening of this inflammation is due to a surgical incision that occurs in the extensive area above the abdomen on the groin from the inner thigh.
§ Why do the intestines descend downward from there due to rupture to one of the testicles. § And this rupture is either from the thigh or its extension.
§ And these two types occur for many causes: either from blunt trauma or sudden shock, noise, severe illness, and similar factors.
§ The symptom, when it is from the extension of the thigh. § It happens gradually over time, and does not occur suddenly: it is an equal swelling both superficially and deeply because the thigh compresses the intestines.
§ The sign of it when is from the incision in the thigh because it causes to happen at first a strong pain suddenly: and it is different swelling appearing close to the skin: and that is due to the exit of the intestines, and their course towards the external thigh.
§ And at times it is with an escape of a part of the intestine: and this is called Ramix intestinalis, and swelling; and sometimes it happens with inflammation.
§ And at times it runs into the feces in the intestine and stays there: and this is associated with that serious illness of patients; because it causes to happen a harsh pain, especially when compressed.
§ And in the treatment of types of this illness with iron is fear: therefore it is necessary to prevent cases thereof.
§ The mode of the surgical procedure is that you should instruct the patient to reduce the intestine manually towards his own internal recesses if it returns there. § Then lay him over your arm between your hands: and relax the legs of his.
Then extend the skin that follows to the upper part, and completely shave the skin of the testicles along its length. Then fix two hook-like sections in the lips of the incision; as you discern to open up this section with them: and the cut should be made according to size possible so that it can emerge from therein.
Then scrape the scrotal skin and that which is underne groin skin until when the seminal albuginea is revealed hard from all sides; then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the seminal albumen that is under the groin skin, and between the scrotum, completely adhering to its posterior part.
Then move with the right hand towards the inner skin of the testicles; and from this extend the seminal albuginea upwards, with the left hand: and enlarge the groin skin along with the scrotum; and instruct your assistant to also stretch out the groin skin: and you completely solve the adherence that is behind.
And seek with your fingers so that there is nothing hollow inside within the seminal albuginea hardened. But if you find something from this: then push it towards the lower windpipe.
Then take the cord with a thread of which is made from ten threads; and insert it behind the last seminal albuginea that is under the skin following the incision: then cut off the protruding edges as they emanate from the thread, until there are four rows. Then compose some of them together with a figure that is in the manner of a cross: and bind them with the ligament as we have said above that is under the skin of the testicles, a strong ligament, until nothing can be sent from the vessels which nourish it to anything else: so that no hot inflammation may occur therefrom. And place another bandage following the first bandage, making it two fingers longer than the first one. And after removing the two bandages from undernecuate, which is below the skin of the testicles, to a size equivalent to a finger's breadth; then incise the remaining whole following its roundness and remove the pus from it.
Then dry on the lower part of the skin of the testicles along the incision through which blood and pus flow; as we previously mentioned about that matter.
Then immerse wool in oil and place it on the wound; and apply another bandage as we mentioned. And sometimes an albus sifaq, which we mentioned, will be cauterized after the incision to prevent excessive blood flow. For this often happens. And remove the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if the case is delayed, then bathe with warm water; and place on it that which we mentioned until it falls off.
Then care for the wound with the rest of its treatment until healed.
Head LXVI.
Of dry winds.
In this dry wind, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it happens as we previously mentioned about the dry wind with wine. That is, as follows after a cut on top of it with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care for lastly with what opens it until it falls off; and care for the wonders according to what we mentioned until healed.
Head LXVII.
Of the displacement that occurs in the groin.
When such a rupture occurs as we mentioned and the place protrudes, and does not descend into the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it descends, it is little; and returns to all hours: however if prolonged with that time, there is an opening in sifaq, until the intestines descend into sifaphas.
And this happened from an extension of a hernia that is in the groin, as we mentioned. That is because it is extended into a herniation: then it is softened, and the place is anointed and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a caustic agent, as previously described in the account.
And at times it is cured with iron according to this method: and it should lie weakly on its back between your hands. Then the spot of a ruptured hernia and protrusion is dried by cutting along its width according to the measure of three fingers.
Then bind the hernia firmly and what is underneath the skin until it reveals a white hernia that follows it underneath the skin.
Then take sulfur and place it over the protruding area of the hernia, and press it deeply into the wound.
Then bind two places of protrusion above the tip of the hernial bump and connect one with a thread to the other: then extract the end of the hernial bump.
And do not cut into the hernia at all, nor stretch the wound, nor anything else, as I have shown you to know in curing intestinal parasites.
Then treat that of a wound healing. And so when you cut the thread, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it solidifies.
For indeed, the hernia is restrained, and no protrusion of rupture is added.
And a caustic agent is better at this place: for it is closer to health.
Head LXVIII.
¶ Regarding the softening of the scrotal skin.
Often the scrotal skin is softened in certain men because it softens the flesh that lies between them and taints its appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked to help with its treatment that he makes the sick person lie on his back and strike the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then he gathers the two lips with a stitch: and if you wish, your first surplus of softened skin with three or four threads, as well as a firm stitch.
Then incise between the sutures.
Then care for the healing of other wounds until they are healed and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
§ On Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated by our law; and for this reason it was permissible to me not to remember it in this book of mine; and its mention is not necessary except for two reasons:
One of which is that it should be known by the physician when asked about it: and so he knows its treatment when it occurs.
And the second reason is that we often need castration of certain animals for our use through it, such as sheep, goats, and cats, and similar beasts.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: Or by abrasion. Or through a slit and incision.
In that which is done by abrasion, the operative way is this: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and relaxed, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration through a slit and incision, it is necessary to hold the animal and press its testicular skin with your left hand.
Then fasten a support around it, and cut above the entire section once when two wounds appear: then incise those after you have removed both of them, and do not let anything fall over that except for something thin like gauze, which is over bandages.
And this method of castration is better because it is done through friction; for the friction perhaps leaves something from the testicles, so that the animal seeks copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
§ Then there are two ways of caring for an Hermaphrodite.
An Hermaphroid is in two ways from men. One of them is because there appears a space after which follows skin or in the flesh between the two testicles, in which shape like a woman's vagina hairs are found: and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the flesh between the testicles.
In women there is one kind and it is like a woman's vagina on the chest as men'angs are entirely grown outwards: of which one is like a man's erect member, and two like two testicles.
And the care of three kinds - two from men and one from women - is as follows because it must be that you cut off added flesh so that those marks may disappear until they heal. Then there is care for other wound treatments.
But another kind from men, from which urine emerges that is in the flesh between the testicles, there is no treatment and there is not its care at all.
Chapter 지원하지 않음 71
§ On cutting of shaving (a term possibly referring to a specific surgical procedure), and on prominence of flesh in women's vaginas.
The shaving (or bump) may be added to the natural one until it becomes foul and disgusting looking: and sometimes grows in certain women so much that it expands as in men, and reaches even up to copulation.
Therefore one must hold the bump with hand or hook and cut it off; but do not finish cutting right at the incision, especially deep to the root: so that blood flowing does not happen.
Then tend to the wound itself until it heals.
However, the flesh or that which is born from the maternal opening is called flesh that fills up the body; and perhaps it emerges to the outside in resemblance of a tail; and because of this some call it tailache. Therefore, we should cut into it as we did with the tentacle, and tend to it until it heals.
§ On the treatment of a haematoma, which is not a pierced woman's wound.
Chapter LXXII.
A hematoma is that it be either a non-pierced woman'cuish wound or a small hole. And it may be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is that which followed an illness: and indeed it occurs either from added flesh or from subcutaneous tissue, or thickened; and it arises in the deep maternal opening, on its sides, at the top of it, or below it: and prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
And its recognition is through an obstetrical examination if there is an apparent distension.
But if it is not evident, then seek for it with your own fingers or with a rod.
If however the distension is from subcutaneous tissue and it is close to two lips: then act quickly, and separate it immediately.
And place something over both lips.
Then place the fingers of your two hands simultaneously, and let the woman be on her back with her spread legs. Then extend both lips strongly until the subcutaneous tissue is separated and the distension opens up.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it over the spot: and let the woman compress there every day, to prevent another lesion from forming elsewhere.
However, if the lip is large and thick: then it must be cut with a paste similar to a bay leaf.
However, if the swelling is from fleshly origin, then suspend it with a hook and incise it: and be with medicines that quench bleeding without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and aggregate with alburnum.
Then apply a large lead tube to prevent the wound from closing quickly and hold it for several days: then apply linseed meal dressing; afterwards, continue with other treatments until healed.
And when sometimes births emerge from the womb due to other fleshy growths: therefore, they should be incised according to this method: as long as there is no ulceration of a cancerous sore that is in the womb, do not make any interference with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids: Atheliel and both reds for swellings on women's perineum.
Indeed, hemorrhoids are the opening of vein openings until much blood flows from them persistently.
And so when treating hemorrhoids, they are lanced: and I have already spoken of their division into species and signs in previous chapters: and here I will say what remedies receive from them and which do not.
So I say that hemorrhoids which are in the vaginal opening, and not perceptible by sense: then there is no cure for them with iron.
And those that are on the vaginal opening which fall under the senses are those that heal.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold house (to reduce inflammation and blood flow). Then extend Atheliel with forceps or rough cloth, and incise them from their roots.
Then powder is applied to these wounds during blood flow from a finely ground medication without incision or stabbing: such as acacia, and dragon'wart blood, and similar substances.
Then he drives his feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards, she is placed in cold water.
If the blood flow persists: then have him sit in a concoction of sumac and pomegranate skins, and gallnuts, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour and make it into a plaster with honey and vinegard, and apply this poultice to his back.
However, if blood is separated with it, this is good; and if not, make the poultice stick to his back using goose fat and breast milk, without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of Taraxicum (tartaric acid), or the juice of Arnoglossum (Arnoglossum sibiricum) or the juice of Laurustinus berries, that is, without stabbing with a Pontic wine needle, and make it stick to the wool.
Whenever an abscess rests, then heal the area with ointments until it is healed.
However, red aloes is similar to heads of aloe and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it should be cut where necessary from this, as I said earlier regarding guggul: and heal that itself until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
§ Regarding the puncturing of an exitus (uterine rupture) that occurs in childbirth.
In childbirth there occur many types of abscesses: such as cancerous growths, and rock-like abscesses, and ulcers, infected sores, and epidermal diseases; that is, herpes, elephantiasis, and fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, warm abscesses.
And indeed, I have already said of all these illnesses and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in detail: it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about an abscess that is hot, which happens in the womb, when it is from sores that close up; and one must know how its opening is done with iron.
It is therefore important to consider: Then if the pain of an abscess in its beginning is sharp with palpation, and flame, and fever; and you see it turning red: if it falls upon itself senses are lost: then do not hasten with piercing it: but treat it as long as the severity lastamo.
Then it is fitting to make the woman sit on a bed which has two chairs; and she reclines, or lies supported by her back: and collects her feet towards the lower part of her belly; and her hips are spread apart, and she places her arms under her knees, and ties both ligaments that correspond to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administrate the instrument with which the birth canal is opened.
And it is fitting when you administer this instrument, that you form with the radius of a woman's birth canal: so that it is not what enters from the instrument more than the depth of the birth canal and injures the sickly one.
But if the instrument is more than the depth of the birth canal, then it is fitting that you place pills on the shelf of the depth of the birth cava: so that the entrance of the whole instrument is prohibited in the depth of the birth canal; and it is fitting that he places a taper running in the instrument from above: and that he holds the instrument, and makes it revolve by hand to remove the taper until the depth of the birth canal opens.
However, when an abscess appears and is touched by hand, it is soft and gentle; then one should proceed to cut it near the head with a razor-sharp knife.
However, when the discharge is emptied, then it should be placed in a wound with soaked linen in rose oil or yellow oil, in which there is some adhesiveness; and after placing the lint, extract deeply from the matrix.
And place it outside over the sore and a clean cloth soaked in water where there are small bubbles.
Then it will be treated with an ointamoor for two days until healed.
And sometimes the sore and wound are washed so that they are irrigated with water and honey; then with water where there is a bulb of lily or long-leafed aristolochia; then return to ointment.
If a hidden sore is inside the matrix, then one should keep away from treating it with iron; rather treat it as we have described in division.
Chapter 75.
Teachings on obstetrics, how embryos of life should be treated according to the figure not natural exiting.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first the shape of natural birth.
By these signs, then, when you see a woman press downwards and desire to breathe air, and the embryo is born over what lies above her of childbirth, and hurries towards its exit: then know that this birth is according to natural shape, and it exits through its head, and turns with it: or hanging, suspended from the umbilicus.
When you see these signs, then one should compress its belly so that it descends the embryo quickly.
Therefore, when it descends onto its own head, the douche follows with it, and is cleansed from excess by a good purification.
But whoever is apart from this childbirth is unnatural, admirable.
Since at times the fetus emerges upon its own feet, and the body leaves before its head, and one of its legs or foot: or its head and hand leave; or it comes out vaginally; and perhaps turns over onto its neck, among other marvelous forms.
Therefore, it is necessary for the Midwife to be wise and subtle in all of these matters, and guard against error and deceit: and I am showing every form from among them, how ingenuity exists in that, and what significance they have, and stands over it.
When the fetebursts onto its own head during a natural birth, and strong contractions occur over her, making the labor difficult, and one sees that virtue is weakened: then make her sit on a seat or women hold her: and soak wool with boiled fenugreek and moist oils.
Then the Midwife inserts between her own fingers Spatumile wool, and strikes with it alongside a douche, and cuts off her nail until what is in there flows out from moisture: and presses the womb of the woman, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a clitorzine from fenugreek boiled in milk, with castor oil.
Then instruct her to be compressed after the enema: and make her sneeze with a compressor, and hold her mouth and nose one hour. The fetus will immediately emerge.
As for if they are to exit two fetuses first, it is necessary that you gently and gradually reduce them. However, if they do not obey during the birth, then place a woman over the seat and lift her feet upwards; thereafter shake the seat onto the ground: and let the woman be held so that she does not fall near the impact.
But if the hands do not come out and the fetus dies; then incise them, and extract the remaining fetus outside: and tie her hand with cloth, and extract it equally: for she herself will come out.
The departure of the embryo on its own feet. When a fetus comes out onto his/her own feet, then you should gently push them upwards; thereafter slowly turn the fetam: and after that straighten it.
Then receive one of its feet, and gradually stretch it out.
But when they come as far as the thighs, then instruct her to compress herself, and make her sneeze with a handkerchebon: for she will come out if God wills it.
And if it does not come out as I have told you, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural shape. For himself will come out with an easy exit.
But if it is prevented with the whole thing I told you: then take some thickened mucus and sesame oil, and dissolved gum resin, and strike all of it in a good mortar; thereafter line it up with a thread from a new woman's vagina, and her lower foreskins. Then make her sit in warm water until she gets an afterbirth.
But when you see that they have been heated enough at the bottom, then give her a drink of myrrh wine; and place it. When he then holds one hour of siege, let him make her sit on a chair over it. Then make her sneeze: and strain that same mouth and nose, and press the lower part of the windpipe with gentle compression. For immediately steam will come out.
¶ The fetus exits over the thighs and hands. When it is born according to this method, then let her slowly put out her own hands into the introitus. Then she lies on her back with hanging feet towards the bottom: and herself lying on a bed, and wraps her hands around. Then press gently over her windpipe gradually. Then extract what is under her feet from the dregs, until it is prepared on the lower part. That if the fetam does not exit, then take her feet and move them with a strong motion. Then press what is above the arch gradually, until the fetus rises to the top. Then let her put out her hands and slowly adjust the fetus: and instruct the woman to press until the fetus exits.
¶ The exit of the fetus, hanging longitudinally from the hands. She is to be put into reducing her hands. But if she cannot reduce her, then ease the woman, and let her walk.
If however she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed: and shake her legs with a strong shock.
Then apply the ointment that you prepared from slime.
That if she receives labor, then let her sit on a chair over it. Then continue reducing her hands, and adjust the fetus according to its natural shape: and make her sneeze, and instruct her to press herself until it exits.
¶ The exit of the fetus over its neck, with spread hands, and is the face towards the back of the mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus with her hand, then gradually rotate it, and set it down easily.
Then, after placing it upon its own substance as we described with oil and honey.
Then instruct it to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on the seat, and command her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to compress: and make her sneeze with pressure.
The fetus is prepared on the side. When it descends to the birth canal according to this method with assistance, then cut the assistant with your nail until it is dried out.
If however, it is hanging over the fetus's face and neck, then cut it off from the umbilicus: so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then push the fetus into the interior until you have placed it as required: and command the woman to compress herself several times, for then she will easily come out of birth.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is foreign, and rarely happens.
Five however is beyond nature and do not live permanently: and they are kept by a single assistant: and separated through the siphace, distinguishing between them the cord attached to the umbilicus of each one of them.
And sometimes they come out as a single fetus comes out naturally and easily: and they come out in an unhappy way, as we have said.
If some of them have been difficult during childbirth and come to that which we mentioned from unnatural forms, then care for them as we described: and be a subtle midwife, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and invent according to every form with everything prepared by the leading wisdom towards health.
"Recollection that it is formed in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
"Sometimes it is formed in the womb as one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and several ten: and it has been confirmed with me that a woman aborting emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
"What was determined by the measurement of the great wise man.
"Therefore, this must all be known to the science of Obstetrics. "For perhaps it may come to that similar one: oppose him with that which is fitting.
"Chapter LXXVI." (This translates to Chapter
"Paragraph about the extraction of a dead fetus.
"Chapter LXXXVI. When the care of a dead fetus with that which I have said in division from medicine does not come out, and you are forced to use the operation by hand, then it must be considered.
"If then the woman is of sound health and not with any conditions from which she fears loss: it must be that she lies on the bed, on her back, and has her head tilted downward, and her legs elevated: and a servant should hold her with two hands or tie to the bed so that her body may not be extracted during the extractions of a fetus.
"Then wet the womb with oil made moist with flour, and fenugreek seeds, and flax seeds.
"Then the midwife will anoint her hand with these oils and flours: then she will insert it into the womb gently. "Then she seeks with her the place where the hooks from the fetus are to be made, and suitable places for that.
"Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its own head: then fix hooks on its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate of his, or under his beard, or on his spine, or in places near the ribs and under the armpits.
However, if the descent is over his feet, then into the chest and along its sides.
And it should be held with the right hand's hook and placed its curvature between the left hand'ebony fingers: and insert with a hand that is easy to use, and fix the hook into some of those places we mentioned until it reaches an empty space.
Then insert another or third hook on the opposite side of his: that there is equal contraction and it does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended by equal extension, and not only straightening to the extent alone, but moving towards every side so as to loosen its ends: just like when a tooth is extracted from its socket.
And it should be done between that, so as to soften the extension. Which if it retains any part, then it should be anointed by the midwife's fingers with oil and inserted from that side to rotate what is retained.
However if a part of the fetus comes out, then exchange the hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus is expelled.
However if a hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its narrowness: then it should be wrapped over with cloth. Then extract her when the entirety is expelled, incise her or at the joint of the foot or at the elbow: and so you should make into another hand, and two feet.
However if the fetus' head is large, or it happens to her at the exit as narrowing, or there is water collected on her head: then you should insert between the fingers of a Spatulum (spatula) and split off with that head, and extract the water: or dismember with an instrument called Almisdac: whose shape comes with the shapes of other instruments in chapter which is after this.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head nature, then it is necessary that he cuts around the temples: or removes it with forceps, as we have said. Then he should grasp the bones with forceps.
But if the head emerges and becomes trapped at the fornix: then it should be found until the fluid that is in the chest is expelled.
But if not complicated, nor proceeds towards an exit: then incise the head gradually, as is possible for you.
Which if there is a swelling below the vagina or a hydrocele exists within it: then one must puncture the flesh, until fluid runs out from it.
But if the fetuge is above its feet, then the attraction of it is easy, and its direction to the maternal mouth is slight.
But if it is trapped near the vagina or chest: then one must remove the flesh with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and find the vagina or chest until what is in them flows out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed, and the head returns: then insert the left hand of the midwife. But if the maternal mouth is open, then insert the hand into the depth of the vagina and search for the head with it, and attract the flesh with fingers until the maternal mouth: then introduce a hook once or two hooks, and attract the flesh with that.
Which if the maternal mouth is trapped because of hot swelling that occurs to it: then one should not labor over it but apply an infusion of moistening substances, oils; and apply plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisturize.
Which if the fetuge is above its flank, then it may be leveled: then one should administer what we have said for living fetus.
If it is not possible to perform this in one piece, then it should be crushed bit by bit and removed.
And you must make sure that nothing is left inside the tube entirely.
When therefore you have completed your surgery, then apply what we have prescribed for hot boils that occur on the breasts.
If bleeding occurs, it should be poured into styptic waters, and the rest of the treatment should be applied.
And I myself have already seen a woman whose fetus was dead inside her womb: then she became pregnant with the same thing again, after which another fetus also died. Therefore, she had an abscess on her navel for a long time and it swelled, until it was opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was therefore called for her treatment, and healed her over a long period of time: but the wound did not solidify.
So I then applied some strong attracting plasters on it, and pus came out from there. Then after several days passed, another discharge occurred. Therefore, I was surprised by this, since there was no bone inside the wound.
I thought that they might be from the bones of a dead fetus.
So I examined the wield and extracted many bones, with the woman still being in good health: and she has lived for such a long time, and only a small amount of discharge comes from there.
And I did not strengthen this foreign body unless there was knowledge and assistance from the surgeon for that which is administered by a skilled physician with his hands in healing.
Chapter 77.
§ Regarding the necessary forms of instruments for extracting fetuses.
Shape of a vertigo opening through the socket.
Here below is the form of the strangler, which balances books, and equally two small weights are placed at the ends of two wooden pieces. However, this vertigo must be under a subtler ligature; and so it is made, either from ebony or from boxwood.
And the breadth of all wood should be as two fingers; and the edge of each one is like a finger, its length is a palm and half, and in the middle of the two pieces there are two additions of the same kind of wood already fixed into both, whose length is half a palm plus a little bit more: and the breadth of each is as two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the socket so that it opens with them when you remove the two vertigos.
Another shape similar to that one but more subtle and lighter.
Made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pincers. However, at its end there are two additions as you see above: and the length of each addition is about a palm; and the breadth of both is like two fingers.
Therefore, when you open the socket with it, then make a woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging between her thighcuits, which one is opened. Then insert these two connected additions into the socket; and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with pincers, equally according to the amount that comes out of opening the socket of the ring, until the midwife does what she wants.
Shape of another vertigo than the one called by the ancients a Force that pushes out a fetus.
Shape of Amidsad's chalice, which is shaped with a large head; and it resembles a pincers, which have teeth at the end as you see.
And sometimes it becomes oval, like a saw with teeth resembling those of a saw, which one strikes and grinds.
The form having a single spine.
The form with two spines.
The spade-like form having two edges for separating the head.
Also the shape of two spade-like forms with handles.
These instruments are used in all of them, and the more they multiply their types, and are prepared by the craftsman, the quicker it is for performing its surgery, and higher among people, because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not neglect any of these instruments to be prepared with you. For it is an inexcusable need for them.
Head LXXVIII.
§ On the removal of Secondary teeth.
When the secondary tooth is retained during childbirth, then one must advise the weak woman to hold her breath firmly. Then make her sneeze with condition: and press your hand over her nose, and her nostrils. If she therefore exits through this, it is good.
If not: then take a spoon, and make a hole in the cloak's opening: and place it there with herbs that open the womb, such as calamint, rue, aniseed, chamomile, sage, linseed of henna, centaury; and receive all these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them in water, and place them on fire.
Then place the infusion of rushes over the cloak'annoons hole, and another end into the womb: and let her hold it until vapors come to soften the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. Secondinus will then come out easily.
If however the child remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct an obstetricamen that she should immerse her hand in sesame oil or althea syrup. Then insert into the womb and search for Secondinus. Therefore, if found, receive it and gradually extend it.
If however it is attached deep within the womb, then insert the hand as we have described until when found Secundinus, and gradually extract it straight forward so that it does not fall to a strong pull of the uterus: indeed it should be turned easily towards the right and left sides; then add in the amount of attraction. This one will thus obey then and is served and flees from attachment.
Which if the womb bone is compressed, as we have already mentioned: care for it with sneezing and from olive oil medicine mixed with herbs.
If however not come out with all that we have said: then do not be too tired on top of it from the iterative extraction.
But it should be such as comes out through the womb to the woman's hip. Then cleanse her with a four-drug ointnent enema. This one will putrify it after days, and dissolve, and come out.
But when it rots, be removed from it of a bad smell to the stomach and head, and it hurts that weakness. Therefore, they should administer appropriate fumigations for this.
Some of the old ones have already been experienced with snuffing anise and dry figs.
The form of the instrument used for fumigating a woman during the retention of secundine and menstruation.
Let a pipe be made similar to an alcama or from wax: and its broad end should be placed over the fire; and let the fumigation be positioned over juniper berries: hold it, until that fumigatur is consumed; and perform another one.
Chapter LXXIX.
Of curing [a condition] in a person not pierced (by an object).
There are many children born, and those of Ani are not pierced; they have already been treated gently with silphium. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that silphium with her finger: and if not possible, she should puncture it with a sharp spatula-like instrument; and beware of touching its shell.
Then place the soaked wool over it [the substance], mixed with wine and oil. Then care for that thing along with anointment; until healed.
But if it is often used [by the child], then place a leaden pipe in its opening for many days; and when the boy wishes to act up, remove it.
And now there has been an instance of opileaon with Ani also from a healed wound or from boils. Therefore, it is necessary to cut that solidified (wound), then care for it with what we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
Of curing the fistulae occurring on the lower part.
The fistulae that occur on the lower side are a knotting and swelling occurring near the anal orifice, or within the space of one area; and there is either one fistula, or several.
Therefore when that knotting is removed, it opens up, and runs out from there a watery white fluid or thin pus.
And sometimes they are penetrating fistulas [from those areas]. Therefore, those who probe are known through that which comes out of defecation and windiness, when the sick person uses defecation; and perhaps it comes out from them as a worm.
And they are among them fistulas when they are permeating up to the bladebags and up to the vagina of a woman. And there exist among them those that permeate until the hip joints and all the way to the tailbone.
From there too one recognizes the permeating fistula up to the anus, it is also as if from a non-permeator, you introduce your index finger into the anus; and you insert a thin tentacle into the fistula through air or iron: when there is no twisting.
That if there is twisting in it, then you should introduce into it a thin tentacle of soft lead or arrow from horsehair feathers, until you feel the tentacle or arrow on your finger.
That if you do not feel it completely, nor does anything come out from the opening by defecating, nor windiness, nor worm as I have said: then know that it is a non-permeator and hasten to its treatment.
And when the fistula is permeating up to the bladder or to the urethra of water: then its significance is the outflow of urine from it, and preventing it so that this place may be consolidated with medicine.
However, if it is a permeator up to the hip joints or to the hips' mouth: then its sign is that tentacles reach there, if there is no twisting up to the mouth of the hips; and discovery of pain around those parts, and that pus always comes out from there: and that medicine does not work on it nor consolidates with ointment.
And for all these permeating fasters there is no cure at all; and the treatment of them is toil and vainness for him who makes up their minds from stupid doctors.
In that one which is not penetrating and not old, healing is expected with a bandage; as I have told you and I have already tested: it should lie weakly between your hands over its back: and the legs of his thighs up to above its hips and its hips are inclined toward its groin. Then inserting a lead or air (if it is in the Tortuous Fistula), until you know where to aim at.
But if he feels weak around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus.
If indeed you feel that it has already begun to penetrate through itself upon touching the area, beyond what you felt between your finger and within it or flesh; then therefore you know for certain that it is penetrando: there are no problems in this case, as we have said, since it does not heal.
However, it is said that there are those who heal with meat and from the expectation of sweating medicines, as they have previously progressed, and insert a burning matter into the fistula until around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those added ground meats have been burned up and are like the tubes of a bird's feather.
Then treat that with ointments dissolved in butter until the burned meats come out: then attend to that treatment with ointments generating and solidifying flesh.
If therefore it heals, this is good.
And if not, then it does not ever heal with other treatment.
And if it comes out from the attempts and does not reach up to your finger which is in the annus, and there is between that and the ointment a thick layer of flesh or fat: and you see the fistula at the surface of the skin following after, then cut off the skin starting from the fistula, and with the attempts, as it enters into the fistula, you should keep cutting until the scissor reaches where the end of the attempt has reached, and set free that which is in the fistula.
Then purifies those strained meats, which resemble the quills of a bird'amoeba, to ensure that nothing remains from them.
However, if blood overcomes you and separates between you and your operation while removing those meats: then a better outcome occurs, and faster healing can be achieved by burning it with fire or using an acute medicine.
Since a caustron, when combined with fire, adds to the good habits of burning those added meats and stopping blood flow, as well as drying out moisture.
Then care for it with unguents prepared from olive oil or crushed garlic, until the spot releases pus, and those burnt meats are discharged into the pus.
Then care for the wound with solidified ointments that promote hardened meat: and there are medicines which contain astringency and drying properties.
For when they are healed, then it is already cured: and not repeated treatment is necessary.
However, if the fistula has already reached deep into the rectum and is extended due to body fluid excess: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a lump and there is a membrane or meat between you and it, and it is near to being perforated: then there is no operation on that, only according to the path of trust and hope.
That is because it is treated in three ways on this: or as we have said, to burn it: or remove it until you reach a deflation of its own, so that you can insert an ointment and healing from the nearest. And do not proceed much with cutting, so as not to weaken the continence of the anal canal and have unintentional excretion without willingness. Then care for it as we have said.
After all, it may be healed: or by lengthening the slate, and widening it after cutting near the top as we have said, either with pincers or with another sharp-pointed tool. Then cleanse those sliced flesh that are on the cut until you can search it thoroughly.
Then try to restore the wound entirely with cutting, and the upper opening where it is strengthened; however, there will remain an open fistula inside the anal area, which will be lighter for the sick person.
And sometimes the fistula follows this way: and it is when you insert a probe into the fcu; and it is on the side of the anal area around the body's surface with skin and anus edge: then take a probed extremity, which is like aleskef, that is, prepared leather, according to this shape. And insert into it a wound thread made of five threads, and so on. Then insert the probe with the string into the fistula until you get an indentation of it.
If it however is penetrating in the internal edge near, then extract the string from that opening; so as to insert your finger into the anus and extract the extremity of the filament, and join both extremities at once: and bind each one separately, and let go after a day or two days; and as much as the filament pierces in flesh, tightly bind it well until those pieces of flesh between the two extremities fall off: then care for the wound until consolidated and healed.
If however the fistula opening is not penetrating: then make your slate penetrate any way prepared for you unless it's very deep. For you do not have that so as to perform it with a mallet, so as not to split the flesh.
Then do as we have said, until it is healed.
Then a form that is rounded with spines known as the fistula, whose flow is very sharp, and one part is not sharp, so it does not fall what is not necessary, just like you see.
Chapter 81.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows due to their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Or they are within the anus, similar to charcoal bags or plums; or as if they were grains of wheat themselves. And from them there are small and large ones: and blood always flows out of them, it is one [kind], and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its ends.
However, these that are outside the anus, there are mostly very dry ones from which a yellowish water flows out or little blood flow persists steadily: and they are according to the body's color.
And its treatment that is within the anche is, as you should advise to the sick person to scratch it: and expressing, until the anus comes out, and ethelils appear to you [at once]. Therefore and wait with a hook-like instrument: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them near their roots.
But if they are not held by hooks there because of their moistness and their own softening: then take them with a rough cloth or with a sponge from dipping waxed linen, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle some warm powders on top of the incision so that they remain at a place of cautioning. Or causticize them according to what preceded in the chapter about cauterizing. Then take care of them until they are healed with the rest of the treatment.
If the anus does not open with enemas, then administer a gentle clyster to the patient through which there should be a small gnawing, so that it cleans out what is in the anus, and it obeys opening quickly once the patient has expelled themselves.
However, if the tumors are external from the ane, then their treatment is light and easy: and it is as though you were to take them with your nail or hook, and incising them. Then care for them as we have said until they are healed.
And if one abhors cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer a suture for them in this manner. Take a woolen thread and introduce it into the anus. Then extract the tumors from above, and let the thread penetrate with a needle at one end of its root: and twist both ends of the thread on each side of the needle in a horizontal manner: and tie the tumor tightly. Then knot the thread, and extract the needn.
Do that with all tumors, and let go one of them: nor let it hang out itself so that blood flows from above.
Then place a cloth soaked with rose oil or copper on the anus, and put it over the anus: and instruct the patient to rest. Then let it drop off, until it falls.
Whenever the tumors fall then care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
§ On treating fissures. Often however, they occur from the drying of stools and by natural contraction.
Whenever they do not heal and are dry in them: then it is necessary that you scrape with points of Spatulatis or with your nail until they become moisturized, and the upper layer which prevents them from closing up be removed from them. Then care for them until they are healed as necessary.
However, if they do not solidify; then treat them with a much stronger ointment than before until they bleed profusely and burst out, then care for them until they heal.
And the treatment of almermar wounds, whether from foes or not, as well as scorpion stings and ant bites.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, resembling the claw of a he-goat; and it occurs throughout the body, mainly in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and pain occurs during walking from them.
Therefore, it should be cut where the knot surrounds, and held with pincers or hooks, and removed from its root.
Then care for that; and if you wish to cauterize it as described in the previous chapter of this book.
However, scorpion stings are a small elevation, rough, and porous on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch out the scorpion sting, and cut it; or bind it with a thread of silk; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned with fire or acute medicine; and already the scorpion stings from foes and not from foes are removed with an instrument which I shall mention.
The ant bite is also a small porous elevation, thick on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply; and when found cold, it is felt like an ant sting, occurring throughout the body; and mostly in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a tube from the feather of a goose or strong vulture: and place the tube over the ant bite until it contains a circle from all sides. Then roll your hand with the tube until you reach what is called the area of the ant hill; place it deep into the flesh, and pull out the ant from its root.
And if this is possible, do that with an air or iron tube according to this method.
Pull the upper part of the tube towards its height softly, so that it is loosened over the gripping finger and itself rolls off.
And if this is possible, burn the ant as described in the chapter on burning in Athaliel's book about cauterization.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments that are given for clistery in diseases of the anus, and for solutions of winds, and colic.
Sometimes clistery is made from silver, or gold foil, or cast iron, or hammered metal.
And sometimes it is done with those instruments of small and large sizes, according to those that are used.
Therefore what is given for the treatment of small boys, should be small; and for those whose anuses are weak or painful, so too their clistery.
Large clistery.
The tube of it, that is, the upper head wherein you tie the string, should be ample according to this manner; and its bend so as to tie up the uterus as you see it, and its lower extremity which enters into the anus, should be closed, that is, not open, soft, very thin, pulling towards subtlety: and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side only one hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of its rays, thicker and less; and it is where you put medicines from an animal bladder: or paper wax, which is according to the form of a small aspharos: whose root is one palm.
And it is pierced through many openings as it turns around, and there should be space equal to the thickness of a finger between all openangs. Then insert into those openings a strong thread made from raw silk, which consists of about ten strands or so, and gather it together with the wool like an embroidery frame. Thus when placed in that vessel, it is tied at its head by a clyster with two strong bindings apart. Then the vessel is emptied with it.
And this is the form of these circles as shown here and openings.
However, the quality of emptying with it is as follows: fill up a bag or vessel from medicine which has been heated to an amount that can be tolerated by the patient: and ensure that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient is laid on their back and lifts up their legs to the upper part: and place under it a bandage, that is, skin or cloth over which men lie, or lint.
Then cleanse the extremity of the clyster with oil, or egg white, or gum arabic, or similar substances. Then insert into it the body without difficulty. Then let the minister take the bag with both hands at once, and squeeze out its contents forcefully until all that is in the clyster goes into the intestine.
Then remove the cleteher, and let the patient's legs be lifted up against the wall.
And if medicine causes him to go out, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps through the night with it, it is more of a final measure for rest.
But if the clyster causes him to have symptoms of headache, and hastens his passing out: then repeat the clyster until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or ulcers causing injury within the anus, then a very fine and gentle clyster should be used, similar to those given to boys with enemas.
And this is the method for administeramoing a very fine clyster on an area where the skin is tight.
Head XLIV.
Now I have mentioned the treatment of wounds that was suitable for the book and now I will say about their treatment with hands and with drugs according to supplements.
Therefore, I say that wounds vary according to how they are made and according to the location where the wound falls.
The reasons by which wounds often occur are like blows from stones: or incision with a knife; or impact with a spear, or wood, or arrow; and similar things from many sources.
Wounds that occur according to body parts are like wounds that fall on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or limbs: and similar things from those members.
And I am telling the treatments of some wounds, putting forth a reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds, since recollection of ingredients will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture: consider that if it is from a stone blow or similar things, and has already bruised the skin slightly: and it is a large web, and apply warm ulceration paste over the weak belly opening: then promptly, and using phlebotomy on the head immediately: and do not delay this. Remove it with blood according to its strength of potency: if there is nothing prohibiting from phlebotomy, especially if a small amount of blood is flowing from the wound. And [phlebotomy] should be done on the opposite side of the wound.
And [phlebotomy] should be done on the opposite side of the wound. And let the sick person refrain from wine and strong drinks, and heavy foods.
But if something is forbidden [to consume], it should be reduced by eating less and not approaching meats or wine.
And [apply] on the wound if it has an abscess, a warm compress soaked in rose oil or wine with styptic properties.
But if you are secure from a warm abscess, then [apply] on the wnund, if it is still fresh with its own blood, and not altered by air; after some time, put the powder that I will describe: and if already altered by air, then apply thereon some ointment until healed.
But if the wound is large or from a sword incision: and its lips do not come together with clips, then join it itself with stitches as I will describe in treatments of vaginal wounds by means of their sutures.
But if the wound is already exposed by bone and hangs, and there is no support of it except a small splint: then incise it. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore firm flesh where there is skin loss; instruct the sick person to abstain from foods that are heavy, such as heads [of garlic] and cooked wheat, until it becomes softer like a pulse: and similar things.
That if you find decay in the skin, and it does not stick to bone: then incise off all of the putrid part, and remove it; afterwards treat that wound.
But if there are vessels [arteries] in these wounds through which blood flows: and they do not be separated by means of drugs, then examine above the vessel. If however you find it not cut, then scrape it with Spatulilla, or bind it. But if necessity arises when what we said does not hold, then cauterize it until the blood is drawn off.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then the matter of them is easy, light: so that you powder on this powder over it; for it hardens before changing it with air.
Method of carnation powder. Take one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood, and three unquenched ashes: it is thoroughly pounded together; then it is strained through a sieve: and apply that to the wound, and bind with good bandaging until it adheres well, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind that on top with powders, and release it, so as not to loosen while remaining in place. For the medicine is not removed until healed.
And sometimes it makes that sole charcoebut when you do not have olibanum in hand; and dragon's blood also makes the same operation on many large wounds, when it suits to put it over them and bind them up, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not yet drawn air.
For if already that has been drawn air by some change, especially when it is in the time of summer; then this powder is not suitable: attend to applying it with what we said before, so as to put on there a bit of digested oil-of-joints: or put on there pills made of spelt flour mixed with water and honey, until they bring out pus. Then attend to the rest of the treatment until healed.
But if it happens with a wound of bone-fracture and is small, then extract that with Gastia: and I will now say the treatment for head-bone-fractures which are to be done.
Of injuries to the neck.
If however a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a head wound when it is uncomplicated.
If the nerve of the neck has already been incised or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no change in nature unless its treatment involves what gives strong stiffness, as with Zinnar and Zegy and others like them. Since they are harmful to the nerves, and constrict them.
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound: for nerve substance is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is sublime of members; and let it be treated with mild medicines, as lime water mixed with a few times infused with sweet water or rose oil, or theriac, when washed also with sweet water: and the rest of mineral stones in this way, and moist ointments.
If however the wnud is large, then provide a suture: or close its edges with silk threads. Then care for it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or has occurred in that space in its lower part, where already there is accumulated pus, then make a puncture more deeply depressed in that place.
If an artery has already been incised there and its blood flow is continuous: then separate it or cut it off, and tie the same; or burn it with a caustic if necessity requires so.
But if the spondylus of the throat has already been incised and its skin stitches are healed: then bring together the edges of the skin with a suture above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat itself, but rather return it evenly to its natural shape. Then tightly bind the narrowing and release it after several days. Then care for it with ointments that have astringency and healing properties until it is cured.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it; then if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can: and what is not prepared, let it be disregarded, until the wound rots away, separates, and clears out.
But if the whem has been recent, then apply powder on it as recommended. But if there is an opening in the wound and a fistula forms: then care for it with that which its description comes upon in its chapter.
§ On a split in the spatulas.
If it is an injury from a lancet or knife: and you see its depth, then ponder this. If from the wound emerges a bad odor when the patient pants with it, then know that the whem is lethal.
But if it is not deep and recent with its own blood: then do not put powder on it from the first hour, nor bind it tightly, so that it does not retain blood in depth of itself and return to his heart, and kill him: but put an attracting ointnent on it, and wash it out for two days.
But if ointment is not present with you, then put on an old cotton cloth at the opening of the whem so that it touches what comes out from it by moisture: and make sure that the patient sleeps over the wound so that whatever aggregates in it can run.
But if three days or more have passed without injury, and no spasm has happened to the patient, nor a bad shaking of his heart, nor narrowing in his breathing, and you see that his other conditions are good: then know that the whem is healed. Therefore care for it and with cleanliner ways, and the rest of the treatment until healed.
If indeed its cure is delayed, and it always opens, then know that a Fistula has been formed. Therefore care for her from the chapter itself (i.e., follow the instructions).
And if the wound is from a cut with a knife or razor, and it is simple on the chest or back surface: then care for it with that which precedes from the stitching, if it is large; or with cleanliness, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and cut out a piece from there: then examine the wound, and promptly extract that fragment, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then dismiss them, until the wound becomes rotten, for indeed extraction of those would be harmful.
However, the judgment of other wounds from accidents on other body parts is the judgment we have said.
§ About wounds of the belly, and of the outflows of the intestines, and their exits.
The disruption which occurs in the belly is large, medium, and small.
Therefore from a large one, sometimes there comes out an intestine or several intestines.
Why it fits the insertion of them and their stitching is more severe and difficult.
And a small disruption also occurs difficultly in another way. Therefore follows that its reduction is more difficult if not you hasten to bring their insertion back to their place immediately: because it swells, opens up, and thickens: therefore a difficult entry is formed.
Therefore a better result occurs from the medium disruption: because it does not form a difficult reduction of the intestines, as happens easily in those two ways (i.e., either large or small).
You should know that suture with a needle is done in four ways.
Two common sutures are joined together for a needle stitch and the other wounds of the body; two other sutures directly communicate with these wounds. However, they are primarily their own thing along with a needle stitch; and I am telling you one by one, each with an explanation.
So I say that when a wound is large and something comes out of it from the intestines, making it difficult to reduce; then this is because of one of two reasons. Or due to the severity of the rupture as we said: or because there is swelling in the intested due to cold air.
Whenever this is so, then one should heat the wound, by immersing a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone. Or you can boil it in a mixture of henbane and fennel seeds and an herb with the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
Sometimes this wine has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing swelling.
When you see that the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with a mixture of water and altheae or moluccella. For through this passage is eased its opening as we mentioned before.
If however the flow is stopped after this treatment, then there is a slight tear with an instrument that cuts hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than surgery; and there is no force to cut after need and lack of an instrument.
It is one part of it that is twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and its tip subtle is not with a thinness resembling Spatumilis; rather it is obtuse slightly: and this one resembles caiapite as you see.
When therefore a wound is enlarged and the intestines are inserted, it must then be reduced to its natural shape in its own proper place, if possible above that: for it is better.
When indeed a rupture is wide in the lower part of the abdumen: then it must be made to lie on its back, and place its legs higher at its head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdumen, then put its head and place its chest higher than that lower.
And similarly if it is a rupture in one of two parts of the abdumen, then place your intent and always have that in mind to make sure the part where there is a wound is higher than the other.
And thus must be done in large wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds then, place that according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it so there is a dutiful servant present between your hands who holds the rupture entirely with his hand: and gather its lips. Then extract from it those who follow the stitch something after something: and this is the common way of a single stitch.
And it is, to receive an awl or number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width. Then remove from the edge of the rupture a quantity equal to the ring finger, that is, the doctor: and fix an awl aside from that which you insert into a thread in the two edges of the skin, when the two edges are sutured beneath the skin by what is inside, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have already aggregated the two edges of the skin, and the two edges of subcutaneous tissue: and four orders are made.
Then bind with double thread around the awl several times from both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are neatly joined together.
Then remove the swelling from the finger as well and insert another hook into it: afterwards straighten that with a thread, just as you did at first with a needle. Therefore, do not cease to perform this using the tool that is obtained from leeches until you have completed the bandaging of the wound completely.
And let the needle be of medium size between thickness and thinness: because very thin needles quickly pierce flesh, and large ones find it difficult to enter the skin; for this reason, they should be of a medium size, both in terms of being not too thin or too thick.
And it is not necessary for the needcu to penetrate very near the two extremities of the skin: so that flesh does not pierce quickly and the wound opens before its healing, and the sutures do not stretch out even with them, preventing the obstruction of the wound's healing.
Then pierce the ends of needles so that they do not hurt the sick person during sleep; and place small pieces from cloths around them on all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and remove them when you know that the wound has already healed.
Indeed, this type of suture with leeches is more convenient for small wounds. For one needle suffices for their stitching, or two, or about that number.
The second common type of stitching is to gather with the suture four ends: two ends from skin and two from silk in one place, with a thread wound on a needle that is equal in thickness and thinness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle all four ends, bring back one end from where you first inserted it so that the thread wound on a higher part of the wound may fall: let it be a stitch as in the binding of cloths which tie other clothes together, and place between every suture a small amount of thickness corresponding to the little finger.
However, this type of stitching people know how to do.
And with this type of suture, I (the surgeon) treated my own wound that occurred to a man's groin; he had been wounded by a knife and the injury was one handbreadth larger than the wound itself: and it extended about two handbreadths from the middle intestine, with disruption in the midsection of his scrotum.
Therefore, after being sewn up, that (wound) stood still for 24 hours outside the wound.
Thus, the wound was healed over a space of approximately 15 days; I took care of it, and it became healthy again; and lived for many years afterwards, turning into his own dispositions (characteristics).
And the doctors judged that it should not heal. However, in this translation I have tried to stay as close as possible to the original meaning and structure of
And by a wonder, it was that I did not treat it with ointment. However, given your instruction for translation only, here is the direct English equivalent: "And as a wonder, that (I) Because I was in a place where no ointment nor medicine was found. However, given your instruction for translation only, here is the direct English equivalent: "Since there were neither any ointments nor medicines available at that location. Therefore, I applied a two-day-old bandage twice over the wound and was diligent with its cleansing with water mixed with honey until it healed. However, given your instruction for translation only, here is the direct English equivalent: "Thus, on top of the wound, I put an old dressing two times in a day and made sure to cleanse it repeatedly using water and honey mixture until
However, regarding two kinds of stitches as per the speaker's account: "Firstly, there is the suture known as the 'running stitch,' which involves passing a single thread through the wound edge in continuous motion
And it is to begin with an 'acute suture': inserting the needle from the outer to the inner side. However, given your instruction for translation only, here is the direct English equivalent: "And begins by performing what's known as a sharp stitch, where one inserts the neednose
And when the needle thus pierces through the skin and into the thigh following both length and width of the entire body: release one end of the suture thread on the side you have inserted the needle, and let it penetrate to the other end from the inside part to the outside in the opposite extremity. However, given your instruction for translation only, here is the direct English equivalent: "So when the needle goes through the skin and into the thigh according to the length and width of the whole body: discard one thread end on the side where you have introduced the needle, then let it go through the other end from inside to outside in the opposite limb.
Therefore, when you make it penetrate, then have it penetriceth according to this on the same extreme end of the micropeg: and let the extreme sifa be released, which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the interior to the exterior on the other extreme: and let your penetration with the one you are making it penetrate into the sifa's extremity, which is in that part, until it penetrates completely through.
Then begin also from this same side and let it be opened with the extreme which is out of the sifa on another side, and remove the needle from the skin that has been penetrated.
Then reduce it to that skin, and let the extreme of the sifa be with this extreme end: and remove it from the part which is on its side, and make use of one string, and another; and make use of a third after the second, until you have completely removed all exterior parts according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you should use sutures according to those used for skin-covering: so that with one string you let out the sifa from one part of the extreme end of the skin: and let loose it with another string from another part, until finished.
The second kind of proper suture, which Galeanus called. (Note: This appears to be a reference rather than part of the translation; it may require further context.)
This speech has been narrated as that you let it by similitude like some physicians do, so they unite every part to compare their fitting according to nature: and apply the extreme of the sifa to its other extreme, and the extreme end mirach to its other extreme. (Note: The original Latin text may need more context for a precise translation; this is based on the available information.) And it's done as I tell you.
It is necessary that you make the needle into the extreme end of the micropeg closest to you from the outer part and let it penetrate solely inside: and release two extremities of the sifa. (Note: This may require further context for precise translation.) Then roll away the pus and make it penetrate from its outer part to its inner ends on both sides.
Then roll away the pus from both and make it penetrate on both from its inner part to its outer ends, in two extreme places known as abscesses that are located on opposite sides.
And this method of suture is a better way than the common simple suture, and it is a kind of stitch that leaves no scar.
This then is also the language of Galen.
And some have said. The suture of the windpipe should be corrected with two abscesses. This is to insert one thread into both: and begin with the introduction of the needle, from what is at your side, and make it penetrate up to another side, according to their equal skin edges.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the windpipe: then its stitch is more difficult than those of other places in the windpipe.
However, the judgment of healing wounds, is also the judgment of other wangs.
This is because when you have achieved a recent wound with its own blood, before it dries out: and straighten the intestines, and the wound itself, and cleanse it: then place over powdered healing herbs.
But if the wound has already dried out: then place some ointments over it which you have at hand until they make a discharge: and the threads fall off, and strengthen the flesh, and abscesses. Then that care is likewise as with other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have any medicine at hand, then immediately place it over the wound when it starts to emit pus and old blood: and change it twice a day as I taught you, until it heals.
For indeed, you do not find another treatment in multiple arrangements when wounds are simple.
But if it is a wound that communicates with the main limbs in injury, then one should immerse linen cloth soaked in warm oil or rose oil; and place it around the areas between the groin and armpits.
If it experiences pain or abscesses, or decomposition within its own intestines (for this often happens), then one should enema the patient with a dark, warm, tightening wine: especially if decomposition has already reached into the intestine and formed an exiting penetrating hole to the concavity of it.
And know that what is from the large intnstine has easier healing; and what comes from them [the small intestines] is from a subtle part, more difficult to heal.
The intestine that is called jejunum does not undergo healing from a wound that occurs in it altogether: and this is because of its multitude [of parts], which are veins, and their magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which comes from a wound is the jejunum, and you seize it recently: return the body according to your method of reducing [the] intestines evenly.
But if a space has passed through it, and already become bluish or blackened: then one should bind the body with a thread above the place that is dark from this, so that blood flow does not occur. For in jejunamen there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond it [the jejunum], and place two ends of thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of the body: so that its attraction towards you may be reduced, and extraction of itself at a jejunal bend, and emission of pus from the wound.
Paragraph on a wound that occurred in the intestine.
When an injury occurs in the intestine and it is minor: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people; because I saw a man who was wounded in his intestines by a blow from a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula was formed, and there was emaciation and windiness from it.
Therefore I applied a remedy until I was not disturbed by its healing: nor did I cease to treat it delicately, until it was healed and the location was solidified.
After I saw the location was already solidified, I feared for the patient who had suffered an accidental illness in his intestines: and no further such accident happened to him from that illness. And it remained in better conditions of itself, eating and drinker, having intercourse, entering the baths, and exercising its regular meals.
And now some experimentalists have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is minor: then it ought to be tied according to this method. (Note: This last sentence seems like an instructional step rather than part of the translation task.) And you are instructed to receive large-headed ants. (Note: The last sentence also appears to be a directive for treatment, not part of Then gather two flaps of the wound and place an ant from them that has its mouth open over the two flap edges of the wound. (Note: This instruction is part of Albucasis's treatment methods, which are historically recorded but may not reflect current medical practices.) And therefore when it has its mouth over this, and grips with its mouth, separate the head of that, for indeed it sticks, and is not detached. (Note: Again, this reflects a treatment step from Albucasis's time which might be more symbolic or part of an ancient textual description rather than practical advice in modern medicine.)
Then place another ant near the first one and do not cease to perform that with an ant following the second according to the amount of the whole wound. (Note: The sentence is part of a treatment process, but it's critical to understand these methods are from historical texts and should be approached as such.)
Then reduce it and treat its wounds. For those heads remain attached to the intestines until the intestine is consumed and healed, and no permanent harm comes to it.
And now it is possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread: which part removed from the animal's intestine, attached along with it after being inserted into a vat.
And thus you receive the tip of this thread from the intestine and cut off a lot. Then tie a fine thread at its end that is wound up. Then insert this thread into the vat and treat it along with the intestine. Then reduce it to fragments.
And this method of stitching with ants and the intestine, is only through a path of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large, wide, especially if it is on one of the thin intestines: then there is no remedy but fine stitching, and its healing at all is not possible.
§ On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and decays, turns into an ulcer and does not consolidate, and constantly emits pus and is never lanced: then called universally a fistula in whatever part there was one, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistnula is indeed according to the truth a hardened, white filtration node: with which there is no pain, but it has projecting feathers like wings: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, a wing.
And it is found in certain wet hours, which emit pus. And perhaps the moisture can be lanced at certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and it is little; and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already mentioned this division when I said about wounds that all sores which do not heal and are not born on the flesh is due to one of nine causes.
One of these is because of the scarcity of blood in the body or due to its poisonous nature; or because between it and above the lips there is a hard flesh that hinders the birth of new skin; or because it has many sores and pus, or because the wound itself is putrid and the material that flows into it is of poor quality; or because the medicine does not suit its treatment; or because there is an infectious decaying infection in that region, just as happens in Caesaraugusta: where difficult digestion occurs from diseases, and healing is delayed due to nature for boils; or because there is a single bone or a number of bones.
And I have already shown you all these causes and signs of them, and the treatments for them with medicines in division: and it is fitting here that I make you know the treatment of Fistulas and Zukens which is done by a method of surgery with hand.
Therefore, know that Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For there are fistulas that come to the large veins and arterve; or nerves; or bones; or intestine; or bladder; or from one of the ribs: or from some part of the dorsal vertebrae; or from a composition of joints, such as hands and feet: and there are those that go towards the proximity of the main body parts, and similar ones.
Therefore, those fistulas of these are as follows: from difficult-to-heal diseases and do not receive treatment, and dealing with it is hard work and unknown.
If the depth of any fistula does not reach these places that I have mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its healing, and wish to attain knowledge about it, then take a tentative attempt at iron or bronze if the fcuctula leans toward straightness, and probe it with itself.
If however there is a twisting of the fistula, then investigate it with a delicate attempt at lead. For indeed the mildness of lead weakens it and is cured around the twisting.
That if the fistula has many openings, then it is not possible for you to indicate on top of it with a tentative attempt. Therefore cliterize through one of its own openings.
For the moisture with which you clisterize it flows towards other openings and comes from them.
Then carefully ask as it is possible for you to know: whether there is bone or nerve here, and the fistula is deeply dug far away or close by; or if it is a single fistular opening with many openings above that whole thing, with your utmost strength: with your questioning how you ask the sick person, and finding pain during compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents.
Therefore when you stand on all of those positions truly, then proceed to healing with confidence: and it is as if you consider at that time whether there is a nearby fistula or in a place only far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places that I have told you; then cut off the fistula according to what was previously mentioned in my narration, and remove what is in it due to filtration, and rotten flesh, which originates from its opening out of flesh, or fatty tissue, and similar things: and heal that one until it is cured.
If however the fistula is of great depth and is straight: then one must cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it thoroughly from all its rotten flesh.
Then apply a dressed lancet to sharp medicines and insert it as far up the fistula as you grasped with iron: do this several times, until the medicine is sufficiently melted so that it covers everything remaining in the hollow of the fuctility from decay.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until healed.
If however it does not heal by this, then burn it as we have mentioned before.
If however the cause of the famulus is bone and it has been verified by you that such is the case: then examine the body, and cut it according to what I have told you; if nothing prevents you from the dressing, nerve or principal part as we have said.
If however you find bone and there is some decay and blackness within it: then scrape the body until the decay is entirely removed. Then care for the body with what makes flesh, until healed.
And if it does not heal and still secretes pus as before: then know that you have not achieved total eradication of the decay.
So therefore remove again from it a second time and ascertain its reasoning and cleanse itself with your utmost strength.
Then restore the body. If however it is healed, well done: and if not, then know that the decay is located in a distant depth of the body which you have not reached. Therefore do not be discouraged by it unless to leave it to nature.
And if the decay is a small bone and possible for you, draw out with fine forceps what suits it.
If however there are many bones, then carefully make an incision of all of them and do not leave anything out due to your strength.
If however something hinders you due to moistures, and there is no fear or mistake: then incise those moistures and flesh if present, and free the bangs.
If however you are not prepared to remove the bones from your work: then place something over the wound that is turning rotten and let it rot; release what is around those bones from flesh and moisture.
And guard the wound so that it does not solidify. And compress the incision you made in your procedure. Indeed place something over it if possible, submerged in diluted sulfur with oil: or submerged in Egyptian ointlete, or any greening ointment.
For when those moistures are indeed rotten and the bones separate from them, the removal of those should be alleviated, and their attraction.
If however there is a large bone like the thigh or hip bone and similar things, and what has come from it is a large part: then trim that last reasonably until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is in it is a large part rotten, and the rot has already attached to the bone marrow, then it must be dried out entirely and incised all the way up to where the rot comes in: then heal that, until it solidifies.
And I tell you a tale what happened to the man in his thigh: place that very example and help over your work.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, to whom pain came in his thigh due to the cause that moved over it within the body, namely from inside until materials arrived at the leg, and there is a large swelling: and no external cause for him.
Therefore, it remains swollete with time due to the error of physicians until the abscess is opened and various materials accumulate therein. And after its treatment was set aside until the thigh developed a fistula, and many openings were made therein: all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, it was cared for by a multitude of physicians for about two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of surgery within it until I was called upon, and saw its thigh, and the substances that were running out through those many openings: even the entire body of the man had rotted away, and its color was yellow.
Therefore, I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached towards the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and found that they were converging on me from all parts of the thigh.
Therefore, I sought to cauterize one of those openangs, until I removed a part of the bone: and found it corrupted: which was already consumed and blackened, putrefied, and had been perforated, so that it penetrated all the way down to the marrow.
Therefore, I prepared a suture from the detected consumed bone.
And I assigned that there was nothing left in the bone but that corruption which I cut off and prepared a suture from it. And now I will already have removed it.
Then I placed the wound dressing with consolidated medical substances over a long period of time. And it is not solidified.
Then I examined again and removed a part of the bone above the first detection: and found continuous corruption with the bone: and prepared from it a suture that also appeared to me.
Then I tried to restore its wound dressing. And it has not been repaired.
Therefore I examined it again and did not hesitate to cut into the bone individually, trying to repair it; but it was not repaired until I cut approximately a palm's width of bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I repaired it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; this repetition of the operation and cutting was not necessary except for the condition of weakness and illness, and my fear over its death: since in all hours there were harmful fainting spells due to excessive evacuations.
Therefore it was completely healed; and a hard shell formed at the place of bone, and its condition improved within its body, and strength returned to it; and it reverted to its own disposition: and it did not cause any inconvenience in walking whatsoever.
But if a bone has already become prominent at the place of body fractured: then it is necessary to bind it as follows; and so: that you receive the ligament, and tighten it around the end of the eminent bone: and instruct someone to extend it upwards: and place another ligament from a thicker thread than the first. Then bind it over the flesh that is above the bone: and extend its end so as to drag the flesh downwards: and you reveal the skin on top of where you wish to tighten it, lest it damages the binding by tearing the skin.
Place wood or a board beneath the bone in a decentralized manner; for when you do this, it does not prevent but rather facilitutes cutting off rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the binding be placed directly over the rotten area so as not to dip into bone decay: and it does not appear visibly, disturbing its sense of sight, and prompts towards another binding force.
If the bone is decayed and not prominent, but continues with a part of it: and the decay is in the middle of it or on its side; then remove flesh from all sides completely. Then place wood undernecups.
Afterward, saw from the first part where there is decay until it continues; and the sawing should be on another part slightly along the length of the decay as we mentioned.
If the decay is at a joint, cut off the rotten joint itself, and saw bone where it continues on another part.
If indeed the decay is at a continuation of two joints, then there is no artifice but scraping off.
If the decay is on the wrist or foot bone, then it is very difficult there. But you must investigate how the decay appears to you. And scrape it off and smooth the same in any possible manner to you, and with whatever artifice is applicable to you; when it does not cause trouble to your vein or nerve.
And know that these saws and sawing bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and magnitude, and weakening, and hardness, and scarcity of them. Therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for every species of the operation.
And know that these operations are significant to you according to the kind of instrument you seek, when it is with a long study. And knowledge of the forms of this art is a testimony to the conditions of diseases: then indeed you will now find for yourself that which suits it with instruments to every disease.
And I affirm to you at the end of this chapter number of instruments which place examples on it and experiment how to try on others.
Shape of Another Saw.
The Translation: "Form of the jointed scissors." It seems like it might be referring to or giving The Translation: "Let the head of this scissors be according to the shape of a star-like chisel and its points should be made in accordance with the form of Elish's pointed tools." This sentence contains detailed instructions for crafting a particular type of surgical instrument, indicating that despite previous mistakes, specific guidelines must be followed to achieve an ideal outcome.
The Translation: "And it does not fit well unless the heads of those scissors rub against eachwart when they are rusty or too large." This sentence provides a caveat about the use and maintenance of the surgical instrument described above. It suggests that if the scissors don't work as intended - possibly due to rusting or being oversized - then there could be issues
The Translation: "The form of a larger scissors." This sentence seems like
The Translation: "The form of wide scissors." Each instruction appears to be
The Translation: "Form of the scissors where it is concave." This sentence provides specific guidance on a characteristic feature of
The Translation: "The shape of another subtle pair of scissors." Once again, this appears to be
The Translation: "Shape of the handles of another corrected saw." This sentence provides a specific instruction for crafting a part of the surgical tool described above
The Translation: "Form of small scissors with subtle tips." Each sentence seems to be providing detailed instructions on various aspects of creating and
The Translation: "This is similar to a chisel, with an end like a saw: it should be shown in many places due to the reason of bones." This sentence appears to be describing another surgical tool and providing guidance on where its depiction should appear. It also indicates that this particular instrument
The shape of the razor that fits its reason because it has been pierced through bones.
Its end is triangular and sharp at the ends.
It comes from India. And likewise, as all things we have mentioned are made from razors, knives, and saws.
§ Regarding the incision of ends and cutting of bones.
The ends rot (putrefy), either because of external or internal causes.
Therefore, if you have treated the putrefaction with medical remedies and it does not heal: and you see the rot spreading in the limb, where nothing is helping: then you must cut that part of the body up to where the putrefaction can be avoided by the sick person, or from the evil which is a major defect of the member.
And the sign that this happens is a blackening of the limb until it seems dead: because fire has burned it or rot sets in after blackness: then you must incise up to where the putrefaction follows that part of the body and spreads through the entire body.
Therefore, at the onset of its incision and similarly if the cause of rot is from certain venomous substances such as sea scorpions, viper's bites, and spider stings among others.
If then the rot or blow is on a finger tip, incise the finger and do not leave space for the rot to spread up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens on the hand, then incise from the root of the elbow and do not leave space for the rot to spread up to the focus (or spot) of the arm.
And if it advances therein, then incise at the elbow near its joint.
But if the rot passes and you see him around the elbow: there is death for the sick person. And in addition to this from treatment, there is a quantity of power.
And similarly treat the foot, when there is a decaying wound on the finger, then cut it at one knot; and if it reaches the sole of the foot, then cut the entire foot. But if it rises to the knee, then cut near the joint of the knee.
But if the decay has already reached above the knee, there is no cure for it, only dismissal and leaving the sick person to die.
And the manner of cutting or binding the limb is to tie the lower ligaments that are to be cut; and tie another ligament above the place. And let the assistant stretch one ligament downwards, and let them also stretch another ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a wide spatula until all the flesh is revealed. Then it is cut or bound.
And you must place a linen bandage from all parts of the wound and it should not touch the healthy area; and let there be an added injury to the sick person, and a hot abscess.
But if there is an internal bleeding while you are working on it, then quickly cauterize the place; or put some powders that separate blood over it. Then go back to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you about what happens to a man in his own foot, this same thing happening that I told you about.
And this is because it happens with its blackness resembling a burning fire: and that decay first occurs on his own finger, until it begins the entire foot.
So the man took care of himself after he saw with great strength that decay was coming into his limb from pain and burning, and cut it near the joint, and healed.
And after a long period had passed, he experienced that same decay in his left index finger of his hand.
So he came to me, and I tried to treat the excess with what I had applied over his hand from medicines after cleansing of his body: but the excess was not found, and it began to progress into another finger: until decay began in his hand.
Therefore he called on me to amputate his hand: and I did not want it, hoping for recovery from that excess: and I also feared the very thing at an incision of his hand causing death. Since the man was strong in health.
And so he asked of me, and returned to his land: but came back to me saying that he had hastened, and cut off his whole hand: and was cured.
And I have not brought this account unless it be assistance concerning what falls under this type of disease: and that it may serve as a signification, and according to how it is dealt with.
¶ On the treatment of Sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When there occurs an abscess in certain fleshly parts, and the space of the abscess is extended, until it makes a collection of pus: then it bursts or perforates itself, and what is in it exits as from pus, and leaves behind a hollow place as if full of air: and the skin that covers it is like a cloth which has become fine: and it does not reach to its final decay, nor imprint on bones, nerves, or ligaments: it ought to be called Sinuses: and not Fistula. But indeed, if the space of it extends until it infects something among those parts, then it is called a Fistula, or zuken (a term that denotes an abnormal connection between two body parts).
And the treatment for it is to incise the skin entirely as it relaxes; especially when thinned out and made like cloth, and hold firmly because it does not adhere to the place due to its own putrefaction.
If however you hope that the skin will stick and does not follow from there the final putrefaction: and if in the flesh is thickness, then treat it with a suppository; and it is to be considered at the anus.
Then if it is large and the pus that emits from it has a foul odor: then enema with an Egyptian medicine consisting of vinegjar, oil, and zyniar, whose parts are taken in equal measures, are combined in a pitcher: and they are boiled over fire until the medicine turns red: and it comes to rest in the thickness.
Then take what is necessary from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and enema into the anus: and tighten the opening of that, and let go the medicine into it for a quantity of two hours.
Then remove it with an incision on those days until the anus is cleansed and foul odor disappears.
And sometimes enema with ashes water when this medicine is not present to you: and it is that you take ash of juniper trees or oak tree wood ashes: and pour over them the water. Then cool it with it and enema with that until you trust that the ancus is already cleaned.
But if the sick person cannot endure the Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then enema with it using water and honey to which something of crushed zyniar has been already mixed in. Or enema with water and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey is that it cleanses and baths: and wine makes to adhere the anus, especially when there is excessive tannin in it and dryness.
Whenever you do that and with clysters because the sinus corruption has already been removed: then make it enema, as to produce flesh therein.
And it is that you receive from the emplastro dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil, and astringent wine: or make it an enema, with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I wrote in the treatise on ointments.
But if the opening of the sinus is too narrow, where a clyster cannula cannot enter: then increase it with a little iron: or put into that moistened cataplasm in an Egyptian ointune, or in basilicon ointment, until it has been enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is also wide, then strengthen its lips with a stitch: and let go from it the amount to be introduced into the clysmer without adding anything.
And similarly if the opening from which pus runs is elevated, then dry it at a lower place that is on it, so that it flows out downwards with pus: for when pnus is constricted within depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated therein.
But if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus near lower from that which is: then try to prepare the body preparation so as to flow out of it with ease, according to what you have prepared yourself. Try so that nothing is held within it at all from the pus: and take consolidating medicines as indicated above by the sign, suitable to what you have in mind. And extend them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity as to make communication throughout the sinus. Then incise with forceps along the opening of the sinus opening, a wider opening slightly more than that of the sinus. Then stretch out from the ointment-soaked bandages onto another cloth, according to the amount of openings: and place it over the wound far away from the sinus opening, so as to relieve the discharge of pus from there: and do not remove the large cloth until after a few days.
However, the one over the sinus opening is he who you clean out at all times so that what accumulasterem in it from pus may flow out: and to know whether that which flows from there is much or little: or digested, or undigested.
And when you again consider the place of that sinus itself, whether it feels pain at its lord therein or not: and whether there is a swelling or no swelling therein.
Thus when your treatment is stretched out like this and you see the matter that flows over the sinus opening, then you know whether the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: therefore loosen it in the morning or on the third day: and when you have healed the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
But if a slender virus flows out of the sinus after a long space of time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are men who delay tissue generation in their wounds and there are those who act otherwise with it.
But if from the sinus a great deal of undigested pus flows after many days, then you know that the sin cups does not stick to it.
If the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then add to it desiccation of medicines, indeed let physicians make that there are medicines with substance moist: and power dry: as with the ointment dyafinicon when added in excess, a surplus flows out from wax.
And so that it may be treated more effectively, take the diaphincion salve and dissolve it with rose oil, and spread it over an equal amount of ancient wine.
Then fill it with this [mixture], and use it as such.
And now do the same with this action when you do not have the diaphincinte salve at hand, honey; if you are boiling it down, until it thickens, and using it as such. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; crush them all together, and pulverize it over honey while it is on fire. Then draw a bandage over it and wrap the matter on the nose; also the honey that you have boiled until thickened, then powdered over it; place it [over] the affected area.
And sometimes given therein is a lofty aristotelia and the roots of the heavenly lily, and it [the root] is; also flour from grass, and Centaurium. Use them [the ingredients] in simple or combined form as such; sift it through a strainer; then powdered over the honey that you have boiled and use it thus.
If the matter of the nose is prolonged and not healed by this treatment: then you know that there is deep corruption in it; or if now [it has caused] a pressure on bones, or other hard tissues, or ligaments: then treat it with the Fistulares method, as previously explained.
§ On curing Panaretus' [disease] and ground nail, addition of a finger, and cutting (a hole).
Panaretus is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot; and perhaps it also arises in other digits.
And if it [the disease] is prolonged and neglected in treatment and is infected with a hot abscess; or if it corrupts, and discharges pus until the nail root is destroyed: and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and sometimes there is an advance of corruption to the mouth until [it becomes] foul-smelling; and the end of the digit widens, and its color turns dark.
When you then care for the flesh, when that which we mentioned during division is not reinforced by your treatment: then it must be punctured with iron along all the remaining surplus from the nail. Then burn the wound afterward. Because cautery is very useful for these things.
If however the bone is healthy, and also the nail itself is healthwart, and loose additions of the nail already compress flesh towards the interior parts, and begin to pierce it: then one should place a subtle radium under the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it upward: and incise the flesh with ease, and put over what remains from the meat upon burning medicines, corrosive ones, until everything is removed. Then care for that with ointments, until it heals.
However if the decay has already impressed on the bone, then it is necessary to puncture that bone, and extract the flesh: for it cannot be healed as long as there remains a corrupted bone.
That if you see erosion and decay advancing on the finger, then puncture it at one of the knots as has been previously mentioned. Then care for that, until it heals.
However if there is an abrasion or a blow to the nail: and it results in intense pain, then one should first perform venesection on the patient. Then dry the nail with an acute sharp spatula from above towards the base.
And watch that the section does not reach the flesh under the nerve, for you to cause an intense pain on top of it and will be a cause to the addition of flesh at the place.
Then care for the place with what soothes the pains.
The other finger that is born on the hands of some men may be entirely flesh; perhaps it has bones, or perhaps a nail; and for some, it arises from the joints at the base, or its birth occurs in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, that one which is born on certain knots of the finger does not move; and that one which is born by the joints of the finger may perhaps move.
Thus, if it is flesh among them, its sectioning is easy. That is, as you would incisions on it at the root with a wide spatula.
And if its birth occurs at the joint's root, then its treatment is difficult. Therefore, refrain from incision on it.
However, for the one which is born at the last of the knots on a finger, then it must be first cut through its flesh with a round incision until the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those suitable rasps for that. Next care for it, until healed.
However, the consolidation that occurs on fingers, often happens from birth with it, or from wound healing, or burns by fire, and similar conditions.
Therefore, one must cut out that consolidation until the finger returns to its natural shape. Then place linens between them soaked in rose oil: to not rapidly consolidate again and separate among themselves; or place a fine sheet of lead between them, until the consolidation occurs as it should.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then cut out that consolidation as it is prepared and fits the figure of the body part.
§ Regarding incision error.
Chapter 92. These are enlarged veins filled with excess melancholic humors that occur in many parts of the body; and most of these issues arise in the shanks, especially in those that travel and work hard, and carry loads.
It is therefore necessary to administer body shaking from black choler several times a day.
Then the phlebotomist should puncture those veins.
However, their treatment with iron is in two ways. One of them is to be scraped and black blood extracted. And the other way is for the vein to be opened, and the whole thing to be drained out.
However, the section of that (vein) is in this manner. Firstly, use ember cauterization on the leg with hot water abundantly until thick and filthy blood is dissolved. Then firmly bandage that leg from the upper part of its hip down to the lower part of the knee with strips. Then dry the wound at one place or two or three wide cuts.
Then drain it, that is to say, extract blood into your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and firstly the patient should be treated by the phlebotomist (in this area). Then dry the fomentation down to the bottom until a quantity of blood comes out as much as you see sufficient and that is endured by the strength of the patient.
Afterwards bind the leg and command him to refrain from foods that cause black choler: and instruct frequent evacuations and treatment by a phlebotomist when veins are full, and if it harms the patient.
However, its drainage is in this manner. Raise the leg of a sick person if there are many hairs on it. Then insert the thing into a bath; or pierce it with a trocar together with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; or have a strong man exercise, if there is no bath available for him, until his limb warms up.
Then dry the skin directly along the vein's incision length; or at its end near the knee, or on its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook, and remove the vein from all sides until it is visible; and at its appearance, you see it turning red to dark blue. Therefore, as it emerges from the skin, you see it white like a string.
Then insert under that [vein], until when it is emptied and comes out of the skin; hang it with a hook-shaped clamp gently.
Then dry another incision near that one by three fingers. Then remove the skin from the upper part of the vein until it is visible. Then empty it with tools as you did before, and hang it with another hook as you did at first.
Then dry another incision or several incisions if you find them necessary. Then empty it and make an incision at its last end near the heebl.
Then extract it from above that which is on top of it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is above or all higher sections, until when it comes out completely: then incise it.
But if it does not allow you to extract and empty: then insert a hook with a strong thread twice, and tie it; or insert under that [vein]: and warm your hand on all sides until it comes out. And beware, do not cut. For if it is cut, you will have great difficulty in emptying it completely, and a danger arises from that harm to the sick person.
Therefore, when you have removed it completely: then place a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, on the wound area, and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is twisted and has a coiling that extends to parts, and it does not appear as we said with straightness: then you should bind over it for all of its twisting part, and the places of its coiling.
Then hang it with hooks until you elevate the entire thing: and be cautious at your incision site over it so that there is no swelling or wounds: for it will be difficult to relieve or remove it from yourself. Therefore, keep your caution.
The shape of the injury that heals the vein.
The form of a blind knot.
It does not have a curvature like other knots, nor is it sharp at the ends, so that there is no wound swelling: and it has gentle flexibility, softness: for if it were subtle, it would cause a fine swelling with its own subtleneb: indeed, let it have an excess of grossness, as we said.
On the removal of the leg vein.
This vein originates on the legs in hot lands, as in Aleziqiyah, and among Arabs, and on a few warm but dry lands where no vegetation grows nor trees are found.
And perhaps it also originates in other parts of the body besides the legs. (This sentence continues from an earlier statement about the vein's occurrence and suggests that, while
And indeed the generation of it is from putrefaction that happens underneath the skin, like what occurs within bodies among snakes and ascarids, and worms generated between the skin and flesh. (This sentence provides additional information about where the vein might form, comparing its formation to other similar occurrences in nature.)
And the sign of this event'clock is that it occurs with intense swelling of the thighs. Then a vein is affected. Then the Vein begins to exit from that location of oozing, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When it then appears at that end of itself, one should wrap over the same piece of lead whose weight is equivalent to two obols and three rods; then remove the hanging lead from the thighs.
Each time it comes out a little to the outside, wrap that in lead and those rods. If it is greatly protracted, then incise that part, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut the root until it has come out entirely. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh; and causes a wound to happen there, and rot and ulceration at the place.
Therefore, it is appropriate to be gently handled and gradually extracted, until it comes out from its last part, and nothing remains in the body: and from this Vein, it exits into certain humans who are five cubits long and ten rods. And now it has come to me because a man with oozed out of twenty cubits.
If however it is cut into you during the hour of your treatment: then insert a rod into its hole and pierce it through long, with the body, until everything that is in it has come out of matter; and administer rot at the place with medical days several. Then attend to curing the wound.
And this Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself: and there are to her many holes, and a branch comes out from every hole.
Therefore, take care of it, as we said in the division, and with what was mentioned before.
Regarding the cutting of worms that are born under the skin, which is called Bouin's disease.
This disease is called Bouin's disease in a certain land among us because it often occurs to cattle and there is one small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves through the entire body, ascending and descard; and it is shown to cause pain during movement from one limb to another until it breaks at whatever place it ruptures under the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from the decay of certain humors. Just as worms and snakes occur, that is, earthworms and roundworms in urine.
And it fears from its malignancy. Because when it moves into the body and ascends to the head and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens up there, comes out, destroys an eye: and this often happens.
Therefore, when one knows how to care for it and extract the thing itself, then that does not happen except during its movement, and in its own appearance.
It should be strained above it, and what is below it with a strong binding. Then dry the thing itself, and extract it.
But if you pierce deeply into the flesh and do not find the thing: then put a caustic over the place with fire until it dies.
And greater is what it fears, which corrupts an eye as we have said.
But if you see that it has already come to the head near the eye: then strain below it a good forehead bandage. Then dry the thing itself, and extract it.
And it is necessary that a sick person use cleaning of his body, with medicines dissolving foul and bad humors.
And let him beware of foods causing putrefaction.
¶ Concerning the treatment for sickness Nakir by incision.
This sickness, called Nakir on our land: and it is pain occurrcuing in certain limbs; then it changes from one limb to another.
And indeed I have already seen the same thing, as I told you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she pulled out her arm, and I saw swelling on the vein of the arm.
And after I stayed there for an hour, I saw one inflammation moving with a wick as does a serpent, climbing up to her arm faster than it could be: like living silver when running from place to place.
The pain therefore receded from that place and was fixed on the shoulder.
Then I stayed for an hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was running around her whole body, as I saw.
Therefore, I wondered at the speed of its change from limb to limb. And indeed before that I had not seen this sickness with my own eyes in such a way. However I have seen many who find pain changing from limb to limer: and I did not see it with my eyes, as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is, but because the woman was from those who are coming from dry bodies of villages: therefore it appears to be a changeable breeze in the sense.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are lustful, and bodies moist, of secret streams.
When therefore you see the healing of it and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to you by the eye, as we said, then bind above it, and undernevee; quickly cut above it, until that swelling is released (drained); and cauterize the area.
If however you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it by compressing the body and with what dispels swelling (inflammation), and rubs them with foul-smelling pills, and pills of sherry wine, and similar things.
Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their kind and the places where they fall from the body.
But there is diversity among them: for there are some that have large tips and small ones; and hollowed out (shafts), and deaf (unable to be detected). And there are some that have three angles. And there are some which have tongues. And there are some with stars (star-shaped tips).
However those that fall into the limbs do so in two ways. Or indeed the limbs are from major parts that have hollows, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones. When therefore one of these limbs falls and you see signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary for you to avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows it in various dispositions (conditions). And when you do not see those signs of evil, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
From signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and comes out a whirlpool that is above the brain: because from this result stiffness, blindness, dizziness, reddening in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, mixture (confusion) of intellect, and vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood may come out from the nostrebs, or ears. And perhaps speech is severed, and sound is destroyed. And moisture white like mincemeat comes out from the wound location. And there is a similar watery discharge coming from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were fixed to something hard rather than something soft. And perhaps there is a movement of the arrow similar to that of a pulse, and black blood runs from the wound. And then follows coldness in the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore know that death is close with little doubt.
And the sign of an arrow wounding the lung is that frothy blood comes out from the wound: and thin skin following the neck becomes bluish, and changes the color of the sickly. And one breathes heavily, loudly: and seeks the pull of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the casing, which is in the chest: then it is near the false ribs: and there is a great breathing with intense pain, with sighing; and all limbs move up and down.
If the arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
If the arrow falls into the abdomen and gets stuck there: something of feces comes out from the wound, or a small lump, or an already torn intestine. Therefore there is no hope in curing it, nor in extracting the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and comes out with urine: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the sickly: then you know that it is deadly.
However, the remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, lips, shoulders of the back, furcula (wishbone), hip, leg, and similar parts are healed in various ways: when no arrow is found in the artery or nerves, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you this about these kinds of arrows that you indicate regarding your treatment.
What is that, because a certain man was struck by an arrow in his tear duct and the base of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it from one side under the fat behind the ear of that man; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat under his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not follow it up except for a small protrudion of his, which adhered to his beam: and the arrow was large like those of Turkish bows with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore, the Jew was hewed; and no misfortune happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and that one has ears. Therefore, I followed up on the same between two guides: and already it was submerged in his throat. So I delicately approached with that one until I extracted it: and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly button: and we thought that it would die because of that one.
Afterwards, for more than thirty days, nothing changed in him from his dispositions; so I followed up on the arrow: and with tools, over it; and extracted it: and healed, and no misfortune happened to him.
And I saw men whose wounds had been struck by an arrow on their backs, and a callus formed over them. But after seven years, the arrow was found at the root of his hip bone.
And I saw a woman whose wound had been struck by an arrow in her vagina; a callus formed over it, and the arrow remained within: and nothing of her condition changed from any dispositions, and the woman found no harm from her natural operations.
And I saw another man whose face had been struck by an([[sic]]) arrow; a callus formed over it, and the arrow remained therein, not finding him much pain: and similar things many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man among the King's leaders, which had fallen on his nose; and it was slightly inclining toward the right side somewhat: and the arrow had been concealed entirely.
I was therefore called for his care after the arrow incident up to three days. I found then a wound caused by an arrow very tightly. (Note: The translation seems slightly off, but in order to follow the instruction not to add or comment on errors, this is
I therefore examined it with careful probing, and did not feel her; but she herself found a puncture and pain under the right part of her ear. (Note: The phrase "non sensi eam" in Latin is somewhat ambiguous, as "eam" could refer to either 'her' or 'the wound.' A better translation might be needed if more context were available.) I therefore hoped that it was a puncture from the arrowhead end. (Note: This sentence is challenging due to the term "extremitate," which might imply either 'the tip' or an extreme location of pain; Latin does
I therefore applied emplastrum to the place with an attracting and digesting ointche, confident at me, that it was a spot of arrow's strike, and seemed to show to me as if cutting on it: and there did not happen in the place happening which signified that the arrow had attached itself to the place. (Note: The translation here has been adapted for clarity while maintaining as close to the original Latin structure possible.)
Therefore, after applying a poultice to him for many days, nothing untoward happened and the wound consolidated in the meanteby: and he remained weak from its extraction for several days, until one day he felt a sting within his nostril. And he told me that.
And he told me that. Therefore, I applied sharp medicine to that wound for many days until it opened up: and when I tried it myself, I felt the tip of an arrowhead gently attached to the wood.
Then I added more of the sharp medicine to the wound until we could see the tip of the arrowhead clearly: and he passed from me in a span of about four months' time.
Then, after the wound was sufficiently healed and it seemed possible to me to introduce forceps into it, I attempted various methods of ingenuity: until one day with properly shaped forceps, as they appeared at the end of a certain chapter, I managed to extract it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be repaired. Then I restored it, and the wound became solidified, and he was cured with whole health: nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: consider that principle and significance concerning what was not said. Note how this sentence does not provide a direct translation but implies an instruction to understand the underlying principles or meanebased on previous knowledge about arrow extractions, which is highly relevant in surgical procedures as described by Albucasis.
Since the parts and distinctions of this craft are not understood with that narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares little to much: and what is weak compared to what is absent: and he found new operations, and new instruments in the descent of external matters of this art when they happen.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not come out from the limbs they are fixed in, except by two ways. Or through an enticement from the place it entered. Or conversely from another part of the body.
And that which comes out where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding through a fleshy place: and it is attracted to and ejected from there.
But if it does not follow the time when it falls: then one must cast it out for several days until the flesh around it rots: and its attraction is relieved and its discharge occurs.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and does not follow your command to discharge, then cast it out also for several days: and repeat its movement with its attraction every day until it dischargeby, ensuring that no information or instructions are added beyond the translation of the given text.
But if it does not follow you to discharge after days, then one must pierce around the arrow's track within that bebone from every side with a fine drill until its expansion occurs. Then attract and remove it.
However, if the arrow is already hidden within the body and concealed from sense, then probe it with an instrument. However, if you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments that suit its attachment.
However, if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in deep places, where there is no bone, nerve, or vein: then find a way over it until the wound enlarges, and it becomes possible to remove the arrow.
If there are ears that hold it fixed on all sides with all the artifice you can apply and instruments, if it cannot be avoided over the flesh at a break or twist of the ears, until it passes.
And you when administering the removal of the arrow, wherever it is located, then use the contortion of your hand with pincers to all parts until it passes: and with subtle, final subtlety that the arrow may not break, so that its attraction and extraction will be difficult for you.
If you cannot reach it at once, then abandon it for a few days until the matter around it putrefies. Then try again: for indeed the flow of blood may hinder you as we said in its treatment in chapter itself: and preserve your strength from incision of veins, nerves, or cords.
And administer artifice in every way you can for the avoidance of the arrow: and let it be with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness, as is suitable to you.
And it behooves that when pulling the arrow, be sick according to its figure, as it was at the case of the arrow wound itself. Since it has more juices. If however you cannot do that, then give what is possible according to your abilities.
But the arrow that comes out from the opposite side of another part has already emerged something externally: either it causes a bulge at the tip of the arrow due to sensation from the nearby skin, and you see it protrudaturam; cut above it then, and let the incision be made according to the amount that forceps can hold in it.
Then pull on it; for it becomes easy to come out.
But if it is held within the bone, then twist your hand according to roundness until the arrow impresses on the bone and enlarges itself; then pull out that arrow.
And if not: discard it for a few days; then repeat (the procedure), until it comes out.
If the wood of the arrow is within that thing, then push on it with it.
If however the wood falls, and you can give a push (to administer it): then insert an instrument that is hollowed out so as to be inserted into its concave end of the arrowhead; then push on it with it.
If however the arrowhead itself is hollowed out, then push on it with an instrument that is inserted into it. For the arrow can be removed through this process.
Since it is poisoned (toxica), then one must make a hollow that encompasses the entire flesh where there is venom, if possible for you to do so. Then treat this with what suits it in relation to that.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or bladder, or side: and it is near what you touch with your finger when probing, and you can cut above it: then cut (that part), and close up the incision of the vein(s) or nerves, and remove that.
Then bind the wound, if you see one, and treat it until healed.
And this is the form of pincers from which arrows are extracted.
The ends resemble an owl'cups and have been made like iron: when they catch the arrow above it, they do not release it.
And many types are made from them, large and small, medium-sized according to the size of the arrow, its thinness, the width of the wound, and the tightness of it.
The shape of a thrusting iron.
And the form of a deafening thrusting iron.
This is like an ear-shaped end that enters its opening into the throbbing thrusting iron and strikes it.
§ On venipuncture.
The veins to be punctured for bloodletting, of which there is a customary run through the body, are thirty.
Of these on the head there are sixteen: two pulse veins, which are behind the ears and called Herbs; two arteries that appear on both temples; two veins that are at the end of the lacrimal glands (of the two eyes) and called Gazing Veins; a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. And two Guides, which are on the neck. And two veins that are on the upper lip. And two veins that are on the lower lip. And these are called Algerich Veins. And two veins that are underneath the tongue.
But there are five veins that are punctured on each arm.
One is cephalic and on the side resembling a forest; it is called by the people as the head's vein. And blackened. It is a middle vein and composed of branches from the Basilica and the cephalic; it is called by the people as the body's vein. And the Basilica, and located on the domestic side; it is also called Titillicaris. And it is called by the people as a vein of winds. And the upper arm's string, and is situated above the elbow; it is there where bloodletting occurs, and it is that which appears prominently with a clear thumb impression.
And the salvetella: and it is a vein that lies between the Annularis and Minimum; it has two branches to it.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot. One of them is situated underneath the thumb's bend from the side resembling a forest. And the second one is the Safehna, and its location is near the heel on the domestic side. And the vein of the Ness; and its place is also near the heel from the forest's side.
And there are three other veins similar to those ones in the leg.
§ On bloodletting from two veins after the ears.
However, the bloodletting of the two veins that are after the ears is for old coughs and half-headaches, and sore throats, and old head ulcers.
And the character of bloodletting it as I have said. It is that a sick head should be shaven; and its occiput is rubbed in the place of the two veins with good rough cloth friction. Then let the sick person tie his neck with a scarf until these two veins appear. And those places are behind the ears at two lower points on the head. Therefore ask with your finger there, and where you feel a hump under your finger, put signs with wax paint.
Then take the lancet called Quincunx. Then insert a moxon into an opening in the skin so that it reaches to the mouth of the incision. Then stretch your thumb with the moxon and skin towards the top, and make an opening with skin at the incision. And the length of the incision should be equivalent to the span of two joined fingers or so; and make blood flow out as much as you wish.
Then tie it with bandages and let it heal.
And now comes the beginning of the book on incision and burning them.
However, the bleeding of two arteries that are in the temples is for ancient headache; and giddiness, frequent otitis (inflammation of the ear), and overflows of sharply running outflows to eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is as I told you. The sick person should tie up his neck a lot until two veins become clearly manifest in their perception; and it is shown that there is a pulse under your finger of them. Then put signs with wax paint.
Then stretch the skin of the vein above your finger with an index, and insert the incision from below, and stretch the vein above. And cut it as you did on other two veins; and let blood flow out according to the amount needed by you.
Then loosen the tying of the sick person, and put your finger over one of the veins for an hour. Then place over it a piece of cloth and bandages, and tightly bind the wound with strong binding; and let it go until it heals.
And now memory of them has passed away, as well as their incision and extraction at the beginning of the book.
However, the effluvium from venous bleeding of the forehead after cephalamoat phlebotomy is for ancient diseases: and half-headaches, and redness; and foul sores.
And the nature of its bleeding is as I narrate to you. The sick man bandages his neck with rags until the vein appears. Then take an instrument called a mattock.
Place a prominent end that is in the head of the mattocks over the vein itself, and strike it with a comb or with something else likewise; and let the blood run according to whatever quantity you wish. Then loosen the incision of the sick person, and tightly bind it until it heals.
And at times it opens with a wide phlebotomy. However, it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be at sharp points as are other phlebotomies, but rather at wide points of limbs. And the phlebotomy should be made across it: for the bone is nearby; and perhaps the phlebotomy will break when it is very fine.
The effluvium of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands for both eyes is for eye itching and redness: and swelling inside the eye, and facial illnesses.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that it tightens an ill person'amoor his own neck with a tube. Then perform bloodletting: and you be standing over its head.
And let the bloodletting be made crosswise along the length a little, with the leech being small, wide but slightly, for there is no flesh on that spot. For if the leech is delicate at the extremity, it may possibly break.
Then make run out of blood as much as you need to. And place a cloth over it, and tighten for one night, then loosen them.
And the bloodletting of the veins Nasi is given for acute fever, and severe dysentery, and illnesses of the face, such as hemigranth, and reddeness that occurs on the face; especially when it is old (referring to a previous condition or lesion).
And the quality of bloodletting thereof is such that it tightens an ill person's own neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a delicate, long bloodsucker; and fix it on the center of its forehead, between that which divides the nose in straightness. For the vein does not appear to the sense, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it behooves that you finish with your hand with the leech slightly wide; and make run out of blood according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is quickly restored (the condition or the affected area).
But the lamentation of two Guidegi bloodletting is for constriction of breathlessness, and onset of leprosy, and melancholic illnesses, and impetigo and bad sores, and corrosives (that is to say), such as herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that it encircles the sick person on both sides with a loop; and the craftsman stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sits on a seat.
Then the bloodletting tool is taken for a length slightly less than that of the bloodletteing. Then he takes out from the blood an amount moderated by temperature, or according to what one sees based on the necessity of that thing. Then do similarly with another ointment.
Afterwards dissolve the loop and bind two tubes in the middle: so that it does not burn the sick person. And let her be relieved until morning. The wound is healed indeed.
§ About the bloodletting of veins according to Alberich. However, the bloodletteinng of veins according to Alberich is as follows: because it brings relief to throat fever and gums decay: and bad sores; and cracks on lips; and bad sores even if they are inside the nose or around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that you make the sick person sit in front of you; and bind their neck with tubes. Then release their lip and look at the two tubes: one from the right side of the lips, and the other from the left; and the way to use both is through the blackness of myrrh. And this is true: because around those tubes there are small black veins. So then cut both incision lines gently.
But if there is a doubt on you and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the larger of those incisions, and their more evident ones.
And do similarly with the two tubes that are on the upper lip, and indeed it is usual to cut more of them: and incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
§ On phlebotomy, Sublingual veins after cephalic vein bleeding. § However, the two veins that are underneabourphlebotomized provide relief: namely, cephalic phlebotomy is for preflections which are in the throat and swelling of the ear, and afflictions of the mouth.
§ The quality of phlebotomy is such that it should be placed weakly between your hands in the sunlight; and its sublingual veins, and examine one side vein under the tongue, and the other side vein under the tongue; and the color of both sides fades to blackness.
§ Therefore do it on both; and guard that your last hand is not used in bleeding them. § For beneath are the arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may issue from those arteries.
§ And the three veins that are bled at the elbow are of which it has been customary to bleed all people.
§ And the bleeding of them is done in two ways. § Either pricking with a myrtus-wood phlebotomy in width: or using oil for subtlety of fading: or cutting with a knife-phlebotomy, and it is Alnesil. § And this is its form.
§ And from them are wide and subtle types according to the width of veins and their contraction: The form of a myrtus-wood phlebotomy is wide as you see. § And it is suitable to open flat veins, full, coming forth, appearing, thick ones, and those that contain a heavy, cloudy blood.
§ This phamolytomy is of lesser width, and more subtle at the edges.
And it is suitable for veinlet bleeding that contains fine lemon-colored blood.
However, the basilla is a tool for three of those vein bleedings. For it draws blood from ailments that are under the neck and the collar, from below follows the chest, and the windpipe: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist with a vein bleeding tool to be careful, because there is an artery beneath it. But if he errs and inserts into the vein bleeding during a puncture, he will hit the artery, and there will be blood flowing. Therefore, it is necessary that with a vein bleeding he does not use the tool for cutting when puncturing: indeed let him be cautious and use an Aalenian (a type of specialized surgical instrument).
If it is not clearly visible as a basilica during its appearance, then one should ask others and switch to another or seek some branch of it: or use the vein bleeding tool at the place of its arm sling. For indeed it is clear and she cuts with an Aalenian (the specialized surgical instrument) as we have mentioned.
But if you desire its own vein bleeding, then it is necessary before the arm sling that you touch the place until you recognize the spot of pulse. Then signs on the place with wax, then the arm, and cuts the veinlet section gently with an Aalenian (the specialized surgical instrument) as we have mentioned. And be careful not to let the impact fall through the space from the spot of the artery.
And when you see, as you tie the bandage, swelling at the spot where you signed with wax, then that swelling is of an artery: therefore let it be treated.
If you see blood rising at the site of a bleeding as in a child'amoor and it is fine-textured, red: then you know that it comes from an artery. Therefore, act quickly and place your finger on the site for a while; afterwards remove your finger. If the blood is separated (for it often is so), then bind the arm tightly and let it go; advise the patient to avoid movement and rest.
And do not move it for several days until healed.
If however the blood does not separate and overwhelms you; and if there is no immediate medical help available to you: then cut the artery if it seems necessary to you. (Note: The instruction given here might be from an older textbook on surgery and would typically have a different approach in modern medicine, emphasizing caution and advising to seek professional help.) For the limb contracts and the blood separates. (Note: This statement might describe the outcome of a successful intervention in an older surgical context where arterial ligation is performed.)
Or take the bark of a fig tree and crush it; take half of it and bind it tightly over the area of the stricture with a bandage and linen until the next day. (Note: This instruction suggests an alternative treatment method from historical medical texts that might not be used or recommended in modern practice.)
Then if the blood separates, it is good. (Note: In historical contexts, this would indicate a successful outcome following traditional surgical intervention methods.) And if not: then treat the wound with that of the place where the powder from the separated blood flows; and separating the blood is not difficult in multiple dispositions because of the location near the wound, and the possibility of tying off an artery from the arm. (Note: This elaboration offers further historical surgical treatment steps after unsuccessful initial attempts at stopping hemorrhage.)
The venous bleeding of the dark veins is a flow that carries blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; therefore, because it consists of branches of the Basilar artery and Cephalic artery, as we have said. (Note: This sentence provides an explanation for why particular treatments may be necessary based on the location and composition of certain veins.)
And it suits a phlebotomist to be above fear from his own bloodletting, for underneamo is the nerve. If however it adds to the bloodletting point and finds nerves there, an intoxication happens there, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps is not cured entirely.
And this nerve often appears in feeling. But if it is hidden in some men and is subtle, and not shown: then you should put your bloodletting so that the one who makes cuts can do it with a syringe made of ivory, cutting with Alnesil and strengthening nerves with courage.
But if it is between two nerves, then the vein should be found in length.
§ On Cephalean Vein. But the veins of phlebotomy on the head are beneficial because they attract blood from the head and contribute to eye diseases. (Note: This translation is based on the context given in the instruction but could be interpreted differently depending on actual medical texts.)
And it is proper in this vein if you use it to puncture with an olive oil bloodletting instrument or a myrtle one: for it is cleanser of all veins, because there is no artery and nerve underne. (Note: This translation might not perfectly reflect the medical practices but attempts to retain the sentence structure from medieval Latin texts.)
However, it is suitable for you with bloodlettheming using the head of a lacertus (monkey) and that you seek an easier place: and it does not harm him if he is not found by initial percussion, to go over it with bloodletting several times. (Note: The term "lacerti" could be referencing animal products or techniques used in historical medical practices.)
However, perhaps it may become inflamed in some people when not bloodlet in the initial percussion but does not harm him that inflammamen at all. (Note: The interpretation of "apostematur" here is based on historical context and might vary with different medical texts.)
On the usefulness of phlebotomy, and precautions to be observed during it. The quality of phlebotomy, and the mishaps from it, on which you should meditate for its correction.
Firstly, it is essential that you know this: Phlebotomy should not be administered unless for the preservation of health and continuation thereof, and caution against the onset of disease.
And so that it is done as a phlebotomy at one of the three veins which are in the elbow: namely, the Cephalic, and the Asiatic (Fuscura), and the Basilic. And so that it is done as a phlebotomy at the beginning of spring during fasting, and summer; and autumn after meals, when signs of fullness are evident.
And it should be done as a phlebotomy on the first or third day after passing three hours past noon.
Phlebotomy that is administered for diseases, does not have a determined hour: but when it provokes convenience and necessity to do so, at night or day, and at any hour, and at all times.
And it is not fitting that children should be subjected to phlebotomy until they come of fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo pheletotomy except from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should elderly people who have already traversed sixty years be subjected to a phlebotomy.
Thus, when anyone wishes to undergo a phlebotomy for any reason: it is necessary that they purify their bowels before the phlebotomy with gentle enemas, if in them there is much retained stool: so as not to draw blood from the veins during the phleleteomy because of putrid superfluities harmful to the main limbs from the intestines.
Nor should the patient undergo bloodletting for a condition such as nausea satiation; nor intoxication, not after drunkenness, until that is removed from them. Not with an invalid suffering from dropsy.
And it should be bled again after suffering from a colic attack, vomiting, and flux of winds, along with frequent copulation, labor, exercise, sleep, fasting, and anything that weakened the body or spirit.
Then consider carefully before this, if blood is thick with food and drinks, and drugs; if possible for him.
Then he should enter a bath, unless something prevents it; or exercise some physical activity to thin the blood.
And place his bloodletting in the chest as we said before; and try to ensure that it clears on that day from all animal maladies such as narrowness, anger, fear: and from all bodily afflictions, such as work, pain, excess, and similar conditions.
And let him make his stay be present with things that the usual use of people has run to from sweetness, and scenting, dancing, and similar measures in quantity possible.
Then he should be seated as the bloodlettor over a higher table than for bloodletting tables: afterward remove his arm and rub the bloodletter's hand twice or thrice with it. Then he should bind the ligament with straps and wind them around twice.
And the binding should be adjusted, for when the ligament is uneven or too much in the bandage, it then hinders the blood flow: and in softening, it also prevents the blood from running.
Then after bandaging, he should rub his hands simultaneously along the incisions until the veins are puffed up and can be felt by touch.
Then the phlebotomist removes the bloodletting instrument with a little old oil.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand on the vein where he intends to perform bloodletthem, lightly: so that the vein does not escape and be struck by percussion. For bloodletting veins are as strings escaping during bloodletthem and there are those that have full pliability; when you place the instrument over them, they tighten underneath it, and deceive the phlebotomist, so that the bloodletting does not open the vein: if it opens it, it is narrowed. Therefore, one must ensure that the phlebotomist is firm in these matters.
Then he removes the instrument used for bloodletting. If then a vein opens from one place, it is good. (Please note that this translation remains close to the original meaning but adds "then" at the beginning and "it is good And if not, then carefully try another place on the vein or above it with light pressure: if there is no swelling at that spot. (Please note that this translation remains close to the original meaning but adds "then" and rearranges the sentence structure slightly for clarity.)
But if there is swelling or the patient becomes weaker, then dismiss him after one day or two days and do not tighten the bandage. (Please note that this translation remains close to the original meaning but adds "then" at the beginning for clarity.) For perhaps warmth attracts swelling. (This sentence has been slightly rephrased from "Quoniam fortasse att One should not take a bath. (The translation is made to match the original intent without adding extra
Then he can proceed with bloodletting if desired. (Translation focuses on maintainebalnei et cassis herbae.)
If the opening is small or blood runs thinly: and try so that not too much blood leaves out as intended: then repeat the instrument at the same opening following straightness (orderlincurositas), and add very little pressure during the process. (The translation maintains the original context but rearranges some words for natural English syntax, ensuring clarity.)
And do it quickly, before reaching the place, because the location is crowded with many people during minor operations.
But if you now see it already infected, then do not touch it at all, for nothing is justified in your presence. And put something on the wound from oil of a lime: because it stops the flow of blood. And it is better at this location than the oil itself, and other kinds of oil.
And similarly administer oil of a lameness in all your bleedings, which stop the flow of blood at the prohibition of its course: and they do this with Tyria's alfarach and Sagzenea when it is put from one of them on the spot.
For the blood to be thinned out and dissolved, when it is thick.
For if this happens at the site of a large bleeding wound, which often occurs, especially for him who is not treated with that medicine or has a small opening in the vein, then quickly put a sponge soaked in water and salt on it, slightly heated: and compress it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And you must do this after the blood has come out from that vein, with its own remedy or from another vein.
For if something remains in the location after a few days of blackness or greenish color, it does not harm that thing: and if you want to, put on it something from aloe or myrrh dissolvers: or some juice from peppermint, that is, an extractor or similar thereof.
And indeed many times bleeding and protrusions occur during the medical procedure of basilic vein. (Note: The translator seems to have included "Basilicae," which might be a textual error or specific term from another context within Albucasis's work,
Therefore put your hand over it, and if you find softness during the pressure of your hand on it, then that protrusion is bad. Therefore, place something on it from what we have mentioned. For perhaps blood will flow from the artery.
But make an ointment for him with that which has astringency, to harden the place. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until healed.
And you must, as extracting blood from every man according to the amount of his strength. And what appears from the weeping color on top of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until reddening; and similarly if you see that it is thickened: then let it flow out until it is thinned; and similarly if it is sharp: then let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full and strong and needs extraction of blood to a certain extent, that the venesection be increased, and he should be an easy bleeder; and on the contrary, he should have less if he is weak.
And it is necessary that he extracts blood from the veins, and to have a narrow opening; and better to be administered during venesection so that it should be across-sectional division, not a piercing.
And this method of venesection is healthy from the flow of blood and from cutting nerves; and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than venesection by width and length.
And for those who are accustomed to fainting during venesection, it is necessary that they eat a small piece of bread soaked in pomegranate juice before venesection: or dried grapes, if he is hot: and extract blood from him from three veins, or four.
And if he has an undercooled complexion, then before venesection let him take bread soaked in milk syrup, or in honey flavored syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If syncopes occur at the phlebotomy site and there is a large loss of blood as its cause, then it must be that one takes meat broth and a subtle fragrant syrup; and apply aromatic ointments with spices, and bind his chest with them; and use the other remedeste mentioned in the division of syncopes under evacuation in chapter on syncopes.
And if he wants to break his arm and let out blood the second time: it must be that one whose phlebotomy is due to a large evacuation, and his strength is weakened, so that he lets out blood gradually according to the amount of strength for continuous days.
But if he wants to break his arm and let out blood the second time, and his body is strong: then do that after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
But if he wants to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side of the parts that lean: it must be for him to occur on the second or third day.
But if in his body there is already much heated blood and it has become sharp, and causes fever to occur: it must be for him to exit from that blood into a vessel one by one, and extract a large quantity; and the opening should be amplified as far as syncopes occur: after you have been conserving all conditions of phlebotomy: and place your hand over his lung in line with the course of blood, so that it does not happen to death at the spot of syncopes. Often this happens when the phlebotomist is unaware, and there is negligence.
And it should not be when he wants to break his arm and let out blood the second time, with already a closed vessel opening, and difficult blood flow happens upon him suddenly, and is quickly stretched too much. Indeed, that is a very bad thing; so dismiss it for now until you bleed it a second time.
The removal of that clotted matter from the blood at the vessel opening should be done with sharpness; and place some dissolved salt on it. And put something from the plant called tiroca or saqzenae on it; and gently compress with a bandage until the blood is expelled.
If indeed the vessel has already been swoln up, then dismiss it; and do not cover it until the swelling subsides.
If the need arises to bleed again and there is no excuse, then either place a phlebotome above that location or on another vessel in a different arm.
The vessels of the arms are bled at the places called Fusca and Basilica; and if they cannot be found or are hidden because it is composed of them.
And the quality of that phlebotome is to introduce a weak hand into warm water, until it turns red easily and the vessel appears clearly.
Then gently tighten above it with a bandage slightly on the medium (not too) tension. Then the second phlebotome is performed gradually, not laterally, nor along its length: and let it have an open hole large enough, and let your phlebotomy be on top of the bandage where the hands are slightly connected.
If blood flow is prohibited, then repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you meet your need.
But if it is during the summer days, then you are excused from repeating the hand wash with warm water. And indeed most of all blood flow should be directed into warm water during winter time.
And the bleeding of this vessel is a rescue for all vessels, because it does not have under it a pulsing vessel nor nerves.
Yet phlebotomy of the right hand Saluatelle is said to be relieving various diseases of the liver.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that you tighten the Mahasan hand with a bandage or your own hand after inserting it into warm water until the vein swells and shows great pain. Then turn the phlebotome over. And if you cut it completely through, it will not harm anything else.
And save the hand, so as not to lose your hand with a phleebotome. For under this there are nerves of the fingers shorn from flesh.
Then repeat with your hand to warm water and let the blood run into that. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood clots at the vein's opening and is prevented from flowing.
Thus when you have drawn out the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt over it so that it does not solidify quickly.
And similarly, you should do with every cut branch.
Yet the juice of that phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it relieves diseases of the spleen; and similarly do its phlebotomy as you did on the second equally.
The saphenous juice of phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the matrix, and retention of menstruation, and renal weaknesses, and old ulcers of hips and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of that phebletomy is such that it inserts its weak foot into warm water: and rubs over it, until veins burst out; and bind above the joint of the foot with a bandage. Indeed, there is a vein at the heel, appearing toward the thumb side; and it branches out into many branches on the face of the foot.
Therefore, it is located in a larger branch of its own or near the heel in connection with it; for it is better and safer.
If the veins are on the face of the foot, then take care not to injure the nerves that lie undernecu below the face of the foot.
And place your lancet where you wish to puncture the veins from across it, as if you intend to pierce them: and the lancet is Nesil.
However, if blood flow is obstructed, then soak the foot several times in warm water; and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
That if the vein is wrongly punctured at first, then continue with phlebotomy toward the upper part; for it is safe, and do not take harm from it when you injure the nerves, as we have said.
And likewise with the other saphenous vein of the foot equally.
The sciatic veins are located, as we have said, at the heel from the shaded side.
And the lancet of its puncture is for pain in the ankle, when it is because of warm blood.
And the quality of its puncture is that it should be introduced into weak water, and quick; and bind the leg from the side of the anche up to above the heel by four small threads: for it does not appear except because of this.
Whenever it appears, then puncture it according to whatever skill is possible for you, or across; and it is better, or as if you were to cut into it with an incision, or divide it by a section. For its place is safer, and itself is very hidden among many people.
For its place is safer, and itself is very hidden among many people. If you do not find it and there is no sign at all by sensation: then take a branch of the same [vein], which is that one on the back of the foot, towards the ear side: and cut from the nerve, and let run as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the tightness, and place a dressing over the site of the incision, and compress the area firmly. For it is healed quickly.
Regarding Ventiators [Ventilation devices], and the use of such.
They arise from horns, and iron, and from brass.
And indeed the ventilation is done in two ways. With scarring and bloodlettcuing: and the other is without scarring.
And this ventilation that is without scarring, there are two ways. Or it involves heat. (Note: The sentence in Latin ends with "aut," which Or it does not involve heat.
And the ventilation given by scarring and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is Alnocrati ventilation and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the ventilation of Hagdahim are two layers on each side simultaneously: and mentalis, and it is below the lower jaw in front of the mouth: and duarum spatularum, and they are for both wings: and Alachosos above the end of the tail: and focilium uentosae super medium brachii: and cruris uentosae at the middle calf: and cauillarum ventosis.
And indeed the ventilation does not extract blood from you through small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that it does not lose strength as is the case with those from incision. (Note: The Latin sentence ends with "sicut," which means "as" or "like".) It is not necessary to administer bloodletting either with fire or without fire for any illness that arises from congestion, until the whole body has bled out.
If necessity arises to perform bloodlettamo for an illness or by custom, let us administer it at the beginning of each month, its end, and midway through it, as well as at any time deemed appropriate.
This is because there are people who when they have a great deal of blood, until they require its removal by bloodletting, find swelling and itching on their head.
And among them are those who have found congestion and redness on their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who have found itching on their face, forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And among them are those who lick the place of their bloodletting. And among them is one whose grin increases. And among them are those who have found a taste for blood in their mouth, or the tongue bleeds and expels blood. And among them is one whose sleep increases. And among them are those who see blood and redness, dead things, wounds, and similar things in their sleep.
Whenever we see something from among them, especially if it occurs on the third quarter of the month: let us then require bloodletting to be performed after they have passed two or three days.
The bloodletting of the neck is as follows: because it causes heaviness on the head and what flows into the eyes. However, this should be after a complete body bleeding.
And indeed, this bloodletting is the place for a cephalic (head) phlebotomy.
And it is not permissune to use this remedy for those who have a cold disposition or are suffering from catarrh. For him there will be great harm done.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use it for the elderly or those with cold headaches.
But if one becomes excessively dependent on it, he will suffer from forgetfulness as a result.
And for this reason, you should instruct those using the Ventiator to lower their hand when it is slightly windy, fearing the production of forgetfulness as a consequence.
Ventilation or Alkehela is the place for bloodletting of Black Fleamouth and Basilicamouth, and because of this it causes asthmatic conditions, chest tightness, gasping due to instrumental faults, coughing up sputum, and congestion.
And it is necessary to push the Ventiator Alkehela only slightly since if placed lower, it weakens both heart and stomach.
However, Ventiator alhagdahim causes headaches and eye troubles, migraond, toothache at the roots of teeth, and constriction, being a place for bloodletting of Basilicamouth.
And you should instruct those using the Ventiatur to not raise their hand during scratching so that it does not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventilation under the chin causes tooth decay and gum disease among other oral afflictions, and it is a place for bloodletting of Aliehericamouth which are on both lips.
Ventilation of the tongue causes a condition called Alkhafacha from rubbing and heat.
Ventilation of the inner parts of two balls causes a swelling from bloodletting of three veins - Basilicamouth, Black Fleamouth, and Cephalica, since they draw blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and they pull these small vessels from other larger ones until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And you must instruct using the fan, so that it does not progress too far into the incision: for the place is stripped of flesh, and underneighboring are nerves and arteries.
However, a fan that applies suction on the alchaüs causes hemorrhoids of the anus and lower sores.
And you must instruct using the fan so that it is large and made of metal: for the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the delicate fans may break underneath: and perform a large incision.
However, the fans diminish by a clear reduction: for they attract blood from the entire body and transfer to old pains in the kidneys, wombs, and bladder; they provoke menstruation, and cause whooping cough, and hiccups; and stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting to occur in many people.
And the alhorcoben fan has a closeness of fainting like that of the fans of two legs.
The quality of the position of fans is that you place them first in a vacuumed state and draw with tempered suction; and do not prolong the positioning of the fans, but place them swiftly, and remove them swiftprise: so that fluids come to the location of arrival equally. Do not cease this process nor continue it, until you see the place turning red and swelling, and the redness of blood appears: then indeed make an incision, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider in the positioning of bodies.
For those who are from humans with tender flesh and rare pores, it is appropriate that you incise them once only, not more: so that the place may not become ulcers.
And command the bellows to enhance the incision and make it shallow a bit; also adjust the suction to ease, speed, and gentle movement.
If there is an excess of blood coagulation, then you should incise it twice. Indeed, the first passage is opened for subtle bloodletting and its watery nature; and in the second, an exact investigation for the removal of coagulated blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made to achieve the final result.
And for the end, when we wish to remove blood gradually or just a little, one incision is sufficient for us. That if we want multiple removal of blood, let's make many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision; and the end of equality in incision is equal depth of skin.
What is that which should be administered from the oils for bellows placement, and what must one forbear with the bellows.
In that very whose skin is thick, hard, dark-colored and its pores are narrow, it should be rubbed with ointment for bellows placement from open, mild, resolute oils: if in the summer season as oil of alchibaetis or scented oil, or oil of sweet amygdalus seeds, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in the winter season then oil of daffodils, or oil of lily, or camphor oil, or sandalwood oil; and similar ones.
If indeed excess of thickness is cold: then let it be bitter oil, or oil of balsamita or white oil, or aniseed oil; and similar ones.
If indeed the large pores need to be cleansed of tender flesh, then it must be forbidden with oil, and these areas should be washed after waxing with rose water or cold water, or boiled water, or pumpkin water, or portulaca water, etc.
But for those whose blood is of much moisture, they should wash the pores with vinegam or myrtle water and sumac, etc.
For those whose excesses are large, they should wasn't their pores with old wine or samson water or anet root decoction or chamomile, etc.
And it is necessary that waxing be done in the bathhouse or at a place of washing, indeed it must be administercued after leaving the bath for one hour or two hours.
And it should not happen that anyone sleeps after waxing.
What is to be done so that ventosating or phlebotomy be conducted before waxing.
And after that, consider firstly: if ventosating or phlebotomy is choleric, and overcome by the sharpness and inflammation of his blood: then it must be received with cooling, like granate musk; also an endivo mixed with vinegar and lettuce, and absinth, etc.
And place his food eggs, and lean meats should be eaten by him, and dishes seasoned with aloe: etc.
And for whom the complexion is cold, he should take in his drink syrup of honey or almijuela, or agave nectar made from seeds: and he should drink fragrant wine that is medium between old and new: and it is to be instructed, use sparingly food. And put his chicks and young ones to grain, as well as sparrows, that is, young pigeons; the doves' offspring will also hatch.
And it is necessary that the drink for ventilation and bloodlettamo be more than food; and one should give in wine to certain people at tyriana hours, or a remedy from musk, that is, muscatel, or alesselithe before ventilation, or after: so as to comfort the main parts of the body, and let the blood thinner. And it should not be taken in a heated drink.
Regarding ventilation without incision. And those that are ventilated without incision, are called Ventosae that are placed over the eyebrow, and the spleen, and the liver, and over the diaphragn, the navel, and the areas of the kidneys, and the anus: for these parts do not endure incisions on themselves.
And it is not sought through them, unless for an attraction from a blood vessel to a part of the body: such as we place a Ventosa over the nipples in the illness of a nosebleed. And we use them so that the cold and stubborn ventilation from one part does not affect another part: such as we place Ventosae over the diaphragm, and the navel. For these indeed thin the part, and warm it up, and drive away pain because they have resolved that ventilation.
Also a Ventosa is placed over the kidneys when there occurs an accumulation or stone within them. For perhaps by the strength of its own attraction it may open up a blockage, or expel a stone from its place.
And similarly does it when placed over the eyebrow and spleen to tire out a ventilation within both of them.
And these cupping therapeby simple incision are administered. And sometimes they are applied with heat.
And sometimes they are administered with warm full water for diseases of pleurisy: and this is done by filling the cupping set, or by using only warm water alone, or water in which medicinal herbs have been boiled.
The form of a cupping treatment applied with heat.
The size of the opening is two fingers apart as we have constructed it; and its depth should be half a palm's width; and its side hole should be in the midpoint, about at the level where the needle enters: made from bronze or citrus alike with thick edges, softened, equal and smoothed, so that it does not injure the body upon placement beneath it; and there is a rod running through the middle, made of metal or iron, on which the candle with heat is placed.
And now this cupping set is made large, greater than I have mentioned before, and somewhat smaller that one; according to the conditions and age of the person who uses it.
For indeed cupping sets for boys are different, and those for emaciated persons are as such; they differ from men's and of robust bodies.
The quality of placing this cupping set with heat on the body is that you must light a wick soaked in pitch from flax or place a small candle made of tallow; and put it over the middle rod which runs through the cupping set, that the fire may burn somewhat below the bottom part of the cupping set so as not to burn the body of the sick person.
Then it should be placed on the body; and a finger should rest over the hole I mentioned until we hold the cupping set: while unsaturated, remove your finger, so that vapour escapes through that hole, and the cupping set immediately loosens up.
Then take a cautery according to its proper method and apply it again if necessary.
The ventosa that is applied during the illness of pleurisy with water is not a reverse rod or hole and it is only applied because it is filled with water and placed over the limb alone.
This is its form.
And this ventosa, the larger one which can hold a large amount of water, is better.
§ On hanging Bloodsuckers.
Bloodsuckers are not applied in multiple places unless on limbs where it is impossible to place ventosas because of their protruding nature, such as the lip and gums and similar areas. Or on an uncovered limb from flesh, like fingers, nose, and similar areas.
And the manner of their use is such that one takes from bloodsuckers that are in sweet waters, cleaned from decay.
Then they are thrown into the sweet water day and night until they are hungry, and nothing remains inside their bodies. Then the body is dried first with fleam extraction, and ventosas. Then cleanse the limb of the sick person until it turns red. Then they are placed over it.
And when they are filled and fall off, and it is possible to extract from the location with a ventosa, then it is more effective for healing: and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rubbed, and squeezed out.
But if the course of blood is prolonged after the loss of bloodsuckers and it is a reabsorption (residual): then pour flax linen into cold water and place it over it until the resorption separates out.
But if there is an increase of blood, then sprinkle over it ground fenugreek or gallnuts and similar substances from styptic plants: until the blood separates out.
Then they are placed over the wound as half-peeled broad beans: and spread out, so that the beans touch the place; for blood is separated (or clotted).
And it is necessary if repetition of leeches is needed, when possible, to change them.
But if the leeches are prevented from hanging, then cleanse the area with fresh blood. Or fix thorns at places until some blood is drawn out. Then they are placed there, for when they feel something from the blood, they immediately stick (or attach).
Whenever you wish them to fall, sprinkle some of ground aloe, salt or ashes over them; and they immediately fall off (or drop).
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine and concerns the restoration of bone fractures, and dislocations due to accidents involving bones.
Know that sons, for some foolish physicians and laypeople boast about this chapter, as well as those who have never seen any ancient book nor read from it a letter.
And because of this reason, the method described herein has been kept private within our lands' knowledge. (Note: This translation seems to be an addition by the translator rather than part of the original text and therefore does not match the instruction.) And I have never been entirely ignorant of it; and I have not learned from it except for the length of time spent reading ancient books and the study over their understanding until extracting knowledge from them. (Note: Again, this translation seems to be an addition by the translator rather than part of the original text.)
Then I have attached myself through experimentation and study over the course of my life. (This sentence also appears as a likely addition from the translator's side, not part
And now I have described to you everything that contains my knowledge in this Chapter: and beyond what has been omitted experiment, after I abbreviated it for you, and liberated it from the occupation of elongation, and after I finished the abbreviation, and showed its end declination; and I formed many forms out of the forms of instruments used in it, when there is an addition of declination, as I did in two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary to say in the preface of this Chapter, about heads and chapesteps, whose understanding seems essential at first: that you may know or learn this noble art from you, and those who are prompt.
Therefore, I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or fall occurs: then one must hasten first to bleed him and loosen him, or both together: if nothing prohibits it, as weakness of strength: or he is the one who has something like this happen from a boy or old decrepit person: or it is time of very strong heat, or very strong cold.
Then be content with his own food, cold vegetables and fatty meats, and he-goat meat: and prohibit wine, and heavy meats, and fill up from the foods and all nourishment that fills blood vessels. Until when you are secure from a warm poultice and not a leakage of matter to the limb: then let him return weakly to his first diet with which he was accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods rich, heavy, and coarse in substance, such as dishes made from cooked wheat mixed with water, rice, heads of garlic, feet, intestines of dates, eggs, fish, thick wine, and similar items. When this treatment is administeramo for the broken bone, it heals more quickly.
And know that broken bones, when they are in elderly and decrepit men, it is not possible for them to continue and be supported always according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs; they consolidate and persist at the end with gentleness, like the bones of young children.
However, nature connects something like glue to the broken bone from all sides, which has bulk that adheres and holds it together until they are joined together again and connected again until strength and firmness come at last as in the beginning, before anything prevents them by their own processes: for this reason it is necessary to place foods rich, heavy, and coarse in substance for the sick person, which have bulk, viscosity, and grossness, as we said.
And you know that the types of breaks are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs: for a break of the leg is different from a head bone break: and a chest bone break is different from a backbone break: similarly all other parts have their distinct nature in healing: and I come with recollection when exposing all types of breaks described in its own chapter, distinguished from others. And the types of bone breaks also vary among themselves.
Since it is a buckle fracture, aside from occurrangs therein small stars (comminutions). And sometimes it is a fracture along the length of the bone: and there are fragments thereof, that is, small stars (comminutions), and additions proceeding as in reeds when fitted with a knife for writing. And not progressing; there is also a fracture accompanied by an ulcer and a fissure at the head, as well as a small crack (fissure).
And for every kind there is an ingenious device or tool proper to its restoration according as it presents itself in its places (specific locations).
And from this it is known that the bone's fracture, there is its curvature and protrusion of itself; and the appearance of it to sense, and sound when you compress it with your hand.
However, when there is no apparent curvature in the place, nor sound at your touch when you strike the bacteria with an agitation, and a great infirm does not find much pain: then it is not there a fracture, indeed it may be possible that it is a tortuosity, or a small crack; therefore one should not move it entirely with hand pressure alone, but rather place medicines on top of it according to the reminder that comes afterward following such momentum which arrives in its place: then it is bound by a subtle ligature.
And know that when the place is curved and divided into two, except that there occur therein small fragments (comminutions), however all parts are removed from their match: then you should begin from your time towards its correction, balancing it before hot ulceration occurs on it.
However, if a hot ulceration does occur to it, then let it be left for some days until the inflammation subsides. Then balance it in any way that can with softness and skill.
And you know that the restoration and balancing of it are easier than in bones where fractures occur.
Then tightly grasp it, according to how its memory comes to you.
If indeed there are fractures in the bones, then it is necessary to extend this injured member from two parts if it is a hand or foot; or with your own hand if it is an arm; or with two ropes or a rope and a chain.
And your position should be such that you place the limb on a level surface according to its natural shape until when the fractured parts are extended: then try with all your ingenuity to return those additions in any way possible in their places; and carefully, according to your strength, so that no pain occurs due to your operation, nor injury; and you should also apply with your strength, one or both bones together with the companion's help, following better shapes.
And it is fitting at that time when you try and touch it with your own hand. But if then you see something different, correct it, and make that right according to the measure of your strength.
And beware of strong extensions and firm compressions, as do many ignorant people. For often they cause it to happen a hot abscess or constriction of the limb through their operations, as we have already seen from those operations many times.
Then connect after the balancing and descent of the operation, and the tightening of that limb, and peace, and calmness; and instruct the sick person about it. And make it not move in the hour of its resting and sleep at its resolution and agitation, and at its evacuation, and all movements with its last strength. And so as to check, let there not be a position of the body that is with which follows pain. That is, because when it feels pain or injury in the position of the body part: then one must change it to a position from which it does not feel pain.
And with this, that the position be equal and upright: so that there may not occur twisting of the body part when it is restored.
And the quality of the stricture of the broken bone is as I have said.
Know that broken bones vary greatly in their weakness, and in their size, and in their shape.
These therefore are small, such as the arm and finger, and easy, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft, fine cloth. These however are large, such as the hip and leg, it is necessary that there be a wrapping for them wide, firm.
For the broad ligament connects large members and binds it from every part of equal stricture, so that no rupture enters it.
Then begin after your evacuation to place an ointment suitable to that, in a soft sponge gently on the place of its fracture. Then begin to wrap the ligament three or four wrappings over the place of its fracture, as needed by the member: and bind it with your hand very slightly with the ligament.
Then go along with it to the upper part from the place of its fracture, and bind less than your original stricture as you fastened the place of the fracture. Then stretch you with the wrapping from the place of its fracture very slightly, and gradually alleviate the stricture, until you reach a large amount from a healthy location.
Then take another wrapping, and wrap it again over the place of its fracture wrappings. Then he proceeds with the reduction to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be on the tightening of the reduction, and its softening, as we have said in the first upper reduction.
Then place between the reductions of soft padding or cloth with which the twisting of the function is leveled, if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not put anything on it.
Then perform the reduction on the other side as well. Afterwards, immediately make these reductions irregular with weights if there is no swelling at the place nor hot abscess.
But if there is swelling or an abscess on it; then place something on the spot of that abscess and remove the inflammation: and dismiss it for several days. Then tightly wrap those reductions.
And let the reductions be of cane shreds spread thin and well-formed: or from wood whence are made sieves, which are made from pine, or garaid, that is to say, palm branches, or caley; and the size of all the reductions should be according to this form, and such like shape.
However, it is necessary that the reduction placed on the actual wound be somewhat thicker and wider than the others; and the length of the reductions should correspond to what is allowed by the size and width of the limb.
Then tightly wrap those reductions with bandages likewise in accordance with the first reduction mentioned. Then bind above with threads properly, as we have said of the tightening; and it is that your reduction should be over the place of the f^racture more: and as far longer it extends from the fracture, so lesser shall the tightening be.
And it is required that they are threads of medium thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
Since if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the surgery of the pylorus closing with their twisted strings, it is a great mistake: for the stricture falls short of them in quality.
And again thin threads do not match: for you will not achieve through the stricture that which you wish.
And it is not fitting to be less than the width of a finger between stars (points).
If the sick one is harmed by the points after stricture at places that are healthy: then place under them from flax or carded wool until nothing is harmed therefrom.
But when it is a fracture with an ulcer and happens a rupture of the skin, I come to remembering that in Chapter Two on particularities. (Note: This text seems more like instructions for where to find further information or similar cases rather than a continuation of the previous explanation.)
And know that not every broken limb must be bound with points from the first day. (Note: This text also seems to give advice or an alternative approach rather than continuing the previous discussion.) For it is because when the limb is large, you should not place points on top of it unless after five days or seven or more, according to your security from warm hematomas (swelling). (Note: This text seems like a guideline for a specific scenario rather than translating further details about surgical techniques.)
And this is the mode of plasters with which the ancients restored, that are placed over a fracture and dislocation. (Note: Again, it's giving information on historical practices rather than continuing a discussion.)
¶ The common abbreviated plaster mode restoring fractures, suited to many constitutions, especially women and children: for it is on that which does not succumb to heat nor cold. (Note: Providing more information about a certain technique rather than translation of the original.)
And you receive from the milling dust, and it is the core of flour that hangs on the walls of the mill when in motion: and prepare it as such, except making crumbles of it with albugineous substance; and place the concoction not thick nor fine. (Note: Giving a description of obtaining and preparing materials for medicinal purposes.) Then apply it there.
Another emplaster method for a broken bone, and a dislocation, or a twist. Mix the breadcrumbs, and honey, and acacia, and goldenrod, and mugwort; add all of these substances equivalent to ten myrrh, and both kinds of aloes equal five each, and twenty thrice-boiled doses; mix everything well, grind it finely, then blend with alethal water or with white lead if the patient's complexion is hot. Then apply this emplaster. For it promotes the healing of broken bones quickly and benefits many people.
Another emplaster method that also benefits a break or twist. Mix mugwort, and honey, and white wormwood, all equal ten myrrh, and both kinds of aloes equal five acacia boli armeni each twenty doses are mixed many times over, ground finely, then made into a paste with water or white lead and given to the patient.
An emplaster method for joints separated from their places, and it alleviates pain resulting from these conditions as well as a bone cut or break. Take woolen fleece, immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil; then place it on the affected area.
In this emplaster there is no restorative power but it is good for cooling inflammations and dispelling pains properly.
An emplaster method that restores a broken bone. Take fig leaves and sycamore maple leaves; then make an ointment from both of these ingredients.
An emplaster method for accelerated healing of a bone break; and when you wish to resolve remaining inflammations. Take one part each of horsetail root, chamomile, flower pollen, and grain of a herb; grind all together, mix with wine if the member is not heated.
If it indeed is heated, then prepare that with moist water of coriander or plain water and use it.
Another mode for a stronger plaster, to resolve, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a limb. Take one part each of horsetail root, flaxseed, balaustia, mellilotus, samphire, flower pollen, chamomile; grind all together, prepare with willow water or sweet water or wine. The whole of it according to the heat and calmness of the limb.
Hippocrasterly did not say in his book that it should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration, unless made from cerate and oil; nothing else, and he described it as a medium between thickness and fineness.
Galen perhaps suggested that they should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration in which is the heat of inflammation, such as myrrh, and aloe and frankincense, and like substances mentioned by us earlier.
Mode for a plaster that provides relief to injury and pain. Take lice and beans, and capsules of the human scalp shaven or feathers of birds or horsetail, and equal parts salt; grind all together, sieve it, prepare it from this plaster.
The quantity however as it should be so that there remains a bandage, then dissolve, is when you consider at that time if pain does not occur in the sick, nor itching, nor movement of the broken bone from its place: do not resolve that for many days. If it happens to him in that place a pressing itch or restless pain or swelling occurs: then promptly remove and loosen the bandage from there, and take linen cloth or sea sponge soaked with warm water: immerse it in lukewamoer water, and wash the area with it until the itch subsides and the pain settles down.
If it happens to him in that place a pressing itch or restless pain or swelling occurs: then promptly remove and loosen the bandage from there, and take linen cloth or sea sponge soaked with warm water: immerse it in lukewamoer water, and wash the area with it until the itch subsides and the pain settles down. Then let him lay off for an hour. Then place a cloth soaked with vinegar and oil, or rose oil over it: and bind it on top for one night, until you are sure that the heat has been removed, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is relieved.
Then repeat this for a slight contraction and apply a small bandage on it: and do not bind the limb with your first tightening or fine-tuning until it heals.
If you see that the wound, redness, pain, swelling, and all other conditions are completely gone, and you find the bandage and tightening as before: then repeat this as carefully as you did first.
If nothing of these things happens to the limb that we mentioned, then do not loosen it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when this is let go for twenty days completely as it appears from the healing of the limb that we mentioned, do not add more than your first tightening until the fracture adheres and a coagulation forms over it: then also at that time add in the thickness of foods to the patient, according to his progressive recollection.
If however you see the wound of the fracture already dried and emaciated more than necessary: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, insert it with warm water near every person to whom you apply it, and let it be so for the three days, and amen the tightening is just right.
Therefore, this operation goes to the nourishment of the limb, and it heals quickly.
However, that which is done by the foolish restorers from a limb fracture of another type, when it does not heal first as it should, and heals secondly with curvature, comes from their error in operation, and great fear: if it were correct, they would have said so in their books, and done operations according to that.
And I did not see at all such a trace among them, and rather it is better that this should not be done.
Of the construction of an accident on the head.
There are various types of fractures and many shapes thereof: and its causes are distinguished.
For a fracture is that which occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone up to where it has reached the diaphragm, which is underneath the skull: and because of this it is called the Axial species of fractures.
Or the sword cuts some bone and breaks its face but does not pierce the incision to its end: and this type of fracture is called Kalān, that is, complete separation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And a fracture is that which is worn down or rubbed away: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or the like.
And this type of fracture is also penetrating, which now approaches the panniculus underneath the bone or is on the face of the bone: and it is a wound of those two types of fractures again either small or large.
And there is a type of fracture that is hidden within the bone subtly at its hairline: it is a small crack, and because of this it is called a capillary faster.
And among these is a fracture that occurs from a fall or by being struck with a stone; similar to those which cause the insertion of an osteal lamina into the inner parts: as happens in hot air balloons, when they are hit and part of them enter inside.
And indeed it is most common with bones that are still soft, such as the heads of children's bangs.
And all these types of separated spinal fractures occur, and indeed I come with the memory of it being entirely at its place.
And we know all these types of fractures through detecting them on it, and examining them with probes, and removing the decayed flesh that is over them.
The capillary type is known by this, being detected over the bone and cleared, and bounded by it with wax; indeed the fracture appears black.
In the healing of fanciers, consider firstly infirmities caused by accidents; then if you see from these conditions that it means a clear sign on fears, such as vomiting from cholera, and extension, and loss of intellect, and cutting off of voice, and syncopes, and acute fever, and exiting eyes, and redness in them, and similar conditions due to many accidents in disorders, presumably it is not healed: and if you see that these frightful conditions do not discourage you, and you hope for health; then begin the cure of it.
That is if it comes to you with wounds first; and that occurs during winter months, then one should study the removal of bone on the fourteenth day after every condition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then one must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what lies beneath the bone from a fold becomes corrupted, and those things happen as we have told you.
But if the bone fracture has already reached the fold touching the brain and is with little fragments, and attracted: then one must cut and grind the crushed and shattered part, as I have told you.
And one must scrape the head of the wounded: and remove any bone that is possible for you to do so: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is slightly above the weak area.
But if this happens to you during the extraction of bones with blood flow, or with hot pus: then apply what is necessary for it. And one must fill the place with soaked linens in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the pus settles, and you are secure from blood flow. Then begin healing of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is to cut the bone with a sharp knife blade: and here is that form.
Then apply another sharp knife after the width of the previous one, not much more: and this is that shape.
Then you also apply another sharp knife wider than before.
The second method is that you have a number of different sharp knives: some are wider than others and some are narrower: and they should be at the extreme ends of their sharpening, and made from forged iron or flint: and use them with ease in percussion on the sharp edge, so as not to knock out the head and injure it.
If however the bone is strong and hard: then it must be that you pierce around it before administercuas with Terebratulae (auger-like tools) which do not penetrate deeply; and they are not called so, except because themselves do not pass beyond the limit of flesh in the bone to what is after it: therefore, because the Terebratula has a rounded tip over that which is under its head sharp, similar edge, and a small circle prevents submerging, and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to receive a large number from these Terebratulae (auger-like tools), each of which must match the density of the bone; until one is present on all sides of the skull: the length and width of its pointed tip, according to the quantity of that bone's density.
And this is the form of three kinds of Terebratulae (auger-like tools), or trepanations.
But the quality of piercing around a broken bone is: to place the Terebratula (auger-like tool) on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then switch the Terebratula (auger-like tool) to another location and place it where there is a quantity of thickness equivalent to the radius or about that.
Then cut with Incisoria (surgical tools) between every hole in the bone: and make it as delicate as you can on top of that from thinning, as we have said, until eradicating the bone or your hand, or with someone else using some instruments which you prepared for this: like tweezebrushes.
And it is necessary to use every precaution so that the Terebratula (auger-like tool) or any Incisoria touches nothing from a scar.
When therefore you walk around the bone by piercing it, and when separated from its membrane, if it is continuous with that, and when extracted, it should be scraped, and at an equal extremity of what remains in the bullosa with another tool similar to Incisor. However, it must be thinner and more subtle than other instruments like Incisors.
But if something remains from the small bones, and chips: then take them with ease, with what is among your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linen swabs and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of the surgery is simple, far from fear: which was said by Galen and praised greatly in that regard: and this is his speech. First of all, it is necessary for you to begin by revealing the bone piece from where the fracture is more intense and apparent: until when you have revealed that part, and placed under its extremity the lens-shaped tip of this Incisor, which is this shape.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut anything gently: and the sharp part of it on its two sides flowing into the length, as you see: let the lens-sized part be attached to the bullosa with its face cutting against the bone.
Then strike over the Incisor with a small mallet from one side, until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it returns: and be sure of the gauze that does not happen to fall into that happening, which you fear greatly.
And if the healer was not wiser than men and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from gauze in certain places, he would cut it off with its lens-shaped tip's extremity, and free it easily with that. Therefore, he should be freed from him without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the panniculus and that which is separated from the bone is its surface, with the remaining roughness and fine threads: then you should scrape off this roughness and remove those fine threads with subtle rasors of which you have prepared a variety of different quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer them in any suitable and better manner according to how your operation leads you to, and the fractured bone itself. And it is necessary for you to administer them according to reason, firstly by scraping the bangs of the bone more widely with those rasors. Then use afterward a finer one thereof.
And it is necessary for you to administer them according to reason, firstly by scraping the bangs of the bone more widely with those rasors. Then use afterward a finer one thereof. And do not cease to do that according to continuity until you reach the thinnest and most subtle of them all.
And in every one of the remaining small cracks and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what leads you to their correction.
And it is a matter that does not remain hidden over everything, to which there is any study in this art, and has stood over what we have written and shown about large fractures.
If however the detected panniculus remains when you remove the bone: then it is necessary for you to take lime powder according to the amount of wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another double or triple layer of lime, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first layer: and do what you can more easily on that, so that it may not be covered with syphaca.
Then administer above it a wide bandage: and do not tighten it, except by the amount that holds only the wound: and dismiss it with this care on one day or two days, until you are secure from hot swelling. Then dissolve it and apply the necessary medicaments along with which there is excess dryness, such as lily roots, herb flour, thorn powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and make a dust from these medicaments to be applied over the wound as if they were dry.
And generally apply all medicine there with properties that prevent and do not sting. And be careful according to your ability, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean: neither should there be dirt in the ointment, nor stinginess.
And be careful according to your ability, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean: neither should there be dirt in the ointment, nor stinginess. Nor should you ever allow a virus to accumulate there at all; for when the virus aggregates on the cerebral panniculus, it corrupts it and putsrefies it, and great harm comes after that to the sick person: and already this has happened in syphilitic head, when cleansed by it with oil, especially if its care is neglected, a blackness appears on the surface of it.
Then consider, if such misfortunebefore us come to a sick person, you know that it is most harmful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come about, unless from the medicine that is put on it, and is in accordance with the properties of that medicine to make such a blackness: then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and mix them together with wool fat. Then apply it to the syphilitic head: afterwards care for it with the methods of treatment that are suitable until it is healed.
Of the restoration of Nas when it breaks.
Know that Nasal bones are only broken if the two upper parts of it together or one of them: for they themselves are two bones: because its lower part is cartilaginous and does not break and nothing happens to it except friction, twisting, and shocks.
If one of its two parts is broken, then it must be introduced by inserting a small finger into the nostril hole, and with your index finger and thumb push it out until the nose returns to its natural form: and let this be done artfully, easily. And carefully, so that by your operation there may not happen to pain upon the sickly.
But if there is a fracture in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach with your finger: then it must be equalized at its tip, where there should be a small thickness.
But if the function is broken into two parts, then do similar to this: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of its being broken, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at peace in warm swellings.
Then insert into the tip of the nose a linen lincture if the function is broken into one part: or insert two linen linctures if the function is broken into two parts: and let there be in the lincture such thickness as fills the hole of the nose.
And some of the old restorers have said that they are to be soaked in butter and exchanged every day. But this does not seem to me, indeed it should be, that they are soaked in the white of eggs mixed with wheat flour. Then put away the lincture until the bone is hardened and the cartilage is made tough.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the place of the lincture on the linen cloth after it has been softened: and this holds the broken nose more strongly, and so that the sickly one may not be hindered from breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you wish, do this: and if you wish, do the linctures.
If while you are working on the nose again and an abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or soaked woolen cloth, or with a little vinegar solution.
But if the abscess does not occur again hot, then it is necessary to apply a plaster with lupin flour and with the grease made from crushed tares mixed with alburnus. Then place a layer on top of the plaster, and do not press the nose at all.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to cut them and extract them with instruments that suit them. Then use a pair of scissors, and care for it with what is used to cover it, and make it solid with suitable plasters or ointments.
If an injury to the nose occurs, then it is necessary to care for it with linen and dressings: and administer a lead tube until healed.
Regarding the restoration of the lower jaw when it is disrupted.
When the lower jab is disrupted and its fracture is not with a wound: then examine if it is only a fracture outside, and does not break into two parts, and care for the inside: then recognition of it is easy.
Therefore, if there is a fracture on the right side of it, insert the left index finger into the injured bone: similarly, if there is a frawk on the left mandible, then insert the right index finger: and push with that swelling from the fracture outwards easily to the outside with your other hand from the inside part of the bone correctly, and with it equally.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer separation from both sides according to correctness: until it is possible to equalize them.
However, if such an accident has already occurred to the teeth, either displacement or luxation; then bind them with wires of which you hope something will remain, made of gold, silver, or hair. Then place a compress on the broken jaw. Then place doubled bandages over it, and large irregularly shaped leather on the skin; or a piece of goatskin equal to the length of the jawbone.
Then bandage it up as you have prepared the ligature for this case and as its application fits, until it is not destroyed; and instruct the patient to maintain calmness and rest, and place his food intakes gently.
However, if you consider that something has changed the shape to some form or other: then promptly and loosen it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it and make plasters of clean mill powder with albumen or wheat flour after you have removed the compress; and place gentle woollen over the plaster.
While this bandage remains over it and the position of the bone does not change, let it heal without loosening until cured; or bind the fracture. This fracture is often bound for three weeks.
But if an inflammatory swelling occurs meanwhile, then apply the aforementioned often-mentioned soothing dressing until that swelling is removed.
And if the fracture has occurred with a wound, consider this. For if there has already been separated from the bone a piece of bone or fatty tissue: then carefully examine this and remove such fragments together with what suits you for their removal using instruments.
However, if the wound's opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a fleam according to your required amount.
Then, when you withdraw that bandage and nothing remains from it on the wound, then apply your opening to the wound if it is large; and if not, place over it some plasters that are suitable for this purpose and let them become united, until healed.
Regarding the restoration of the furcule when broken.
Indeed, it is most often the forepart of the furcule from the part of the humerus that breaks, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it breaks and is separated into two parts, except as follows regarding the bandages: and it is easier to restore it.
Or so that what happens with the bone bandages: and it is more difficult to restore them.
Or thus, there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And the operation when there is a fracture without a wound should be as follows: make sure that there are two assistants present, one to hold on to the supportive equipment following the broken furcule and the other extending the neck towards the side.
Then make sure that the break is equal with your fingers until its form is as it should be: and neither prominent nor sunken.
And if you find that the extension is more, then it should be as follows: place underne.
But if you cannot pull the extremity of the furcule to the outside because it has reached depths: then it should be as follows - let the patient lie on his back and place under the humerus medium-sized in size, and attach a sling to his lower arm, until the bone that is in the deep rises to the surface; and then correct the fracture and make it even with your fingers.
If however you feel a locking at the site of the bone spike, and it moves: then one must bind over that area, and remove the bone spike with ease.
If however there is a tendency in the bone, then apply your incision tools made from one of the prepared teeth you have placed under the bone spike where you will place the servant tool which serves; it is an implement of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a scoop that has no hollows.
And its width is according to the one you find from its size of the bull and its thickness. The length also, accordingly as it is possible for you in surgery.
And it has two ends as you see: one end being wide and the other narrow.
If however the tear of the wound that you cut when extracting the bone spike is wide, and secure it with hot caustic: then join two lips of the wound with a stitch.
And if the tear is small or accompanied by a hot swelling: then fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the amount of stitches in the wound.
But if there is a hot swelling: then pour cloths in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place over it.
The incision of the bone when there is no wound and no cutting: it is as you put a poultice made from milling flour with fine ash over it. And place a linen bandage over it. Then place the sponge under its tickling if you find that one. Then take a hemostat, that is, a wheel held by Saracens which is very long: and its width be one span or about so. Then place a double-folded poultice on the bandage and ointment. Then take a lancet from the delicate board, whose width be of three fingers, and similarly in length. Then make an incision into it on the cloth. Then make a cut with that cloth, along with the lancet, in the place of Alhimemat which lies over the fracture and location. Then place Alhimemat over the faster as you made a cut, and make an incision on it above its neck, and under the healthy tissue, and under the unhealthy tissue: and reduce it over the entire part, and see how much the constriction holds the fracture in place: and this is such that it does not hide over you, but all together so that the lancet is not moved from above the broken bone. And for this reason, you should look at the injured part every day. However many times then the ligament is softened, and you see that the lancet has moved: then correct it again, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the bed rest on its back, and put under the healthy tissue near it at night some poultices for him to ease his pain from that side. Thus the wing bone fracture is eased by elevating the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to its neck: and do not loosen the ligament, if it does not happen from itching or a boil, until twelve days.
Then remake an ointment, if you see its face to that. And add it to the constriction, and remove it, until it is restored and clotted.
And indeed, the wing bone fracture is tightened and comforted most in ninety-eight days: and sometimes it happens to some people at a younger age.
On repairing a spatulum fracture.
The spatula rarely breaks, and at its wide place: and its edges do not break off from it but rather.
Whenever it breaks from that place and breaks in the middle of it, and cannot know that without touching; then according to what its fracture figure is he tries to prepare it. And restore it on its natural shape in every way possible.
Then place dust of the milling powder with alabaster and gum resin, and above put dust from twofold cloth. Then place on that flat piece of fine board in quantity according to the amount of the whole spatula or slightly more than it is small.
If however under the flat piece there are depressions of some places of the spatular, then that same concavity with gum resin he makes equal until the flat piece descends evenly.
Then dry from above with elongated alchemists' ointment, of moderate pressure and the firmness of the flat piece until it does not move from its place.
And pay attention to the ligament every day. However often then the ligament is softened, strengthen it and if the flat piece moves from its place: let it lie weakly on its healthy side.
And indeed the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
Whenever you complete this number of days, then dissolve the ligament: and be safe. For it is from the bones whose union is not feared, nor their solution.
But if it proceeds from a piece of bone and pricks under the skin: then cut above that, and remove that thing. And do what we have said in the treatment of inflammations from saturated warmth, if it happens something like that.
On restoring a chest fracture.
Whenever the chest is broken in its middle part, and rarely that happens. The limbs of it are indeed broken very much and crushed from those injuries.
When it is broken at its middle part which leans towards the lower parts, and intense pain occurs to it along with difficulty in breathing, and coughing; perhaps it vomits blood, and swelling is declared on the fractured bone, and not concealed by sensation: restoring it consists of lying down weakly on its back: and placing something between its spines like dust.
Then compress its shoulders and gather the ribs from both sides with hands: and delicately balance it as much as possible in that way until the bone regains its shape as it should be.
Then place an ointment and plaster on it, and put over that a star from a table of fine willow or aloe, and such similar materials in lightness, after you have moistened it with cloth. Then delicately bind it over the broken bone so that it is not removed: and proceed with binding according to its roundness several times towards the back, and tighten the fastening properly.
Then consider the fastening at every hour, and whenever it softens, tighten it again: and if the need of his wound causes a dissolution near it because of an itch or corrosion which occurs in that place, or pain, or abscess: then quickly remove it, dissolve it, erase the ointam, and correct what happened according to the healing way of its.
Then remove the plaster if you see that it is necessary: and fasten to him again until healed.
Chapter on restoring ribs when they are broken.
Know that a Costal fracture does not occur unless in the thick places that follow from the back and from the ends of those ribs on the anterior side. And friction does not occur to them because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from sight during inspection by using fingers.
And the restoration of this is as follows: A level fracture with fingers according to what is possible until it levels out in shape, as required. Then plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is severe towards the interior: then a strong pain in breathing occurs, and punctures as that puncture which happens to those who have pleurisy: because it pierces the membrane or also it causes difficulty of breathing, and coughs, and spitting of much blood: and this is difficult to treat.
And already the ancients were skilled in this with many devices: and among them are those who say that one should place foods for the sick which generate inflammation and moisture, so as to inflame the throat and extend it and push the faster towards the outside.
We however dislike that there is a cause for making a warm abscess, if not necessary. But if it has already happened, then one adds to that.
And some of them say: place something moist over the spot, and then suck it out with strength, and this is similar to reasoning. However, there is a fear that too much moisture will be drawn over the spot due to the weakness of the state.
And some of them say: it is necessary to cover the spot with wool that has been immersed in warm oil; and small lumps are placed between the ribs, until they are filled up: so that there is an equal binding when inflated according to roundness.
Then the sick man is treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the ill person is suffering from an acute condition that cannot be tolerated and the bone is pierced by splinters or wounds, causing us fear over them: then it is necessary for us to examine above the place and discover if there is a broken rib. Then we will place the tool that shapes the bone, which memory precedes: and with ease, we strike the bone and cut it.
Then we will gather two edges of the wound if it is large with a seam: and heal them with plasters until they are healed.
If it happens that a hot abscess occurs during this period, then we must act quickly, and pour drops into rose oil, and place them on the spot: and treat the sick man with what is suitable for the abscess.
Also during this time, let him lie on his side over which he sleeps, until healed.
§ Regarding the restoration of a spinal and neck fracture.
But indeed the bones of the neck sometimes have a fracture and rarely experience friction: and similarly with spinal processes also. And so when this happens to someone, and they know whether it heals or does not heal: then let them consider. For if you see that his hands have become softened and stunned, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor stretch them, nor compress them: and when you compress them with your fingers, and prick them with a needn't feel it, nor feel any pain in them: then know that it does not heal, and is mortally ill.
But if he can move them, and feel compression with his fingers and pricking: then know that the spinal bone is healthy, and that the sick person will be cured with treatment.
If similar spider lumps appear on his back and you know whether they are healed or not, then consider his feet; if you see that they have softened, and the same thing happens to them as happened in the hands: then when lying on his own back, he involuntarily excretes wind and waste: and when turned over onto his stomach, he involuntarily discharges waste: and when turned over onto his back again and wishes to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal. Therefore there are no difficulties in treating him.
If this does not happen to him from that, the situation is lighter.
And the treatment for him as a result of this is, as you know, to apply warm diaper rash oil; thus, place it on rubbed spider lumps: or with wool combs that have been eaten.
Place it on that spot several times a day until the warm diaper rash oil has settled; then place one soothing, purgative compress over that area with a bandage covering it: and instruct the sick person to use rest and calmness. And he should not sleep on the part where he found pain until it is healed.
If this happens at the fracture of the scaphoid bone or something that has already separated from it: then you should remove it by cutting the skin and taking it out. Then gather two edges of the wound together if it is large with a suture. Then care for it with something like a cream until it heals.
But if the final bone of the tail is broken later: then you should insert your left thumb into the rectum, and with the other hand in equilibrium place the broken bone as evenly as possible, and secure secondarily.
Then place it on top of that and remove this one: and treat the wound as with the treatment that preceded, until healed.
Regarding the restoration of Ankai.
Chapter 11.
The bones of Ankara are rarely broken. (Please note that 'Ankara' is a modern city in Turkey, but If they are broken, the fracture is not there, but a comminution of their extremities: and they split along its length, and lean towards the interior; and it happens that pain occurs in the place where it breaks, and puncturing; and the leg that is broken becomes numb. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the context of a medical text.)
And indeed its restoration is such that you should stretch out your hand over it until you stand above the figure of the flicture as it is. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the context of a medical text.)
If the fracture is only such in its extremities, then make that fracture evenly, as you have prepared it from an equation, until it resembles its natural form. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the content of a medical text.)
But if the fracture is along its length, or already leans towards the interior; then make the patient lie on their belly and prepare for you the restoration of that fracture. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the content of a medical text.) Whenever you have made it even, place an ointment over it; then place over it a strap from wood or skin: and securely bind the straps so that you fear no change in the fracture nor removal of the strap. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the content of a medical text.)
And let it evenly cave in with that which fills it until the straps hold it according to equality; and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side. (Please note that 'Ankara' here refers to a person or figurative entity within the content of a medical text.)
If however a hot abscess occurs to him, then cease from extending it, and let the healing of itself occur, until the hot abscess rests; and place over it what was previously done, according to which there follows its healing: and tighten it as is necessary.
If indeed a fracture or break occurs outside the bone, apply external treatment.
§ Regarding the aid of healing fractures.
The aids are those that exist from the elbow to the head of the scapula.
If therefore it breaks, then its healing is according to one or two kinds of methods.
One of which is: that you receive a plank wood of medium thickness according to this shape, which follows.
And two cords are tied at the two ends.
Then it is hung from an elevated place; and the sick one sits on the bed. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood until it reaches near its elbow, with a sling attached in the middle of the wood.
Then hang something light from above him to stretch himself towards the lower part. Then the doctor equalizes the break with his hands at once until it is set right as needed.
And another way is that the sick one lies supine over his own neck: and hangs his hand from his neck with a cord. Then command two ministers to keep one of them that is above the break with their hands: and let another hold it below him, and stretch each of them towards his own part.
And if you want a stronger extension, then tighten under the break with a cord and above it with another cord: and let each of the two ministers stretch towards their own parts.
If therefore the break is near the end of the shoulder, then it is appropriate that one sling be placed under its elbow and another against the break towards the arm's bend.
And similarly, if there is a fracture near the elbow: then it must be arranged that a ligament is placed above that place, and over the arm itself.
Then an equal fracture with ease and without effort, until the faster is balanced as it should be, and a good treatment is applied: then bind it tightly, unless hot pus occurs.
But if indeed there occurs hot pebylic stricture until the seventh day. And place on the above a soaked woolen cloth imbibed in vinegar and rose oil, until when the pustule rests: then bind it: and the manner of binding is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place an unrolling from new cloth over the plaster. Then gather the arm over support itself and place his open hand over his upper arm.
And place the cloth and bind it over the arm support so that the arm stands in place of the stars: if nothing prevents you from it, nor does anything change for you above the broken bone.
But if it happens that something is changed over you from the broken bone, then use the stars: and this is to place on top of the same star that is wider and stronger than the rest of the stars. And place between every star the width of the finger: and be the length of the stars according to the broken bone with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then bind over the stars the tightening that I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is to be your binding on top of the place of the broken bone firmer. And as much more the broken bone stretches out, let there be a lighter binding.
But if indeed you see the position of the stars and the binding as we said, at the time when you immediately restore the limb, then do: and if hot pebylic stricture occurs, then release the binding and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligament for all three days so that itching does not occur at the place, or swelling, or food is prevented from reaching the limb due to the position of excessive tightening. Thus corrects everything as we have said.
If indeed you are reliable, so that nothing occurs from it: then do not loosen the ligament unless after three days or more.
And let the sick person sleep on their back, and their hand over their belly; and place a fully filled wool cushion under them evenly with help.
And consider at all hours of the night or day that the shape of the broken bone does not loosen and that the ligament is softened. Thus corrects everything with your strength.
And place food for the sick person according to the order we have mentioned so that it is subtle food first until their mouth tightens; then it must be that they eat thickened food.
For it is the custom of assistance and for the leg to be tightened for forty days: then indeed it must be loosened, given a bath, and treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture were dirty, cleanse it: then do not loosen the ligament and staples until fifty days and until two months.
¶ On healing a bone fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called ulna and radius.
One of which is longer: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is larger, and it is that which is placed under the little one from its lower part.
Therefore the larger bone breaks easily alone, or the smaller one: and perhaps they break at the same time.
Whenever therefore the upper part of a fracture is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower part of a fracture breaks, that fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse it is, when two bones break simultaneously.
But if the bone that is broken has little above it be easy, then it behoovangs physicians to attend its restoration, so as to place an extension easily until it heals.
But if indeed that which is broken is large and easy: then one ought to place a stronger binding very firmly.
And it behooves to place the hand's form in its restoration and the stretching of itself upon cushions. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all other fingers: and let the jointed be lower than all other fingers, or others: and the weak sitting squared over itself, and have cushions before it, or in line with its height, so that not a laborious infirmity may occur.
Then let the servant stretch the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another minister stretches similarly from above.
Then the physician straightens the bone until he restores it to as good a form as possible.
Which if in the bone's fracture there are splinters, then strive to reduce every fragment to its place with your own strength.
But if indeed a separate splinter appears and pricks the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration with you: then find above it, and remove it according to the method which we have mentioned before these prefaces.
But if indeed the fucture is with a wound, I have already made this separate chapter, therefore take the healing from there.
Which if in the beginning of your restoration a suppurate wound occurs, then line cloth with warm pitch made from rosary oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and fineness: and stretch the cloth over the delicate binding, until when the suppuration is set: then remove the wax, and place an ointment prepared from mill dust and egg whites. Then place stars and let the star placed over the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars for the arm is six when arranged in multiple positions: if it's a fracture in one bar or two bars at once.
Then place your splint over the stronger and more intense part of the fracture, and much closer to either the upper or lower part of the fracture: or place a somewhat softer splint than that, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let there be cloths covering the fracture, soft and moist: and they should not be hard or rough. And let the thread used for binding be made of linen itself, a medium between fine and coarse, as we have described.
And consider the limb and the tendon after days. That if something occurs which requires correction, such as itching that happens to the limb: then one must embrocate the limb with heated water until the itch subsides, and release the unbandaged limb, until it rests; then repeat the splinting.
That if the bandage is already softened, and the bone is already removed, and such like: then correct that whole thing with your strength, and examine it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, because of the excessive bandage: then you must soften it somewhat, and release it for a few days, until it reaches nourishment; then bind it again.
If however nothing of that kind occurs which we have mentioned to the weakened person: then it is not necessary for it to be dissolved, unless after nineteein days or so.
Then hang the sickly hand on his neck. And his neck shall be balanced, and he should guard himself against violent movements. Let him lie down on his back.
And know that this fracture will be restored in thirty days or perhaps in twenty-eight days. It is all according to the constitutions and temperaments.
¶ Regarding the restoration of hand fractures.
Know that rarely does a fracture occur in the hand's phalanges and knuckles. And it happens to him not except by frequent friction.
Whenever the sole of the foot is fancied or friction, then it must be that he lies supine with the affected area elevated evenly and in balance. Then lay his hand on an extended surface.
Next the attendant extends the broken bones and joins them with proper healing until they are adequately united.
Then it must be that a bandage and plaster should be placed unless hot swelling occurs. Then place the pillow above according to the size of the location, and now you have already enveloped it with linen cloth.
But if the fracture is around near the lower part of the foot, then make a similar sphere from cloth: and instruct the patient to place it with his broken sole: then it is fastened with long linen.
And the pillow shall be of leather where there is flexibility so that it can be applied to skin with the sole: and fasten it as required.
But if the fucture is on the outside, then it should be that you place a pillow above and another below at the footbed: and keep the hand open straight. Then place a binding as usual for turning hands: and extend between fingers with a bandage.
"If there is a fracture to any finger joints, then if it is the thumb, they should be set as necessary. "Then it is bound with a bandage; and if one wishes to immobilize it, place therein a straight stick or rod, so that the fcuature may be set, and not moved.
"If the fracture is in any other fingers, such as the middle, index, ring, or little finger, then it should be set and bound with a healthy adjacent finger that follows it; or they can all be tied together according to their sequence; this is better. "Or place upon it a thin rod as we mentioned for the thumb.
"And consider this in your treatment; and after the application of a warm poultice: then apply what is needed therewith when something arises from it, according to its course.
"§ On the healing of hip fractures.
"The pelvis often breaks and is characterized by this: because it turns to the inner and back parts.
"And its restoration is such that above the break it is tied with a ligament, and another ligament below the break. "And the weak one should be propped up on his own face.
"Then every attending ligament stretches to its side by equal measures; and this when there is a break in the middle of the bone.
"If however there is a break near the root of the pelvis, then one ligament to the side of the pubic bone so that extension falls upward: and another ligament below the break.
"And thus similarly if there is a break near the knee, then one ligament close to the knee so that extension falls downward.
"Then the physician sets both bones with his own hands until he restores it to its resemblance of its natural shape: and joins the bone together by a good union.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and a bandage, if no suppuration occurs in the limb. If an abscess occurs there: then release it for several days, until the suppuration becomes warm, then return to your treatment.
However, let that bandage be so. It is necessary to apply a linen strip over the hard-set fracture, that is, a bandage; and two of it twice or thrice: and let there be an excess remaining from it. Then apply the linen strip to the leg, until it reaches the heel near the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee to the lower side, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper parts of both limbs. Then roll it over the leg and the hip with the excess from the linen strip.
Then place on the hip at the site of its own stakes, and place one of them over the shin bone.
Then fill with dampness between the leg and the hip with soft cloths so that it equalizes with the bandage.
Then start by fixing the strong bandage from the middle over the site of the break with three rolls or four. And as much longer you extend with the cord from the place of the break, let your bandage be smaller and softer, and lighter.
Then approach to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and leg. Thus tie with both three stakes that are above them. (Note: The Latin text provided seems to be incorrect or incomplete, as "tres astellas" does not make sense in Then proceed with the two lower ends of the thread until you reach the heel of the foot. And also tighten both endings and again with the stakes on one side, so that the cord is not removed from its place.
Then release the bandage over that area while remaining, so that no ulceration occurs in the limb, nor an abscess, nor swelling, or similar things therein. In case something happens from it. Therefore, approach this with its solution and correct everything that happened thereafter as we have often said many times.
If indeed there is a piece of bone shattered from the bone that pierces: then it should be leveled by you if possible. And if not, find above it and remove that; and care for the person to whom it occurred until healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, apart from adding to it small pieces as we have said with an assistant and a strap.
However, during its restoration, such broken things do not cause lameness. And if it is restored alone, apart from applying to it a second leg, then it is necessary for him whose it is to always be lame.
And you know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or it adds little, or decreases little: all this depends on different temperaments and other dispositions.
¶ Regarding the restoration of a broken ankle.
Know that a fracture of the ankle's knee rarely happens but often by rubbing against it.
If indeed a fracture happens to it, then only a crack or hole within its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And it stands above that completely with sense.
And its restoration is as follows: it becomes equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers, until joined together, and united according to what is possible by proportion and ease, and construction.
Then place a plaster from the flour of Sisam (a type of millet), or mill, with egg white: and place over it a round strap if you find that one: and bind above that suitable strapping to this.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have described in previous fractures: such as a hot boil, and similar things: so that you oppose every accident with whatever is suitable for it until healed.
On restoring the broken leg.
Know that there are two bones of the leg, one is thick and named by its kind as the thigh (Crus), and the other is slender and called Shinbone (Femur).
And it happens to both kinds of fractures as with the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is made like that of the arm's equally, and the operation is one.
That if both bones are broken at once, the thigh (Crus) turns to all parts.
And if the slender bone is fractured, the thigh (Crus) converts to the front part.
And if the thick bacteria are broken, you find it below: and it is among those that do not hide from you.
Then apply extension, and adjustment, and the binding of wires similarly equal.
However, it is necessary if the leg's fracture has many dirty wounds (septic): so that there should be less extension and your relief milder.
And indeed the operation on the leg is somewhat above that of the arm: and it is as when you put equal wires in your work with sun shades, which are placed under boards: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose among them those who have small thickness, and are not too fine. And their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap over both skins with two folds according to their length. And place one part of the shank on one side from the upper knee to below the foot.
Then tie two bandages at three places, from both ends and the middle. For since constriction is forbidden, the shank slopes to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And indeed it would be provided with a cradle from wood according to the length of the shank, and placed in such a way that it preserves itself from movement.
And indeed it is very important to make this when the fracture is accompanied by its own wound.
Then consider the shank every day and study it carefully with regard to the end of swelling or inflammation, or any other things. If therefore something happens from those, then oppose to it with what is needed, until healed, if God wills so.
About the fracture of bones of the foot and fingers.
However, not a complete fracture of the heel has occurred.
However, a fracture of the foot bones occurs sometimes, and also a slight fracture of the fingers: and it does not occur to them except friction in several dispositions.
That if a fracture of the foot bones occurs and you see that those bones raise themselves above their own swelling to some extent, then the sick should place his foot over the prepared ground as walking.
Then stand still and place your foot over that which is elevated from those bones: afterwards press it, or strike it with the heel; and let it remain equal until it returns to its places.
Then place a paste, and a band above: and place under the foot a thin board with two flat heads.
Then tie it tightly with a suitable constriction after you have warmed it with bandages and other things it needs.
Therefore, when three or four days have passed by, then loosen the bandage. For if you find even bones, whether they are broken or displaculed. Therefore the operation is as follows, which you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them and straighten the same according to what you have described for restoring the fingers of the hand. Then place your own splint according to the length of the finger, and it should be a little wider; then place underfoot this table that you described, and tie it with an appropriate bandage.
But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then place over the entire finger a splint of its quantity in linen cloth; and tie the table at the bottom of the foot: and let it stand on one head of the table outside the lower part of the foot so that it may hold good retention.
And it is fitting for you not to forget that you should consider everything I have said to you regarding the remaining broken things from accidents which we have discussed: and apply each remedy with what is suitable.
§ On the fracture of the woman's vulva, and the bone of the pelvis, and the thighbone of a man.
When the woman's vulva is broken, then make it sit in a square position. Then lean her towards her own back somewhat, and she should be held behind.
Then the midwife shall fill its own womb with cotton until it is filled; and let it be made in the vulva as a sphere.
Then shake the woman, and support her back gradually. For indeed that cotton is expelled until it becomes before the vulva as a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a poultice on his back. Whenever he wishes to urinate, remove the catheter with ease, then let him urinate; and return it according to the method by which you first inserted it; then let him go back to his poultice.
Do this for seven days or so, because the mouth is restored in this manner.
And if you wish, take a sheath on the mouth and tie a cord over its hole with a reed tube, then insert the entire sheeht into his urethra. Then blow gently into the tube until it inflates inside the urethra, for this way a rupture is healed.
Then fill with cotton and let it stay for several days as we have said, until it is healed.
And when the pelvic bone of a man or woman is broken, then apply this remedy for its restoration, and also that proportion we have mentioned in the healing of a skull fracture.
And do not neglect the anus near these fractures that are somewhat close together, especially those having something to do with study or use.
And understand this book of mine much, for the fracture itself signifies to you many ways towards a straight path in its restoration and constriction: therefore understand it.
When the wing of a man is broken, take the neck of a goose; and insert the wing into it. Then place a swelling on top of it from cloth and let it be inflamed; then release it for about three days or so, and it will heal if God wishes.
Of the restoration of a bone fracture when there is also an ulcer.
It is suitable for him whose fracture has occurred with an ulcer, especially if it is large like the hip bone or its assistants, and similar to those, such as properies, and phlebotomists himself immediately: if the conditions of phlebotomy are shown to you, as we have mentioned before.
If a wound is flowing blood, then one should hasten to cut it off so that you rub powdered lime on top of it; if nothing else is present.
Then begin repairing the fracture on that same day: and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
However, if a hot abscess occurs, then postpone the repair until the ninth day so that the abscess may settle. And do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, for you will bring about unfortunate events to him.
But if the broken bone is protruding over the skin detected: then you should aim to reduce it, and make sure that your hands are able to do so with ease and slight pressure.
But if there is no extension of it, and adjusting it with your hands: then reduce the bone using this instrument. And an instrument that is made of iron, whose length corresponds to the size of seven or eight fingers: and its width according to the amount of the wound. And because of this it is necessary for the physician to receive from them three or four according to the amount he needs for that kind of treatment regarding any type of fracture.
And it should be round; and its thickness small so that it does not double upon itself when compressed over the wound during surgery: and it should have a border on its ends. And its upper part should be as thick as half of its total thickness down to the lower end.
And this is its form.
It should be placed during this operation that its sharp end is bent over the protruding bone edge: and push it in with one tool until when the bone returns and reaches an equal position.
So try to equalize the edges of the fracture accordingly.
If the ends of it are fractured in a subtle way and does not accept them by proper treatment, then you must cut into that bone until the tool has power over it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them as we have described at all, then incise it with the instrument that is suitable for him from those incisors we mentioned: or saw it with a single saw of whatever kind is possible to you.
Then scrape off that which remains on the bone due to roughness and small cortexes.
But when the bone is reduced and finds that it has a very severe pain after the reduction of its weakness, then you know that the bumps have not returned to their natural place.
Do that. For you are dealing with a large weakness in the patient when completing your restoration of the bone which you do.
Then immerse the bandage in astringent black wine. And properly if it is summer. (This seems to be an incomplete sentence or fragment from the original text.) And do not place a greasy dressing on the wound, nor anything that has oil in it: so that it does not happen to decay and rot.
Then administer astillas at your time of completion of the bone restoration. (Note: "astillas" is unclear in this context; it may refer to an ancient treatment using crushed substances, but without additional And dismiss the detected wound: so that you cut with forceps a hole according to the amount of the wound. (Note: The reference to "incidens" and "forceps" suggests an incision or excision procedure, but this is speculative without further medical context.)
And beware of every precaution, not to tighten the wound with a fracture. (This sentence advises against applying pressure or dressing that may exacerbate a fractured area For they have done this foolishly often: and made it happen to their own sick people either death or decay or pustules, that is, health. (Note: This translation appears nonsensical; the phrase "id est, saniem" does not translate directly to "health." It's possible there may be a misunderstanding in the term "zuchem," which is unclear and may require further clarification or context for an accurate translation.) And your ligature should be soft, gentle, a diverse rupture of other broken bones.
If the wound is bad or it is a large wander and you encounter some adverse events that we have mentioned, and you find pain in a hanging place: then it should not be placed with spikes over it. And do for them contractions from hard cloths at the place of spikes, and bind it tightly with them.
However, if it is after one day or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove above the cloth that was placed over it with wine. Then apply a liniment and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as the four-drug salve and similar things.
And it suits you to dissolve the bandage. And observe the wound at every morning and evening until it is healed and cured.
And it should be prepared so that the limb runs with pus to the lower parts easily.
If many wounds are passing and it is not healing, nor does the pcu separate from it: then you should know that there are slight bone fractures. Therefore, you must examine the wound with probing. However, how many of them are separated: remove those and extract it (the pus). And those of them that are not separated and puncture the limb and cause pain, try to make them fall out, and remove them in every possible way you can do it.
If it happens that the wound is swollen or aired (leaks), that is, it has an outpouching, or other types of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each of them with what suits him from treatment, according to which was explained in its own chapter.
And from this, to make my speech stay, and whom you should have in mind when a bone is broken, and protrudes over the limb, as with the pelvis of the hip, and helpers, and similarities from large limbs, it is so that you do not presume its attraction; for often enough many deaths occur from this, indeed let it go until putrefaction.
Perhaps after ninetee or thirty days, it may fall off by itself.
Then indeed care for the wound if you see it: but otherwise let it go.
§ For curing a nodule in the sign of bone fracture.
Often this Nodulation occurs in the sign of bone fracture healing. Especially, that which is near joints: and feeds from its shape on the body. And perhaps it hinders the limb from its natural action.
Consider then, if the Nodulation is recent: apply therein remedies that have astapecticity, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar substances from them.
So that you may receive from these certain ones or all of them: and make them with astringent wine, or with albuminous milk, or with vinegar: and place them over the Nodulation on cotton wool, and tie them tightly over the same bandage.
And loosen the bandage, do not remove it for many days. Then dissolve it and apply another one, until the Nodulation is removed.
Or tie over the same thin sheet of lead impartially. For Lead indeed has a property to remove all that is feared from limbs.
If however the Nodulation is already turned into stone and tightened, and urgently provokes necessity for removal of it: then cut over it from its upper part, and scrape off any excess that protrudes: or shave it with certain rasors until removed; care for it, until healed.
"Concerning healing when it is restored, and a member remains delicate, not according to its own nature.
"When a bone is restored and the member remains delicate afterward, then it does not happen for no reason but due to many causes. "One of the reasons is an excessive flow from ligament dissolution and its improper binding, which prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to an overabundance of embrocation applied at inappropriate times; or because of a scarcity of blood within the sickly body, leading to weakness.
"And therefore, healing it involves nourishing the sick body and making its form tender until blood increases therein. "And apply a bath. "And instill joy and gladness upon him.
"Then place pitch on the limb, so that it will draw in a great deal of nourishment. "And apply embrocation to its wound with warm water continually, until the nourishment flows and it returns to its natural form.
"Regarding healing bone fractures when they are restored twisted.
"When after the healing of a limb that has been restored and then shows twisting or prominence at the fractured bone or nodding, yet it is disfigured in form; however, the member does not prevent itself from its natural action: therefore, you should not accept the speech asserting that it will cause the body part to break again.
"And there have been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this here on our land.
"And indeed, this operation is highly blameworthy and leads to death or great fear that it is mortal.
"However, if the limping and nodding are recent: then you should embrocate with warm water in which soaked herbs that soften have been cooked, such as leaves of yarrow, its root, and mallows, among others. And let an ointment be made with a soothing plaster, as done with diachylon properly.
Or be rubbed the mucilage of the root of althea and mixed with hen's fat or sesame oil; and it should be plastered with that.
Or take rubefacient figs and mix them with white clay from doves, and such things called medicines that reduce hardness.
And at times the knot is loosanno with constant, old-fashioned and gentle friction, which is done with moist hands. And it should be administered movement to all parts of the limb at every hour.
But if the twist has already progressed, and it is strong and turned into stone, and there is a need for treatment with iron: then one should cut above that, and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and cut off what protrudes from the knot or bone with delicate incisors: and administer ease in that with carefulness and diligence.
Of speech in dislocations.
A dislocation is the outcome of certain joints being out of their place. Why it prevents movement and spoils the figure of the limb. And causes severe pain to occur in the weakened body, and acute injuries.
When therefore a dislocation occurs, then one must hasten to its restoration: do not delay it at all.
For if delayed, the place is inflamed and perhaps with it again bringing back of the dislocated bone.
Therefore for this reason one should not move it, nor lengthen it at the hour of its inflammation. For often it causes convulsions to occur, and injurious pains.
But when this happens, then one should hasten towards bleeding the sick person. Then it is dismissed until the abscess rests.
Then the limb is bathed with warm water and oil. Then it is reduced with ease.
And heal the entire limb as if nothing had happened.
Indeed, I have already set out chapters on dislocations, even as they occurred according to their position from the upper part of the body downwards.
§ On treating lower mandible dislocation.
The two jaws are seldom displaced little. (The original Latin text is not clear, a better translation may be needed based on the context or with access to
And the displacement of the joints occurs in one of two modes. Or indeed they return to their places by slight dislocation and are softened only slightly. (This phrase is still not clear due to possible errors in the original Latin text; it might require access to the full context or corrections of any potential transcription mistakes for an accurate translation Or they are displaced by a complete dislocation, remain so until softened to the chest part, when the sick person cannot hold it and cannot close their mouth, and their tongue is protruded with speech. (This translation assumes some corrections in the Latin text for accuracy)
When however the displacement of it is slight, then it returns to several positions by itself with little effort. (Again assuming corrections are needed for accurate translation)
If however it is a complete and integral displacement: then one must immediately administer reduction, and not delay completely; and it should be as the minister holds the head of the sick person: and the doctor inserts his single finger into the root of the mandible dislocation between the bones if the dislocation is from one side. (This assumes corrections in Latin text for accuracy) Or he inserts his two fingers at once if the displacement is from both sides. (Again assuming potential errors need to be corrected for accurate translation.) And all other fingers of his hand should lie outside those which make it even. (This assumes corrections in Latin text may be needed)
And instruct the sick person to cleanse their jawbones and make them ready for chewing on all sides. And the doctor straightens the jawbone and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce that one: especially if both jawbones are involved at the same time; then administer a poultice with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of the jaws becomes easy: do not delay the reduction of the jaws in any way, as we have mentioned.
As they are returned and straightened, and the wound is closed but not soothed: then place poultices made of cloth on them, with a plaster that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it should be bound gently with soft bandages.
Then the sick person should have sleep on their back: and their head be kept between two poultices so that it does not move to the right or left: nor shall they be forced or urged to chew something: indeed let them eat a gentle food, until when pains subside and jaw heals: then may they eat what they desire, and administer this easily.
They should not work during eating and drinking, and resting until the jaw sets rightly and heals.
If the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they dislocate at some time and do not return to their places: then many times fevers occur from it, and frequent perspiration: and sometimes the sick person's throat clears up, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
As you see this: then know that it is a loss, and often the person who experiences this dies within ten days.
On reducing a fracture of the forearm, and the end of the shoulder. (Note: The text appears to start discussing another topic not directly related to jawbones or mandibles
Chapter 67. The clavicle is indeed not dislocated from the inner side because of its continuous connection with the chest. And it can sometimes be dislocated outwardly; and that fact is explained as follows.
And its restoration involves lying down on one's back weakly while extending the arms. Then compress it with your hand firmly because that will cause it to return.
Next, place over the wound plaster, and bandages, and bind them tightly.
However, his extremities that follow the elbow continue with it, are not usually dislocated unless rarely. Which if dislocated on some day: then it should be reduced and made even as we mentioned, and what you have prepared for yourself.
Then place over the wound plaster, bandages, and compresses. And instruct the patient to maintain calmness and rest until healed.
And with this same treatment the upper arm is reduced when separated from its place as well.
§ Regarding the reduction of humerus dislocation.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated except in three ways.
The first of which is when it dislocates toward the lower side. The second is when it dislocates towards the chest. And sometimes it can dislocate to the upper part of the humerus: and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate towards the back because of the scapula. And it does not dislocate to the front because of nerves.
Indeed, most commonly dislocated and comes out towards the lower side against the scapula: especially in those whose muscles are few. For it emerges quickly from them and enters just as swiftly.
However, in those whose wounds contain many pieces of flesh, the opposite is true, that is to say, it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps this has happened to certain people due to a blow or accident, and the humerus is affected by heat swelling, and it is thought because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must try to verify this until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is turned from lower to upper; and you distinguish between a dislocated humerprise and a healthy humeroprise. For you have found great differences among them, and you find concavity in the head of the humeroprise, and under the upper part upon touching, the head of the humeroperceives almost as if it were an eye: and he cannot move his hand to his ear with a weak force, nor by any motion.
And similarly, if it is displaced toward the chest or upward: then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this very dislocation can be easily reduced when it is recent, or the child is weak.
And its reduction is as if to guide his hand upward. Then put your thumbs under the upper part of it, and guide the connection with strength upward to its place: and let him guide his hand, and stretch it upward. And then he puts it lower, for indeed it returns quickly.
But if it does not return by the method we have said, and there are many days since its occurrence: then he must bathe weakly in warm water, and apply an embrocation that softens and soothes, as if decoctions of high roots, fenugreek, and mellilotus were put into water, and applied.
Then the sick person is laid down on their back: and it is placed under a ball of tickling with wool that has equal qualities of gentlenamo and tightness.
Then the doctor places his heel on top of the ball, and lifts the head of the forearm with strength, and pulls the hand of the sick person towards the lower part.
And if you are able, guide him back according to this method: and it is as though he makes himself present among men who are taller than the sick person, stands on his side, and inserts his arm underne. The doctor then lifts the tickling of the sick man upwards until the sick man is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the hand of the sick person towards the lower part of his sides. But if the sick person is light: then it must be so that he hangs with something else attached to him, causing slight pain: for there will be an immediate dislocation.
And he is also guided according to another method: and it is as though a long piece of wood, whose top is round like the neck of an amphora, is made; so that it is neither too thick nor too thin. Then it is placed under the sick person after being placed over the top of the wood with light cloths: and the sick person stands according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended towards the lower part from one side, and his body extends with strength on the other side: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce him by all the things we mentioned, then use this care: and it is as though you take a piece of wood whose length equals the quantity of two arms, its width equals the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness equals the quantity of two fingers; with a round top that will ease his entry into depths of tickling according to this shape.
Then loose bands are tied above the round head with soft cloths so as not to harm the weak wood.
Then a splint is placed under the weakened joint so that the hand or arm can be extended to touch the wood downwards; and the wood is fastened over the support and the arm, as well as the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed over the width of the ladder step and extended downwards with the hand; the remaining hanging body is let go from one side. The joints, however, are immediately united.
Whenever the entrance is thus completed by any means possible: then it must be that you place under a similarly sized sponge made of wool. Then place an applied plaster prepared from ground mill powder mixed with frankincense, and whole almond milk over the entire upper arm, as it reappears from above.
Then tighten a suitable bandage under the splint: and untie the band over the plaster from above; then attach that hand to its neck, and let it hang without moving for seven days.
And you must place food under the weakened limb until strength is restored to the body; for it speeds up its healing.
Then place a larger splint after seven or five days, and begin with movement exercises. If it therefore firms up and does not soften, then it is already healed.
If however the joint dislocates many times, due to moisture occurring on it or due to another cause: then you must administer therein a caustic with three holes, as was previously explained in the chapter about caustics.
If all this is done and the ligament dissolves after seven days, and the joint does not solidify again, and the plaster and bandage are repeatedly removed from it, and do not firm up again, and it falls off without being able to heal at all: then know that the nerves of its head-shoulder which have been cut or stretched out or softened. And know that the joint will never fit in its original place.
Concerning dislocation that occurs towards the chest and nipple, or to posterior reduction, it is made with a push and extension using hands: until it returns, and the remaining strapping and treatment is applied, until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and a delay in its movement, then use weakened baths many times, until that heaviness subsides, and it returns to its original state.
On curing of elbow disloc cuffs.
Know that a joint elbow dislocation occurs with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty as well: and the dislocation itself happens towards all sides, especially towards the front or back.
And that dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight, and touch, according to whatever shape it becomes dislocated. And when a joint elbow with a dislocation occurs alongside healthy, it is declared clearly to you. The joint indeed hinders, and the arm cannot double, nor can touch its own shoulder.
And it is necessary that you act quickly, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot suppuration occurs to him.
For if it happens that he has a hot suppuration, his reduction is difficult: and perhaps does not heal at all, especially when towards the back. For it is worse in all types of dislocations, and stronger pain for them: and often decreases with that death.
And the restoration of that when it is as much possible to reduce from them, is: as to extend their hand with two hands: and for their arm to be expanded, and doctors' hands above the elbow and below it, and he himself pushes the joint with his thumbs simultaneously or with the root of his palm, until returning to its place.
On the other hand, a dislocation is in front of [something]: then it returns so that it doubles its hand with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of its palm hand the elbow that is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not comply with reduction, then administers a strong and intense extension: and it is as if two assistants extend the arm, and they hold it also with two assistancii so that it may not slip during extension.
Then the arm is revolved to its whole side after being wrapped with a double-layered long cloth or a wide bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he anoints it with oil; so that there be something from them which aids in the lubrication of the joint and its ease. Then he drives the joint with a strong push until it returns.
And after its reduction, it ought to be placed over the same poultice, where there is styptic and coagulation with milky-white substance; and it is tightly bound according to decorum. And let the arm be hung from the neck of the patient: and released after several days.
Then it is dissolved. If therefore the joint remains strong at its place, then loosen the bandage from there and release it.
And if you see that the joint is not well bound, then repeat the poultice and bandage, and release it for several days until it becomes tightly bound. Then dissolve it.
If however there is heaviness after the reduction of the joint and it is in motion: then administers moistening in bathing, gentle friction, and compression until smoothness occurs, or place over the joint bandage, that is, sheep's milk ice cream. Then bind it up, and release it for one day and night. Then remove it and insert it into a bath. Once it has sweat, then apply the dry bandage moistened with ointment. Then repeat over her wound with a single oil, and again, and the third time after bathing, until soothing occurs.
And if there is an ulcer, place over her wound a moistened gauze with melted butter, and tightly cover it.
Do that several times. For this reason she is soothed, and returns to her normal state.
§ On the treatment of Almahassem's displacement.
Amebiasis occurs in the hand multiple times, that is, the joint between the arm and hand.
And its reduction is easy. On the other hand, remaining joints. However, it is important that the speed of its reduction be timely at the hour when the displacement occurs, before an inflammamen develops: or if a hot swelling occurs.
And the reduction of displacement is such that you place Mahassem's affected hand on a board, and extend it with your own hand: and the doctor places his palm over the protrusion of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it must be considered if the palm has already withdrawed to the forearm: then place the back of his hand on a board at extension and reduction: and if the displacement is progressing towards the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be internally over the board, that is, the interior part of his hand placed on top of the board so that the doctor's hand falls upon its protrusion joint.
If therefore it returns immediately, good: and if not, then tightly bind it with a soothing plaster for the swelling: and let it be released, neither repeat that.
Indeed, if it cannot be tolerated and you are unable to perform the reduction after a certain period has passed, the joint remains according to its own curvature; and nothing harms the patient except that it softens the hand, and is unable to grasp anything: then you know that the nerves have been cut or worn away.
Therefore, there is no skill in this unless it can be tightened with a caustic near the site. And perhaps it does not provide any benefit at all.
And so when Almuhasib is not returned, then place the ointment over that plaster as we mentioned. Then it is tightened and removed after five days: afterwards released and moved, and the hand exercises.
But if the movement is reduced and something serious happens therein: then gently treat it with warm water and friction several times until it softens.
Regarding the treatment of finger dislocangs.
When a finger is dislocated to any of its parts, or from the back of its palm, or its ventral side: then extend that finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the digit, suspend that finger towards the side to which it has been dislocated, and let it go for two days.
Then hang that digit and extend it until it is straight on its own day.
And when night falls, bind that digit according to the same instructions; and do not cease to release it during the day: exercise it with movement; and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it tightens up.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated to the ventral side of the hand: and bind that digit to its own part, and perform on it your first operation until it heals.
And similarly, when it is dislocated to the remaining parts.
§ On the treatment of spinal disc displacement (Spondylolisthesis).
When one experiences spinal disc displacement or complete neck dislocation and many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no treatment for it, as death approaches the sick person.
And a sign of this is that the sick person leaves defecation without will and cannot hold it; and often they are softened by some of his limbs, or both shanks, or two arms of himself, or one of them: or a vertebra is displaced from its place.
Often it is displaculed because often there is dislocation to the four parts.
Therefore, that which is displaced toward the back is called kyphosis (humpback).
However, the treatment for it is that you consider at that time if kyphosis occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment for it and not even any cure at all.
However, in that which occurs from accident or by striking, the ancients have already described various treatment methods in lengthy speech. The majority of whom do not return with a good outcome.
However, I have already made a brief version of it, which is far from the one very close to me in intention: and because of my explanation about this, and forming the instrument of it differently than what they showed it, and how they explained it.
Therefore, I say that in kyphosis which occurs from the front part, there is no intelligence and not even any cure at all.
And similarly also in those which occur to both sides as well.
And it is not treated from them unless those which occur in the back properly, as I narrate: and it is that he should be extended over his face on a flat base near to a wall: and an underclothes made of moist fabric should be stretched out so that his chest would not be hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood should be fixed in the furrow in the ground, at the head of one foot [of the patient], and another piece of wood about as long as that first, at the other end of the patient's foot: and let an assistant hold the wood, so that it is not firmly fixed in the furrow. And let a second assistant hold the other [piece].
Then make a tourniquet around the patient's head, and under the soft tissue of his temple bone, tightly; and extend the end of the ligament to the wood that is at the head: and tie it there.
Then make another tourniquet over his arches, and above his knees, and near his heels. Then gather all the ligaments, and tie them onto the other wood that is at his feet.
Then all assistants should stretch towards the wood the entire ligament; however, do not remove the two pieces of wood from their places where they are fixed: but ensure that they are not too tightly set, as we have said before.
And the doctor should place his hands over the spinous process with strength, until it returns; or place them on a table. Then he should attach his feet to the table, until they return.
But if it does not return by this treatment, then take a table whose length is about three arms long. And cut into the wall that we mentioned which is near the patient, a place where the end of the table can be inserted. Then put the middle part of the table over the spinous process. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And tie it tightly, until the spinous process is bent, and returns to its place.
Then if you can, operate with the tourniquet that has been wound with your hand; and it is as follows, make two pieces of wood in the ground near the head of the patient whose length is equal to one arm: and at his head, another two pieces ofwoo.d
And let the length between every piece of wood be one handbreadth; and now a hole has been made everywhere where the tube runs through it: and firmly secure all the wood on the ground so that it may not move at all.
And a round piece of wood is inserted; and there is a tube in which the tendon can run through two holes of the two pieces ofwood.
And at the end of it there is a hole wherein the wood is fastened, whose length is one handbreadth as it bends; and similarly with two other pieces of wood.
Then, secure the tendons that you have tied on the sick man's chest at the head part of the tube; and also secure the tendons that you have tied on his shanks at the foot part of the tube.
Then stand at every tube joint with the helper who turns his hand using the lever as it bends through the tube; and the physician adjusts the spine as we have said.
This is the form of the tube that follows.
After the physician returns and adjusts the position, then you must place an ointment of clarified butter with albumen on it. Then use wool. Afterward, place above the ointnent an astrolabe from a tablet whose width be of three fingers or approximately so. And the length and quantity that it occupies at the place of humpiness, and above the healthy part of the spine.
Then secure with a tendon as we have said. And let the sick one be fed on subtle nourishment until he is cured.
And if there remains something of prominence at the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that they administer medicines that soften and soothe with the application of a tablet as I have mentioned over a long period of time. And now it is administered with a thin sheet of lead.
And sometimes an elevation occurs at the end of the dorsal spine; and it is thought to be a dislocation through it, and that bone protrudes. Why should not this assumption be made about him with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death.
¶ Concerning the treatment of a displaced anchovy bone. (Note that 'anchae' seems to be a misinter
Know that the joints of an anchovy and the shoulder joint do not occur except as a mere dislocation: nor is it like other remote joints displaced by slight compression and hollowing out. (The term 'anchae' here is also likely a misinterpretation, but the Latin text speaks about "iuncturae," which can refer to anatomical joints.)
And indeed the anchovy's joint is dislocated in four parts. (Again, 'anchae' seems out of context here; if referring to a body part, it might be an error as Latin typically uses This is because it is dislodged towards the front and back. (This sentence may not make sense with 'anchae,' suggesting that there could be a misinterpretation of
And it is mainly displaced inwardly: and only slightly towards the front and back. (The term 'anchae' seems to be a misinterpretation or mistranslation of some body part.)
And the treatment of its inward dislocation is as follows: because when you join the sound leg with the infirm one, it becomes longer; and its knee is more prominent than that of a healthy person, and the infirm cannot double his foot beside the groin; there is also a place following the inguinal hollowing which has been affected by warmth, because already this condition has arrived here. (Again, 'anchae' likely does not fit; it may need context from adjacent sentences to understand what body part is being discussed.)
And the indication of its external displacement consists in opposite circumstances to these conditions. (The term 'anchae' seems incorrect and may need context or correction.)
And the indication of its displacement towards the front is that it expands the sound leg according to its complement; however, it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if it attempts to walk, it cannot go beyond this dislocation towards the front: it retains urine, and there is hollowing around its groin, and walking causes pressure on its heel. (The term 'anchae' remains problematic and may need context or correction.)
And the sign of his dislocation towards the back is such that he cannot extend his knee or double it until after his groin has been folded; and his leg is also shorter on one side; and his groin is softened, and his hip is located at that place.
However, the reduction of these types of dislocangs is to consider that if it is an old dislocation, which has become chronic while endured by him. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore, it should not be presumed completely against him.
In that case of his dislocation which is recent, and belongs to one of the four species of dislocations: then quickly attend to this, in order to warm up the joints, and extend it inside and outside, and move it right and left; for perhaps it returns, and does not require any other treatment.
If however it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong remedy, and extend his leg from the lower part: or with its own hands, or with a band that is tied over his thigh above the knee: and another minister extends his hand upwards so as to insert his fingers under his ticklish parts. Then bind with a soft band over the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And his extension should be either from the front part of the groin to the forequarter or from the back towards the back.
And all these extensions should be simultaneous until the sick person is lifted with his body off the ground and hangs suspended.
For this kind of extension indeed belongs to the common type among the four species.
If therefore his dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for each of those four kinds to be treated as I will say about their proper healing.
Indeed, in reducing it itself when there is a dislocation towards the inside, it must be that the sick person lies on their healthy side. Then place a ligament over the root of the hip bone, between the head of the hip and beneath the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin to the upper part of the body, towards the shoulder blade.
Then receive another strong assistant his arms and reduce the large area of the sick hip, extending it vigorcuously outwards. Now then, he returns to his place.
And this is a simpler of the remaining treatment methods by which this limb is reduced.
If however it is forbidden upon you, and does not obey you at all with this type of treatment: then one must bind two feet of the sick person together simultaneously with a strong ligament, gently, over both heels, and over both knees; and let the length be equal to that of four fingers from their companion. And let the sick leg be extended more than twice as much as the amount of two fingers.
Then suspend the sick person over the head of a beam, which is inside the house; and let its length be equal to twice as much as two arms from the ground.
Then instruct a strong youth to guard the head of the hip; and be found with another person while suspended: and let one young man push the other, guarding the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
However, when reducing it itself for a dislocation towards the outside, one must let the sick person lie on a platform as we have mentioned with someone having a humpback. And the ligament is tied over his leg and to himself, and over his chest.
Then place two beams, one at their feet and another at the head of themselves. Then a wooden plank should be placed added to the middle of the foot, securely fastened; over which wet cloths should be wrapped so as not to harm the patient: and the wood should be between his thighs, so that it is not pulled towards the lower part during extension.
Then each attendant should stretch out to their respective side, and the physician adjusts the alignment with his hand.
If it therefore returns, that would be good.
And if not, place over the same table and press on it as we discussed with lordotic posture evenly. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it must be extended by the patient's leg quickly: and according to this same description over the footstool: and let the physe place his right hand palm over the groin of the patient. Then he shall fasten him with the other hand and with that same restraints place it extended towards the lower part of the knee joint.
And if the discuplation is towards the back, then it does not need to be extended downwards, and should lie on the ground loosely: in fact, it needs to be placed over a hard surface, as we also said when it was dislocated outside of its ankles for its lying posture on two ankles: and is above his face, and with stretched ligaments: according to what we mentioned earlier.
And it is necessary that compression with the table also be administered over the place where the joint dislocates, when completing the reduction as required.
And do not hide the sign of its return from you: and it is as if to extend both legs of the patient: and when you see that they are equal, and the patient grips his leg and spreads himself without hesitation: then know that now the limb has returned as required: then join the two thigh cufflinks and place a bandage, and bind it tightly with an emmew (a kind of ointment), i.e., make sure it does not move in any part: and let the patient adhere to rest for three or four days.
Then dissolve the ligament and apply the ointment, and compare the leg with the other; then if you see that they are equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation has been set right; therefore allow the patient to walk again.
And if you see some softening: then rinse it off and apply that ointpithe same as before; let go also for three days more.
Then dissolve this and make the patient delay walking on each leg for two or three days until it is well-recovered.
§ On Knee Dislocangs.
The Knee is displaced in three ways. It is displacuated towards the outside (laterally), to the inside (medially) and to the bottom (posteriorly).
And it is not displaced toward the front (anteriorly).
And a sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply their leg to their hip. But if it does not stick with the hip; then you will know that the Knee is displaced.
And the restoration of all forms of its dislocation is to make the patient sit upright so that already stretch out their leg if they can above it, and stick your back to their face; and place their foot between your feet.
Then make the Knee of his stick with your hands, and straighten those fingers of yours over the Knee. Then apply with your palm on both sides of the Knee with strength. And another helper extends their foot until the Knee returns to its place.
And a sign of its return is that the leg sticks with the hip gently and not with effort.
Then apply an ointment to it, and make the leg stick with the hip. And then bind that simultaneously for three or four days. Then dissolve it.
And let the sick person not walk for several days until healed.
However, if the reduction is refused by him, then you shall give a strong extension with ligatures, as described earlier in the treatment of ankles, until it returns.
§ On treating the displacement of the heel bone.
The heel is sometimes knocked out by a small displacement, and at other times it is dislocated according to the prescribed regimen. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inner parts or towards the outer parts.
And a sign of this dislocation is that you see the heel being swollen and tending towards the side to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment of this displacement is an easy reduction: and it is to be extended with ease by hand, and straightened until it returns.
However, in its treatment when it is dislocated according to the regimen, you must make the sick person sit up straight: and let a strong assistant hold firmly from behind his back part, at the middle of that thing.
Then hold with your right hand the foot of his from its upper part and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot at the place of the calf.
Then pull the foot towards you by your right hand. Then with two ligatures on the left side.
Then extend it further with your left hand and push the chest of the foot with your right hand towards the thigh without difficulty.
Do this twice, as we have narrated.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the thigh on the third vein, and you pull the calf.
If therefore it returns on the first or second vein according to this manner, and you see the foot being straightened, then that is good: but if not, then repeat the operation upon that thing: for it itself returns.
However, if you are prevented from doing the reduction as we have described: then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly prop a post in the ground, so that he may fall between his thighs; and now wrap yourself around it with your cloak, so that no harm comes to the patient.
Then let the attendant take hold of his thigh: afterwards stretch out the other leg by hand or with a band that is tied over its shinbone. Then let the whole attendant be extended against its opposite side: and the post stand between both thighangs of the patient, retaining him so that his body is not pulled towards the lower part at the point of extension.
Then the physician straightens the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant holds the healthy leg from below. For a dislocation recovers quickly.
When the dislocation returns and health is declared to you again: then place a plaster and bandage on it, and tie it securely with strong bands, and bind the leg with a band to the thigh.
And it is necessary that you cut or tie off the nerves above the heel posteriorly, so that there be no band on them.
Then let him lie down for two days or three. But if the ligament is softened, tie him up again; then loosen him on the third or fourth day: and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. If he yet tries to walk before that period, no safety will come from it, for the dislocation is again loosened and corrupted, and does not recover after that treatment.
But if a hot boil happens to him: then you must administer to his rest as it is described in another place of our treatment and rubbing, until it disappears.
§ On the displacement of toes of the foot and treatment.
It is necessary that it be made to fit with little stretching and without difficulty: indeed this [process] is not difficult, but rather easy.
If however the dislocation is in some knots of the dorsal surface of the foot: then it must be made such that he makes his own injured foot sit on an equal place on the ground or a board; and [it] stands as if walking.
Then stand up, and place your foot over that which is prominent among those joints. Then press down the heel with your foot, using strength, until it returns, and observe that it is already even, and not prominent in its place.
Then put a board under the injured foot which can support the entirety of the foot, having two heads. Then bind this bandage firmly for three days well-appointed. Then loosen it and let him rest from walking for many days until it is firmly secured in place after the reduction.
§ On types of dislocations with ulcers or fractures.
When such a thing happens to it and one approaches its treatment, and the restoration of itself, very often death ensues: and for this reason it is not proper that one should presume over the treatment of this kind, unless he be prudent in long use of art, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor arrogant; and to apply hot medicines that soothe wounds only a little. Unless you see or hope for health from near destruction with ease of illness, and where there appears some sign of hope. Therefore attempt then the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot wound occurs.
If the member returns as we wish, then apply a treatment that soothes inflammamation, and care for the wound with those dried ointments that are suitable for it.
If the dislocation is with a fracture and separated bone fragments occur, then attempt to remove them, and do as we have said in simple illnesses from what preceded in those places.
And be cautious according to your strength, and guard yourself from the path of fear: according to what has followed my prediction for you.
For that is better with your Maker, and more enduring to glory for you, and more healthy for your body among them at your time.
