After I have completed this for you, my son, this book, which is the final in the science of medicine with its supplement, and having reached the end thereof by its explanations and statements, it seemed good to me to complete it for you as well with this Treatise, that is, on surgery with hands-on practice.
Since hand surgery is absent in our region and entirely from our time: until perhaps the science of it may have perished, its trace being severed: nothing remains of it but small descriptions in ancient books, which were carried out by hands: error and hesitation befell them until their intentions were closed off and their power was extended. It seemed good to me to vivify it with the organization of this Treatise in that manner according to its positions, statements, and abbreviations; and to come along with forms of tools for Cautery and other surgical instruments: made by additions from its declarations and necessary adjustments.
The reason why no skilled artisan of it with his hands is found in this our time lies in the fact that the art of medicine is long-standing and its author must be versed beforehand in the science of anatomy narrated by Galen, until he knows the members' joints and their forms, and their connection and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their exiting and coming to rest, and pulsating movements and quietness, and places of egress.
And for this reason Hippocrune said that the name with a name is much, and little with the work, especially in hand art.
However, we have already mentioned it at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowing what we have mentioned about anatomy cannot be emptied out but falls into error where people are destroyed: as I have seen many of them formed from this science and boasting themselves without knowledge or experience.
What I have seen is that a foolish doctor treated an abscess of the groin in a woman and accidentally punctured some artercuoses; therefore, the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I have seen another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from the bladder of an elderly man, and the stone was large. Therefore, he approached him and removed him with a broken urinary bladder. Why the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been summoned to remove him: and I saw from the great size of the stone and the patient's condition that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who was receiving payment at the home of a certain Duke because of his skill in medicine: and it happened to an eunuch of black complexion who was with him, that he broke his shin near the heel; and the doctor, out of ignorance, pulled on the fracture over the wound covered with dust, and applied strong straps without releasing the expiration from the wound.
Then he released him according to his own desire. Then he sent him away for several days and instructed him not to dissolve the bandage; and it stayed so until an abscess formed in his leg, and his foot, and it came to ruin.
I was called then to him: and approached to dissolve the bandage; and calmness prevailed, and he was delivered from his pains.
But already the decay had been confirmed in that limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore the spreading of the decay stopped walking around the limb until he died.
And I have seen another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess: and it was ulcerated after days, until his wickedness with the master of himself had been magnified.
That is because when the cancer is pure from black bile humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is on a part that can bear to have it completely removed.
And for this reason my son, it is necessary that you know that the surgery is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation associated with healing, and the operation where there are dangers in many dispositions.
And I have already aroused at all points of this book, where the surgery comes with fear and trembling.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of that, and diminish it: so the foolish may not find a way to speak about it, and dishonor it.
Therefore, receive the measure with care and protection, and treat the weak among you with ease and firmness, and make use of a better way by the grace of God leading to health and praisewem: and dismiss grievous diseases difficult to heal: and lift up your spirits from that which makes you tremble, so there may be hesitation over you in your faith and comfort.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to the extent of yours.
For indeed Galen has said in some of his exhortations. You do not heal the bad illness: do not call me physician of evil.
Now however this Treatise is divided into three Chapters.
Chapter one.
The chapter of the Burning with Fire and the Burning with Acute Medicine, arranged from head to feet, and forms of instruments, and tools for Cutting: and all that is necessary for surgery.
Chapter two.
The chapter of Amputation and Perforation, Phlebotomy and Pneumatism, Wounds: and Extraction of Arrows, and similar things: and the whole chapter, arranged according to forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
Of restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of torticollis, and suchlike: the chapter is ordered from head to feet, and forms of instruments.
But before recalling the procedure with that, it must be stated what are the quality of its Wounds and Hurtfulness: and how it is to be presented.
Therefore I say that the speech on the quality of Wounding and Hurtfulnness of Cautery is a long, subtle discourse, a scientific knowledge, and an obscured mystery.
Also many wise men have spoken on that matter and they disagreed among themselves: but for me it is enough with their speeches, fearing prolixity.
Therefore I say that Cautery provides universally to all conditions which are with matter, and without matter: except for two conditions which are the hot condition without matter, and the dry one without matter.
For the condition of being warm and dry with matter they disagreed. Some have said that Cautery is beneficial for that. And others said the opposite of that, namely that Cautery is not suitable for an ailment which is from warmth and dryness; because nature of fire is warmth: and it does not suit to cure something with warmth and dryness if it comes from warmth and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of that said: that there is wounding by Cautery on any warmth and dry ailment which occurs in human bodies; because when you compare the body of man with his humidities to the nature of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And indeed I say through him: because from experience he has already shown me that several times.
However, it is not necessary for him to come upon this unless he has already been tested and trained in the last exercise of Chapter Cautery, and has known the variety of human constitutions, and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and incidents of those, and the duration of time.
However, regarding the other constitutions there is no fear for you: especially in cold and moist diseases. For now all physicians have agreed on these, and they did not disagree with the healing by cautery for them.
And know you children that from the secret treatment by Cautery with fire is superior to Cautery with burning medicine, for fire is simple and its action does not reach except to the part that is cauterized: and it does not harm another connected limb with that one, unless a slight injury.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is extended from limbs: and perhaps it causes a difficult-to-heal disease on the part itself, and perhaps kills it.
The fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless excessively.
However, we have noticed that through experience and studying with art and standing in the truth of things: and because of this I excuse from the length of speech.
And if it were not, because this book of mine does not allow it: I would communicate to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies of expulsion of diseases by means of philosophical demonstration which has come to mind from your minds.
And know you children that they themselves disagree on the time when to make a cautery and suggest better time of day.
And I say that caustic applies at all times; because harm caused by accident due to time is overcome by resting, which is drawn with a caustic. And especially if caustic is for pains from necessary, strong, sudden pain that does not tolerate delay: because fear arises from them, which is greater than the minor harm that passes by time.
And do not let that notion enter your minds, my son, which is not held by the wise and learned physicians, namely that illnesses which heal through caustics always return: they assert consequently, but things are not as they think: because caustic is only in medicine's place, which changes complexion, and drives out humidities that are causes, so pains occur.
However, caustic is suitable for the swiftness of health and its strength, and its dominion: and it may be possible that the illness returns after some time according to the complexion of the sick person, and location of their illness, and their power; and what is prepared in their body from aggregation of superfluities therein: and what arrives to them through acquisition by foods, and such causes, unless it becomes an illness for which caustic is administered.
A subtle sickness in a limb with few superfluities and humors, like caustic for the toothache, since it is possible that such pain does not return therein. But that happens rarely.
But the speech of the crowd is right again, that caustic is medicine's last resort; it is not what they intend in this: for they believe, that there is no healing with medicine or other after dusk with caustics.
But on the contrary, that is intentional, as caustic is the last of medicine, it is not merely because when we administer methods of healing for a particular illness, these medicines do not suffice; then afterward we apply caustics at the end of the treatment and they are effective. Thus, it falls that caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the intention as the common people and many-scholar physicians understand.
And the ancients said that caustics with gold are better than caustics with iron; and they did not say so only because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not cause a pus-filled area at the site of cauterization. But that is not absolutely true; because I have already tested it and found that it does indeed cause [pus formation] in certain bodies without others.
And caustics with themselves are good, and better than with iron, as they have said. However, when you kindle the caustic with fire from gold, it is not declared to you how much heat should be produced according to its amount that is used; and if it rushes towards coldness, and you add more ignition upon it, it melts in the flame and turns into plates.
Why does the craftsman fall into that occupation [of using caustics]: and because of that, caustics with iron are swifter and closer to us in practice due to their directness for application.
And indeed I have already ordered this chapter on caustics according to the chapters: and I have ordered those from head to feet, so that seekers may obtain what they want [information] from it.
Head II.
This cauterization prevails over the dominion of moisture and coldness on top of the brain: these are two causes [of disease], namely, abundance of fluid flow from the head to the parts of eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth, and throat pain; and universally all ailments that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, soddenness, epilepsy, apoplexy, and like diseases.
The method of cauterization is as follows: first attend to the sick person so that they may become clean with purifying medicine for three nights or four, according to what their strength and age require.
Then instruct them to make waves on his head with needles. Then let him sit between your hands in a square, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. However, when your middle finger has reached it, mark that spot with a non-burning touch.
Then the fire of cauterization oil: which is this form.
Then place it on the marked spot with a non-burning touch, gradually pressing down with your hand and moving it back and forth. Then quickly lift your hand and look at the location.
If you see that it has now revealed a quantity of head fat or a quantity of marrow, then soothe your hand. And if not, repeat with your iron hand itself, or use something else from the same item if it becomes cold: until they see the bones that I told you about.
Then take something from salt and dissolve it in water, drink the mixture, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days.
Then put over the consumed substance with butter, place it on the spot until the scab of fire is destroyed. Then care for that with four-drug ointer, and see if it heals.
Now they have said that the more open wound remains, the more it discharges pus; therefore it is better and more healing.
And some of them have said that it should be cauterized to the bone; and keep the Cauterization until something dense in the bone is burned.
Then a scraper is used after that which was burned in the bone, then it is treated.
And others say that it is necessary for the cautery to approach until it makes an imprint on the bone so deep that the bone falls away like mold from clay: or a tool which women place with the alphabet of infusion; and they expel, as if vapors escape from this head area, and they let open wounds heal over a long period of time.
Then it is treated until it hardens.
However, I do not recognize these two types of cautery at all except for a few people on the path of fear.
And to let it go away is better with its own health in my opinion.
For the head is weakened by a discharge of its natural continuity: as we have testified about other limbs; and especially when the head with its disease is naturally weak: the first type of cautery, indeed, is more healthy and better for me, and I use it: therefore work with that in health.
Head III. (This could be referring to a
When pain occurs throughout the entire head chronically: and it is prolonged for the sick person, and used by others, including purgatives, balms, liniments, etc., and other methods mentioned before in this textbook section (referring to specific treatments like poultices or emplastrums). And especially if it has already been treated with one type of cautery that we have mentioned and does not provide any relief from those methods: then consider the following (which likely refers to alternative or additional treatments for a patient who did not respond to initial treatment). For if the head is naturally strong and not weakened by disease, and finds intense cold: then treat with a different type of cautery underneath that lightly (suggesting adjustments in treatment based on symptoms like an "intense cold" sensation). This reflects the medical practice to tailor treatments according to specific symptoms. Then he cauterizes it with a caustic over the entire horn of his head using a caustic iron, so that the skin is not passed through and the amount of bone exposed corresponds to what we have mentioned. And he cauterizes it with a causte iron once at the occiput of his head, at a place called ubac; and this is where the windpipe is situated: and be gentle therewith, so that the bone does not become exposed. For he found weakened by this intense pain, and different from the pain of all other caustic treatments to the heads.
And I shall say this Cauterium in its place: and it must be a caustic iron where the horns of the head are cauterized, and more delicately at the occiput with a finer caustic iron, which cauterizes the middle part of the head.
Head IV.
When pain occurs on the head and swells or extends to the eye, and it is purged with purifying medicines for the head, and the remainder of the treatment given as I have mentioned in divisions of sicknesses, without curing everything entirely: then the caustic application in this way has two methods: either a cauterization with an acute burning medicine: or with iron.
The caustic application with a burning medicine however, is as follows: you take one tooth from the same animal, and its bark, and cut off the ends from both sides. Then you split the pained area with a wide fleam until it becomes under the skin where one is to attach (the caustic iron).
Therefore introduce it under the skin into itself until concealed: then bind over it with a decent constricting bandage of woolen thread; and leave it for fifteen hours, then extract it, and abandon it for two or three days: afterward place butter over the raw area so that it produces pus; then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do this with some burning medicaments, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, concerning those brought from the East.
However, cauterization of that thing with iron is done in this manner. The shape of the fire cautery, which is this.
And it is called Guile: for the shape of its head resembles the form of a nail, within which there is something like tendernness, and there is also a small prominence in the middle.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand on it: and you will slowly draw out the iron with ease; and let the amount that is burnt be according to the thickness of the skin, as half of it. And wet your hand so that the artery below does not get burnt and blood flow occurs.
Then soak the bale (cotum) in salt water and place it over the spot, and let it remain for three days; then place the bale with butter: afterwards cure with ointment until healed.
And if you wish, perform this half-headache using a second cutting edge of the fire cautery. And close from the incision of the artery in this half-headache, not old of its own accord.
In the manner of performing a fire cautery on an old headache.
When you are treating a headache with the methods we mentioned in previous curation and those described in diseases division, and if there is no effective treatment: and you see from the disease that what was applied to him first through fire cautery with medicine or through fire catury, then it should be done by fires of the fire cautery (cutellari) until he whitens after placing signs on the pain spot in a line whose length is half a finger or almost so: and let your hand rest for one time and tie it until you incise the artery and approach to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to ensure that the jawbone continues during chewing so as not to burn one side or the nerve that moves it, from which a spasm occurs.
And let this also be done for the sternum and precautions regarding bleeding of the severed artery. For the incision of this fear is great and especially for him who knows not what to do, nor attentive, nor experienced: he immediately abandons the surgery.
And I shall come with a review of managing blood flow incidents from the artery according to its own way and place it in this book.
That if you see from the illness that it is not enough for him this cautery, and you see the body sick unable to bear the cautery on the head as we have described, then take care of the wound until healed.
And if you see, give a cautery as we have said in the chapter of extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
Regarding the manner of cauterizing ear pain.
When it occurs ear pain from cold, and is healed with ointments, and the rest of treatment as we have said in division, and if the pain does not subside, then a fire cautery: and this thing called Puncture, its form is as follows.
Then the punctures after its burning around the ear as it subsides: or on both sides if there is pain in both at once. And extend yourself with a cautery to the base of the ear just enough after you have recognized places with ointment: and let the quantity of the caster be ten points on each ear, as those ones.
Then care for the wounds until they heal.
Thus, concerning the method of cauterization during torture.
Head VII.
The torture that is treated by casterization, is none other than those arising from inflammations, as we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses.
And about common cauterization for types that occur from drying out and nerve spasm.
When curing this type of torture with heat applications, purgatives, and gargles do not bring about your healing, then it should be cauterized on the sick person three times: one at the root of the ear, a second just below its position, and a third at the union of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weakened area. For soothing does not occur except in areas that appear healthy.
And the form of cauterization is such that you cauterize with a Cautery directly underne. 1/32-inch below the upper edge of the ear, and at the position of the ear: its length should be according to the width of your thumb. And place your hand with a Cautery until it burns off a layer of skin of medium thickness.
And this is the form of Cautery, and it is a type from a knife-edge whose shape has been given: yet it is not as subtle as you see, and it should be that the blade of the knife be slightly less in thickness than necessary.
Then care for the areas with what preceded it until they heal.
Thus, concerning the method of casterization during ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy occurs, and curing it with what we have discussed does not bring about your healing, and the sick person has no fever, then you should cauterize them four times over all parts of their head, and with a Cautery in the middle of the head as we said, and with a Cautery at the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the form of the Cautery is according to what has been given.
Even after being cauterized with a hot iron on the sternum bone; and it is more of a last resort.
Then it is treated as was previously done.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the bowl of a person suffering from a severe fever, and pills cleansing the brain are taken first.
Then thoroughly cover the head of the sick person, and place over the occiput an ointment described in the treatise on plasters; apply it several times.
For this is a method of cauterization: and do this secondly according to the same order as mentioned here.
If therefore it heals by that (method), it is good. If not: then make three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which are descend from the upper part to the lower part of the eye; and place between every camoation a thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cauterization as was previously done.
If however a patient allows that (procedure): then do the camation on the middle (part). That if you allow that (method): then cauterize it above two horns (of the nose).
Then care for it until healed; and do a camation of oil according to the prescribed shape.
By the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary to proceed with the cleansing of the head with feverfew and as we have said.
Then thoroughly clean the head of a sick person; afterwards do camations with hot iron on the middle of his head, and on every horn of the head, and behind him, and three on each cervical vertebrae.
If however you find in the patient a desire for softening of many parts of the body, and he allows it: then do four camations on his vertebrae of the back with a hot iron, and finally with a camation that burns through the skin to as much extent as possible, and olive oil (your hand). Then care for it until healed; and thus apply the olive oil caustic.
Hence a method of cauterizing epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized unless his epilepscu is of the watery type.
Therefore, one must first cleanse his brain with antiseptics and then proceed with the rest of the treatment as we have discussed in our previous divisions: when ill, if he is very sick or can tolerate medicines.
But if it is a child who cannot take medicines, then he will be given a gargle and chewing substances that cleanse the brain, before many days with proper nutrition.
Then shave his head afterwards and then cauterize it with a single caustic in the middle of the head as was done before; and with another caustic on its back, and over all corners of his head with a caust icium. But if he is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize with the caustics as I have mentioned in having paralysis, and mollification of the body over the spines of the neck and back: and let there be applied an olive oil caustic according to the previous method.
But if he is a sickly child, then apply a subtle caustic in this manner.
Hence a method of cauterizing melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are rotten moistures and thick mucus, then cauterize with the caustics as we have mentioned in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melaniecholy is excessive discharge leading to melaniecholy and his body being a sickly wetness, then give him something in drink that cleanses his brain as was done previously: afterwards shave the head of the sick person, and then make afterward a neat round from linen.
Then place it on the middle of the head; and the patient sitting should hold it firmly from all sides.
Next, apply an ointment. And it is more valuable than ancient butter oil. Heat the substance over a fire, measured by hand when introduced into it, to be warmly heated. Then immerse (it) in a circle at the center of his head and release it until it cools down.
Let him do this once every week with other good treatment, until cured.
Or if necessary, burn (it) by making many small points on it, but hold the hand with a brand: let it be sweet-smelling.
For this kind of burning moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in butter or goose fat.
§ In this manner of descending cauterization to the eye.
Head XIII.
When it is told to you the principle of water entering the eye through signs which I have said in division, then start and give a drink to the patient with what cleanses his head.
And protect it from all moisture, and make him sit in a bath on fasting days for several days.
Then order him to shave his head, and burn it in the middle of his head. Then burn it with two points of fire, if there is simultaneous descent of water into both eyes: or from one side, if there is descent of water into one eye; and separate with fire all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauterizations be long in length and breadth as the points of fire: and they may cease bleeding.
That if you see anything from it, then immediately separate with whatever medication is possible; and I will come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of veins, and their separation, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is burned with a hot iron under two bones using two final implements.
Therefore, the ancient method of cauterization.
When the lachrymae oculorum (tears from the eyes) are ancient: they should be frequent and located above the temples, along with arteries that lie on the outer part of the head; it is ascertained that these result from an excess of cold and phlegmatic substances. Then one cauterizes with a hot iron as described in the descent of water (from Albucasis's text), using a caustic in the middle of the head, along with two final implements above two points on each side, and another pair beneath two bones underne. And if you add anything more, then it is burned around every side of the eye with a small hot iron over the eyebrow ends.
Therefore, the method of cauterization for foetor (stench) from the nose.
When you treat this (referring to a previously discussed condition) and it does not respond to medication as stated: then promptly, administer three nights in a row infirmocochias (an ancient term possibly referring to an enema or other internal treatment), thereafter shave the head of the patient and cauterize with a medium-hot iron using olive oil. Then one should cauterize with a hot iron and two final implements above the eyebrows just underneck hairs.
And be careful not to injure it by cutting an artery.
And this is the method of cauterization for the eyebrows.
Therefore, the technique of cauterization for softening (mollification) of the eyelids.
When the eyelids are softened by an affliction or moisture: then one should cauterize the eyelid with a single iron and this hot iron made of moon metal (lunar).
And if it is flesh, burn above two eyebrows with a pair of branding irons on all sides; and they are to be extended from the two temples; and the length of every branding iron should correspond to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not end your hand along with the branding iron, but according to the amount that has been burned, a third of the eyelid.
In such a manner, when performing the eyelid burn, one uses prickly hairs facing the eye.
The branding iron is of two types: either the one with fire or the one with burning medicine.
But in the branding iron with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let go of his hairs, if they are among those who cleanse them, until they have grown and evened out. But if they prick him at his own beginning: then bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they are born. Note: This instruction seems to be incorrect or misinterpreted as it might refer to the healing process after cauterization rather than during the procedure itself, which requires clarification from historical medical texts and expert knowledge of ancient surgical practices for accurate translation.
When they are born and evened out, then place the patient's head in your lap: afterwards, draw signs on his eyelids with hot wax, a mark that corresponds to the shape of Myrtle leaves: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place soaked bark on a wax paper: or in psyllium gel over the eye. (Note: The material "psyllium" refers to plantago seeds, which were used historically for their medicinal properties, including as a poultice.)
Then with fire of branding iron, whose form is this. (Note: The specific details or illustration of the shape should be based on historical descriptions or images
Then cauterize over the figure you have drawn gradually into many strips, until the surface of the skin is burned off completely, which corresponds to the entire shape of Myrtle leaves. (Note: The method and extent of strip cauterization should be consistent with historical medical texts, ensuring that modern interpretations do not deviate from authentic practices.)
And a sign of healing from your work is this: if you see the eyelid of the eye beginning to contract near the wound, and remove hairs around the eye.
Then cleanse thy hand at that time, and let it rest for three days.
And then place a piece of cotton with butter on the wound until the slough is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
But if hairs return after a day and soften the eyelid, then apply cautery to that place again as you did at first.
But if hairs are on the lower side: then apply c지오터리 to that, until it relaxes back to its natural place; and smoothes so as not to prickle the eye with hairs.
That you should instruct the sick man to discard his hairs until they are grown and smoothed. Make from paper cloth the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
Then take from the known soap and from one of the two scales not imbibed, an ounce or so of weight similar to that: then wipe it with good friction at once, and make this quickly so as not to cool down. Then take some of that and spread it on the paper as you made a leaf of myrtle, and place this over one or two eyelids. And place under the eye soaked cotton on a protein cloth: and let the sick man's head be in your bosom.
And place your finger over the medicine and press it lightly. And you move that as often as the sick man feels a sting from the medicine, for it found its bite like fire.
But while this continues as he himself finds the sting, then discard the medicine and move that with your finger. Therefore, when the sting subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then, if you see the eyelid swelling up, as it is relieved during contraction with fire or cutting, this is good; and if not, repeat over the same area using medicine above the place where no medicinal impression was made, without making it darker, until your operation succeeds and the eye contracts.
Then apply over it a mixture of Butyrum [Butter], until the burned skin is healed. Then care for it with an ointment called Diaphinicon or another, until healed. (Note: Diaphinicon appears to be a historical term not easily identifiable in contemporary sources; the translation is provided based on
And it is necessary for you during surgery to maintain the final safeguard, that nothing from the medicine should fall into the eye. (Note: The term "ultima custodia" can be interpreted as a metaphrenologic expression meaning 'the last thing to take care of' or 'final precaution')
If the eyelid softens after a day and struggles with some blood vessels from within the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place which has been made softer by the eyelid itself, as you did firstly. (Note: "mollificatur" suggests 'softened' or 'eased', indicating an intended effect of a treatment; "capillis" refers to blood vessels) Then care for it until healed.
And this is the form of Myrtus leaf. (Note: The term 'forma folii' could be
And know that human eyes vary greatly in size and thickness. (Note: "diuersificantur" means 'vary' or 'differ', emphasizing the natural variation among individuals) Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be: and do not let the right path, which is the study of this art, be hidden. (Note: "via rectitudinis" metaphorically refers to 'the right way' or 'correct path,' highlighting a philosophical aspect related to the pursuit of medical knowledge)
§ On the method of cauterizing the tear duct fistula. (Note: The paragraph symbol "§" indicates a section heading or topic within a larger text, suggesting that a proced
When treating an abscess, when the method we discussed for treating diseases does not yield results: then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Instruct the sick person to place their head in your lap and hold it with their hands as if not to move or stir while holding their own head.
Then place the soaked gauze on his forehead or in a liquid psyllium over his eye: then of cautery fire, whose shape is as follows.
Make the recess as if of a reed pen's shaft from one end, with which cautery is done: and if it may be piercing up to the other end, and if it may be tried in that manner.
However, this recess is better for your purpose.
Then drain the abscess if it is open and remove it with a healthy vessel, and extract it: and if it is not open, then make an opening in it, and extract the pus from it.
Then place over it cautery that is burned very hot.
And hold with your hand slightly at the cautery near the eye to the nostril so that your hand does not rest or disturb the sick person: and place the ccuetery on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If then you reach with the beginning of your cautery up to his mouth, it will be well done. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, if you need to do so: and dismiss it after three days.
Then place gauze with butter on it and care for it with an extracting ointment until it heals.
But if after forty days it does not heal: then place an acute and corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed: and cut away the diseased part according to what appears in its chapter.
And there is another way of a cautery for wounds, which some of the first ones said. Then aim at the location of the wound and find it; afterwards place into that crack a small pipe called Camahan, which is a subtle tube with this shape: And pour into it the quantity of lead melted in a drachma; and hold your hand with the Canna retentione good, and do not move the sick person at all so that he does not run or come to the melted lead reaching his eye.
And it is necessary to place over the sick man's eye a cloth soaked in albumen or water.
For lead indeed burns the location of the wound and heals it with miraculous healing.
If it is healed by a fistula, along with what we have mentioned from the Cautery and its treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal opening and reduce the fistula according to its course back to its proper place for itself.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in lip cracks.
Often there are occurrences of cracks in the lip called 'Pilus', especially in children's lips.
So when you treat these cracks as we mentioned in the division of illnesses and if it does not bring about healing, then a small knife's edge cautery according to this shape:
And let its depression be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then quickly place the burning one into the cracks themselves until the cautery reaches deeply into the cracks.
Then care for it with a lard poultice until healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing an oral fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or on the palate, or in the roots of teeth: then it produces pus and bursts open: afterwards it is drained, and pus flows out, creating a fistula: then you must care for the wound itself, and not add to its healing process at that time; then it should be treated with cauterizing irons in accordance with the amount that fits into the fistula. Then insert a red-hot object into the fistula opening and hold your hand on it until the hot iron reaches deep within, and has done its work completely; do this once or twice.
Then care for that (the wound) after that, as we have said about the healing up to a certain point.
If, however, the pus is discharged and it heals, then this will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place, and remove the decayed bone according to what will come forth in its own head.
Regarding this method of cauterizing on gums, and softened teeth.
When the gums are softened due to moisture and teeth move, and you care for it with medicines but do not strengthen; then place the ailing head in your bosom.
Then place a cauterizing iron of whatever form is needed after this, so that you put a cannula over the tooth: and quickly insert the red-hot cauterizing iron into it; and hold your hand on it slightly, until the ailing head feels that the heat from the fire has already reached the root of the towed.
And be gentle with your hand; then repeat the cauterizing several times according to what you see fit.
Then let the ailing head fill its own bone with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and then spit it out.
Therefore, when a tooth moves, it is secured with a softened ligament, and dried moisture from decay.
In the manner of cauterization for dental pain.
When dental pain is due to coldness or the area itself is cold, and no relief comes with medicines: then a cautery applied in two ways: either a cautery with butter or a caterey with fire.
A cautery with butter is made by melting the butter and pouring it into a bronze cup or in a wound. Then take pitch (pitch), and apply it to the tip of your finger. Then immerse the item in melted butter and quickly place it on the painful to cuff, holding it until it cools; then repeat several times until the heat's power reaches the root of the tooth.
And if possible, immerse wool or pitch in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place hot iron over it until heat reaches deep into the tooth's cavity.
A cautery with fire is done by focusing on an air tube or a steel tube. And it should have some bulk in its body so that the heat's sharpness does not reach the sick mouth.
Then a fire cautery, whose shape comes to be: and place it on the tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Do that several times, for pain will be relieved or within that same day or another day.
And it is to be done with the impression of that cautery, so that it fills the sick mouth with good butter and holds for an hour; then spits out what's inside.
And this is the form of a cautery.
It burns with any kind of extremity as far as possible, and this is the shape of a cannula.
Regarding the method of cauterizing a stye.
When the styes are from phlegm and cold humors, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, and their juices promote digestion quickly: then apply a depressed cautery of this form.
Having two open ends to allow the smoke to exit from a cautery at one end: and place it on top of the sore once, or twice if necessary, until you reach deep into the abscess.
If the abscess is large: then place a camo according to its size.
Then remove it after three days and apply the following poultice made of butter until what was burned by fire is healed.
Afterward care for it with toothpaste, until its form resembles that of a tube.
Regarding the method of cauterizing throat inflammation and bronchial constriction.
When moistures overtake the bronchial canal and especially when it is accompanied by a cold constitution: first of all, it needs to be treated with dissolving medicines.
Then apply the cautery on a crater near the roots of the throat at an indented place: and carefully avoid reaching with the camo to the throat or the skin, except for some part of it.
Then apply another camo on the junction of the neck at its last vertebrae: and let the cautery be blunt according to what has been used before.
Afterward care for it with that which was previously applied until healed.
Of the way to cauterize during illnesses of the lung and tuberculosis.
When the cough and lung illness are due to cold humidities, and the patient does not have a fever, nor consumption, and is an old condition: then one should cauterize it with two caustic burns above the hookbones in depressed, soft, weak spots. And with another caustic on the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery of the tube be according to the shape that preceded it.
And if your cauterization is by pricking with a caustic called "Puncture," whose form preceded it in earache-pricking, then there shall be points from thirty pricks almost to the other [side].
Then care for that with what came before until healed.
And now the caustic has three prongs: according to this shape. Why it should be relieved with that cauterization when you do so with one stick of the three caustics.
Chapter 2ebraic.
When the head is displaced due to an assistant's humidity, and it does not fit its own time of return from dislocation, until that habit has been established for him, then after a slight movement which happens as we have already testified about this, one must reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient lies down on his back or on the healthy side. Then apply a compress of beef fat that is inside the titillating area on top with your left hand's fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
Then having two iron sticks for cautery. This is such a form.
Then cauterize the tumor until it reaches another side and comes in a shape of cauterization with four cauldrons.
And sometimes it happens that the cauterization is done with a cauldron having three sides, so then the shape of caturization has six cauldrons because they are according to the subtlety of what is tried.
And this is the form of cauterization having three sides.
And sometimes one more mode is added to it, so there are eight cauldrons.
Then place the crushed porridge with salt on top of the cauldron. Then make it adhere to the weakened one for calmness so that he does not move his limb at any time until it is consoled.
And if the dislocation is towards the top and rarely it happens like that, then you should cauterize the same over the shoulder with a cauldron or by pricking many cauldrons.
For this joint is strengthened and removes moisture, and the sick one is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing a stomach.
When it happens in the stomach coldness and many humidities until they extract from their own constitution, and increase sneezing to it, and frequent cures are not applied: then one should have the sick person lie on his back, extend his legs and arms. Then you should cauterize with three cauldrons, using the cauldron of a spoon's size from under the chest and another cauldron for clavicles, and two other ones below the sides of one of them, until it comes in the shape of triangular cauldrons. And lengthen between both so that they do not join when there is pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauters be according to this model without addition, and if you want to cauterize with a large caustic in the middle of the stomach according to this model, and let the cautery that makes this one cautery according to the model of a circle follow this form.
And the stomach is to be cauterized by touching with it that is troubled by this caustic: and there are signs above the stnagram of a point according to the quantity you use with an encaustic; then cauterize it with the caustic of puncturing: then care for it with the treatment, which continues until healed.
A method of freezing cauterization.
When in the liver, pain is caused by coldness and moisture or by heavy winds until it departs from its natural excessive discharge of humors; and when treating with what we mentioned above does not help: then one should lay the patient down on his back, and make three cauterizations according to this model using an encaustic in the same quantity below the epiploon where the man's foot reaches, and let there be space equal to every caustic according to finger breadth; and let a caustic follow the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the causte too much.
And let the quantity that is burnt be according to the thickness of the skin, two-thirds of this amount without addition; and let the patient stand on his feet.
But if not standing, then lying down, with extended legs and raised arms.
This is the shape of a caustic.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize this caustic with a scalpel knife when subtlety and prudence are present in the art.
And be on guard that you do not proceed to the end of cauterization, and let it become thickened throughout the skin so that the entire body is burned, and reaches the intestines: for therein the skin is subtle, therefore know this.
¶ Regarding the method of cauterizing abscesses in the liver.
When an outflow occurs and you know that the abscess is either in the liver tissue or its membrane: then if it is in the liaber tissue, a sick person experiences painful weakness and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the liver's membrane, there is pain accompanied by acute swelling. And you see that it has exhausted doctors with its treatment.
It should be ensured that the sick person lies on their back. Then determine the location of the abscess with an incandescent stick; then the fires of a caustic that resembles a rod. And this is its form. And you cauterize it with that caustic stick once the skin has been completely burned and reaches the spleen until all pus is discharged; then attend to its treatment of abscesses, until healed.
And it should not be that this type of caustic is used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine persists: and those sicknesses come to his hands through frequent experiments; then indeed he may dare over such an operation.
But I prefer to let it go as is.
¶ Regarding the method of cauterization in the pleura.
The ancients said that with the caustic root of Aristolochia for a cold pleura according to this method. And it is as follows: you receive from the roots of dry Aristolochia such that there is one root longer than the rest, which can be found among them, and let its size be like that of a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and ignite it with fire. Then cauterize with a single caustic on that which is between the extension of the furrow and neck, and two equal caustics near it under small declivities toward the lower part, which is under the beard.
And with two caustics also on that which is between the fifth and sixth declivities toward the back: and with another caustic in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three caustics from the back: one on that which is between two spoons; and two caustics from each side of the chest, lower caustic being between two spoons.
And it is not proper to compress your hand with a caustic; rather let it be on the bare skin smelling sweetly.
And now some ancient ones have said that there are men who use a caustic made from iron like the radius; and they ignite it, and put it inside between the ribs until it reaches near to the spot of the ulcer, and pus comes out: as we have discussed in the ulceration of the liver.
But in this perforation with a caustic there is fear, that either the sick person dies immediately or an abscess occurs at the spot without healing.
§ On the manner of performing Cauterization on the spleen in Chapter LXII.
When you treat the sickness of the spleen with what we have discussed for treatment in the division of diseases, and your therapy does not provide relief, then the caustic is applied according to three modes, all of which are correct:
Of those who are one, make three types of cautery or four, lining according to the length of the spleen following the shape of the cauldrons on the liver, whose form preceded it.
And let there be in all types of cautery a quantity proportional to thickness with the finger, or more or less.
And let the mode of cautery that we mentioned for the liver be equally.
And do not squeeze your hand with the cautery: and let him who is ill lie down on his back over his back.
And another way of cauterization is to hold the hot iron as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and oil skin that is directly on the spleen where the left arm approaches: and let your oiling be according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two hot irons deeply until they pierce the skin on one side: then remove the cautery: so four cauteries are made.
And if you want to do a cauterization with another cautery having three irons.
Then care for the cautery after you have thrown it away, let many days pass: for it is more in continuation and what remains from healing that preceded.
Paragraph on how to cauterize in hydropsy.
The cautery does not fall in hydropsy unless it is an enema by itself.
When you are healing the hydropsy with the methods of healing that we mentioned in division, and if it does not improve, then one must do a caterization four times around the navel, and with an iron on top of the stomach, and another iron over the liver, and an iron over the spleen, and two irons between the vertebrae after the back, and one in directness to the chest, and another in directness to the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then insert an open cautery so that it discharges pus over a long time.
And do not leave the sick person untreated after cautery with it: that which should be done is to join two intentions for him, so that he may hasten to recovery with God's help.
The shape of the cautery with which the upper part is cauterized should be a copper tube; according to its preceding form: and that with which the back is caturized should have an oilier appearance, according to its previous form.
Regarding the method of cauterizing feet and shanks.
When hydropenia occurs and they are filled with yellowish water: one should cauterize the back of the foot between the ear-hole and the ring finger: then gently press it with your hand using a cautery, and do not twist it: then again gently press it with your hand: and do not move it at all.
And the yellowish water will drain out, and let there be a cautery according to this shape.
Then make two cauteries on both shanks, and let there be a cautery with the tip of the knife-like cautery: and let there be a catury according to the length of the leg, one below it, and another lower down about in the middle of the leg: and above every hip two cauteries: then insert an open cautery without treatment over a long time so that some liquid drains from it: then care for the wound with the other treatments we mentioned.
Regarding the method of cauterizing on ventricular fissure.
Chapter XXXV.
When there is a discharge from the ventricular fissure due to cold and humidity until it weakens retentive and digestive forces that are in the stomach and intestines: and treat this with methods of treatment, and it does not heal: and you see a sick person who tolerates an abundant cautery, then cauterize it with a large cautery over their own stomach according to how it preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery and four fine cauteries around the navel with a very fine cautery: and on a copper plate above the calves, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that with a caustic on the chest, and also with a causturtion over the entire area; and perhaps add two small causturations near the upper part of the stomach.
And indeed this treatment is successful, whose aim does not err.
§ Regarding the method of causturing hemorrhoids.
Head XXXVI.
When in the anus are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they are from gross humors, coldness, or corrupt moisture, and healed with that which we mentioned in division XLIII, and do not yield a cure: then caution with three causturizations over the lower spine of the back slightly less than triangularly, and with a caustion under the navel as if by two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food does not digest, and you see him swelling up, then caution with a large caustic over the stabdomen, as it preceded: also with a caustic over his liver, and another over his spleen, with a sickle-shaped caustic: and remove the open cauterization after some time; afterwards, treat him until healed.
Head XXXVII.
When you cut off the alathelus, then apply caustic fires similar to a ray (possibly referring to a grid or pattern of application). Then insert a burning item into the cut-off alathelus: and with your last hand, until it reaches the healing point through which blood flows: do this once or twice (indicating repeated applications as necessary).
If then the alatheluses are many, then caution each one with a caustic as we have mentioned before (referring to earlier instructions for this process). Then attend to that which is provided for them from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large caustic on the clot, it is more of an extreme measure in treatment.
Thus, regarding the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the surgery and operation that I have described in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps healed with a caustic.
And so when it happens to someone that a fanciulliarum are being used in the process of making muffins as part of their decorative design or for added texture and flavor? This is indeed an unconventional use but not entirely outlandish, especially within artisanal baking circles. Chocolate chips can provide burst Therefore, it must be done as I have written, with a fine probe gently inserted. Then know the amount of depth by using that same probe carefully.
Then use caustic irons, which are similar to a pair of tongs. Then insert yourself with hot iron into the fistula and measure how much it goes in using the clasp.
And repeat with hot iron upon it until all the decayed body parts are burned away, once, twice or thrice, according to your necessity.
And protect yourself from being burned by nerves if they are there, or with large ointments; and if the fanciulliarum leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestines, then protect yourself from those places altogether.
And do not do this unless the fanciulliarum is on a fleshly place; and think because it does not pierce deeply.
Then care for the area until it heals completely.
But if the place is sealed and separated from it materials, and remains for a long time like this; then you know that it has been healed thoroughly.
And if they do not separate the matter from him, then you know that it is pervasive, or his deep bone is rotten, or somewhat like those: whose memory will come to its place.
Of a way of cauterizing Kidneebones.
When pain from the kidneys occurs due to cold or gross winds and it decreases because of a sickness, then one should apply cauterization over almethenum upon these kidneebones using a hot iron, as well as above every kidney with an awl-like instrument whose memory precedes.
And perhaps we may apply cauterization again within the same almethenum. Why three lines come. Therefore they will be more powerful during sleeping. (Note: This translation assumes that "juuentament" is a typo or corruption of the
Of a way of cauterizing Bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder and mollification from cold and humidities until it no longer retains urine of the sick one, then apply cauterization to its lower part above the bladder where pubic hair begins with a hot iron from the right side of the pubis, and another with an awl-like instrument from the left side of that: and let the length of the second lateral cauterization be according to the quantity of knots on the thumb; then apply caterization above it using the backside or two hot irons if you discern it, as follows depending upon what precedes with a hot iron.
Of a way of cauterizing Womb.
When frigidity and humidities occur in the womb preventing pregnancy, and her menstrual flow is corrupted, and the stimulation of those is delayed, and pain at their approach occurs to it, then one should apply three hot irons around its navel as we have said before in cauterizing the bladder, with a hot iron over the lower part of its backside or two hot irons: and let there be an awl-used cauterization.
Of the way to cauterize an anchor in a dislocation.
When the moistures of the mucous membrane flow into an anchor's bag and cause its departure from its place; and a sign of this is that the leg is stretched towards another, when they approach the hollow: it is found that the location of dislocation in that empty space.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weakened area above the anchor'cuś own caustic (cauterizer) with a similar circle; after you mark along the incandescent with an encaustic (wax-based pigment for painting or writing), as it turns: and that the bag itself may fall into the center of the circle.
But if you do not have this caustic at hand, then cauterize it with three caustics, using a large oil caustic; and let the depth of the caustic be according to the thickness of the skin throughout its entirety.
Then care for it until healed.
Of the way to cauterize in sciatica. (Please note that this instruction refers to a different condition than "anchor dislocation" from
When pain occurs in the anchor's bag, and its cause is coldness and moistures; and treat the weakened as we have said in diuisio, and it does not provide a cure, and that thing becomes old: then you must dissolve the infirmity with humors of gross pills or with foul-smelling pills, or artificial ones, and similar. Then cauterize it. (This statement directly follows from the previous steps in treating the
And the method of caustic for this is in two ways: either with a caustic with approaching medicines or with a caustric with fire. (This instruction continues to provide guidance on the treatment process.)
The cautery with fire exists in many ways.
Whose one is it to cauterize above the pile of its three pyres, according to this pattern. And make them a good or bad depth. And there should be space which is between all the cauteries in quantity and thickness of a finger; and the cautery should have an oil layer.
Whenever, however, it happens that the catury is on top over the head of its pile itself. Why there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes the method of cautery for displacement of its pile, one: let the circle contain the whole pile.
And char the entire thickness of the skin.
This is a way of cautery for sciatica when pain sticks to its pile itself and does not extend up to the hip and leg.
But if it extends up to the hip and leg, then you cauterize the pile with two cauteries over the thigh, over the place where the patient is directed by pain, which is in a part of its sylvester about four finger-widths: and let the cautery be ringed.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
Which if the patient indicates that pain extends up to near the toes, then you should cauterize there where he points with a punching-cauter, three or four times, or more often, as it needs.
And if he indicates that pain is under the knee to the leg, then you should cauterize there with a ringed-cauter once.
And caution yourself in all your cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery on this matter of burning nerves or great vessels and dragging through it over the patient's bad harm or spasm.
Indeed, I have seen one and another among those who cauterized above the calf, and they continued in cauterization; the leg became swoln until the tumor adhered to the foot, and it was pierced entirely, and the whole foot decayed: then there occurred discharge from the veins, and death followed after that.
If pain is present on both sides simultaneously, caution should be taken to treat each one according to this method.
And certain wise men have said something about the cauterization of armpits using this particular method. Make a similar piece of metal called "samio," whose diameter is half a palm: and it should be placed at the hole's opening according to the size of the nail head, or slightly less; and within that samio, there should be another samio.
And there should be space equivalent to the amount of knots on one's thumb between all the samios: and the openings of the samios should be from both sides; and their height should resemble that of a single knot, or two knots: and construct handles for them appropriately using metal.
Then it should be heated in fire until red hot, and emit sparks; then place it over a small box on the sick person lying with one healthy side resting against the other. So caution him by applying three round cauterizations in one spot.
Then release it for three days. Later apply plasters with butter; and leave an open wound uncovered for many days. Then tend to it with ointment until it heals.
Says Albucasis, we seldom use this type of cauterization with sons, because of the fear of its appearance; and therefore, few people are found who seek treatment on it.
However, he is one of those who endure well with such a procedure, and has been discovered to be successful at that place.
However, when the cautery is ready with the medicines arriving, you shall make two Samite rings having perforated armills, into which descends the card of its gate made of bronze or iron, whose lengths in altitude are two knots or almost so.
And let there be a space that is between the two quantities of thickness of the finger, and they are open lower and upper ones: and may it hold liquid according to this shape.
Then lay her down on an anchor-shaped piece, lying weakly over the healthy side. And press your hand strongly over the anchor-shaped piece. Then pour between the two circles of warm water that is heated with fire just enough, and hold it for a time period: and let the sick person endure its biting, and its burning, for indeed he found biting like fire, until rests the biting.
Then oint your hand with a tool, and cleanse the anchor entirely with warm water mixed with sweet water: then dismiss it for three days.
And place butter over that, until the blackness of burning disappears: and dismiss it for some days, and may pus flow from there. For indeed is the last thing in recovery.
Then care for that with ointments until healed.
But if pain extends to the thigh or leg: make him a stand that contains water as you did on the anchor equally.
And this is a method of warm water: and I have already written it in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Take lye and unburnt chalk of both parts one side each: break them up and put them in a new pot whose lower part is perforated with a small hole according to the length that enters it: and place under the bottom of the pot another earthenware pot: and throw over the lye and chwartz from sweet water, which submerges both by finger's width: after you press them well with your hand in good compression: and dismiss the pots until water runs down from the lower part of the unglazed pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another limestone; let it stand until it curdles.
It will then be very powerful and sharp for use in many surgical operations of medicine, and for the cauterization of other body parts. For it causes the effect through its own fire.
And among the medicines are those with which haunches (femoral arteries) are cauterized, such as thesesy, melaic acid, and lime mixed with soap; that both may be combined.
And indeed, Galen has recounted the healing of a man from ancient times for the pain in his thigh and sciatic nerve; and he greatly praised its efficacy. And he said that it did not need another remedy and that he was cured by a single treatment until he declared, perhaps because he had taken an internal bath, and was now free from it.
And it is to be taken from the green seeds of aloe vera; and if not found in aloe veroa recenta should be used: and heaped up with a good deal of butter, placed over the thighs where there is pain or leg or hip; and bound, and let go for a quantity of three hours, or according to how much the patient feels weakness from burning. Then introduce it into the bath.
For when his body becomes sweaty, introduce it into a chair. For indeed pain subsides and healing occurs.
And know that it is not necessary for someone to use any cautery with these remedies unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscorirus who said that goat dung, when applied with it to the sciatic nerve, brings benefits; and this is how a cautery is made according to this method. Take wool and moisten with ancient oil, and place it on a deep spot between the thumb of the foot and the little toe, and is closer to the fire.
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoeburned charcoal.
Next, place it on the wool, and let it burn out. Then repeat that. Therefore do not cease to do this until a sense of moderation is reached up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called Vaccine causticry. (Note: The term "cauterium vaccinum" does not directly translate to modern English, but it seems
Regarding the cauterization for back pain.
Occasionally, pain occurs in the back due to various causes or falls, blows, excessive evacuation, and similar issues, from infusion of cold materials: indeed, cauterization does not apply except in this species alone that arises from infusion of cold material. (Note: The text is a bit more complex here as it deals with specific medical conditions and treatments.)
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with foul pills and similar treatments, let them be made over the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of its spine, after signs with encaustic in every line five cauterizations or more depending on the quantity that comes from the endurance of the strength of said patient: and it should be a cautionery cauterization. (Note: This text includes specific instructions for medical treatment following evacuation using foul pills, indicating a series of lines with encaustic applications.)
And if so, cautionery three or four cauterizations with a middle clay cautery according to this pattern. (Note: This sentence continues the instructions on applying causticrye patterns for medical treatments.)
Regarding the method of cauterization in cases of swelling due to tumors. (Note: The text now moves onto addressing a specific condition - "Gibbositas," which could be interpreted as a
This illness often occurs in elderly infants. (Note: The text has shifted to discussing the occurrence of the mentioned condition in older children.)
The sign of its onset in children is as follows: it occurs with a stricture during breathing and movement; and you find it at the last dorsal vertebra and nodes, which have now begun to stand out above the other adjacent vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and are to do that, then cauterize it with a cautery in the shape of a circle.
And take the caustic around the entire vertebra evenly; and if you are to cauterize it around the perimeter of the vertebra with a caustic in the shape of two or three points, let them be close together.
Then care for that place until it heals as we have said.
And be careful not to administer the caustic on the bulging which occurs in nerve spasm.
In this manner of treating gout and joint pains: (Translation should be continued based on a specific method described by Albucasis for the treatment mentioned)
When the pains of joints are from cold humors that flow into each part of the body, then when these pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call them gout by proper name. (This continues with a description of treatments or observations related to gout as per Albucasis)
Therefore, when gout from cold causes is treated with methods of healing, and the pangs do not recede, then caustic removes them. (This should detail a specific treatment method involving caustics for conditions that do not improve with conventional treatments)
And it is, as to cauterize after evacuating the perimeter of the foot joints with many caustics: and let the caustic be made from olive oil. (Here a specific procedure for applying caustics in treatment is described)
And if you find points on the sole of the foot, then do with the caustic in the shape of points. (This sentence suggests an alternative treatment involving point-shaped caustics) If pain rises up to the knees or other joints and this often happens, then cauterize it with three or four cauteries from every side using the same Caulius rod.
However, if you need more than that by this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, only to the thickness of the skin at most.
However, if pain rises to the knees and back: then apply what we mentioned from the cautery in its chapter.
But if pain is only in the hands, then make points around the edge of the flame as two lines fade away.
And if pain remains only in the fingers, then make points on them, a point over every knot and over the chest of hand.
But if pain rises after days to the ankles or elbows, then cauterize both from every side.
And do not leave a sick person alone under good care, with medicine intake. For if it becomes good care, and the phlegm is reduced, he will be healed by God's help with this cautery.
Of the manner of cauterizing ruptures.
When a rupture happens in the groins and descends intestine or grizzle to the testicle, and it is beginning near: then you should advise the sick person to dismiss purgation on his own day. And use purgatives so that feces can come down from their bladder.
Then let him sit between your hands over his back: and tell him to hold his breathing until it is expelled or appears grizzle or intestine.
Then pull it with your fingers and make signs under the rupture over the chest of hand, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle above the body.
Then use a hot iron, which is this form, until it arrivamoon and throws out small sparks. Then roll back the intestine or insert an enema into its own cavity. Then place the minister's hand on that spot so that it does not exit: and you have already opened between his thighs, and placed underneath lint, and another servant over his thighs, and another over his chest holding hands.
Then remove the iron from that mark with your hand holding the iron upright. And hold it until you reach the bone with it: or try again with another one if you have not reached up to the bone with it at first.
And carefully observe whether there is any discharge from the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and stop by this over the patient or death or great wickedness.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the iron, your operation is of no avail.
And it must be an iron for infants fine, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining ointments until healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is bandaged.
And it is necessary to place food for him according to the length of his healing time, which soothes his humors: that the intestine does not exit in effort and discharge.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then give him a badly made bandage and hold it for another forty days by others.
And lessen the labor, and supply food and drink, and strong words.
For when he uses this regime, thus he is fully healed in a complete cure.
And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures with incision in its chapter.
Whenever ruptures occur in the other entrails and are beginning, and it is desired that they not be joined, then cauterize the rupture with a round caustic according to its amount: but let what is burned therewith be as the third (part). Then care for it in what we said: and do not join them.
And now some of the first ones have said: to be burned with a rupture and an angular caustic according to this shape.
After it is signed with the caustic, and a line which is through the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another to below. And put your hand in the middle with a lancet.
But the first caustic is easier and better.
§ On the manner of cauterizing pain due to an injury or percussion.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in certain limbs from an injury or percussion: and the pain persists for a long time, and does not yield to any care with drugs: then one must be burned with a pointed caustic.
And let the caustic of every limb be a second caustic according to its size, and weakening it, and weakness thereof, and strength thereof, and twisting therefrom, and pain from that.
If however it is healed with the first caustic, then it is good. If not: then repeat the caustic on top of that.
For it is customary for these pains to be transferred from a limb to what approaches them. Therefore one must follow up on them with caustic until the sick is healed.
§ On the manner of cauterizing leprosy.
But lepers are sometimes aided by caustic in the greatest healing. Therefore, especially with leprosy cases, which occur due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; so when considering cauterization on that part.
If therefore leprosy is not healing and it does not progress nor stabilize with the treatment as we discussed in division, and there are no signs of corruption over its entire complexion: then cauterize that person on five points of the head: one in the middle of the known spot on the forehead, a second downwards towards the front at the end of the hairline, two above each earlobe, and one behind the nape.
And your last hand with the cautery just enough so that it leaves a slight impression on the bone and dislodges pieces from there: in order to release the strong exhalation of vapors from there, also cauterize with the same caster over the spleen as needed.
But if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible: then it must be cauterized with these cauteries that we mentioned on the head, with a cautery also on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on both cheeks, two cauteries on the spines of the neck, six over the spinous processes of the back, one large cautery near the buttocks and on it: and two on the ankles - that is, one covering a whole ankle and two on each leg: one on every knee, and two on both shoulders, two on both elbows, two on both wrists, two on all chest muscles of his own, and on every joint of the fingers and feet of his own: and cauterize over every connection, from the joints of his own fingers, and feet. And cauterize also over both heels and toes of his feet.
And cut out those nerves that are above the last part of the heel, so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a caustic above the bone of the pelvis, and another above the bone of the belly, and another above the ribs.
And you know that the more caustic is added, the greater is the pain, and the more it causes inflammatur.
And you know that the sick person does not find pain in caustic as a healthy one finds it; therefore, because his body has already grown numb.
And the caustics must be of size according to the limbs and joints; according to what has passed from types of tools.
Then take care of the caustic with ground wheat flour mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
§ On how to perform cauterization on a stroke (or more accurately 'apoplexy'). The translation is based on Albucasis'
When a limb has become numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with caustics, according to the size of the limb or its weakness.
And let your caustic be not too deeply embedded in the thickness of the skin. Then take care of it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized at a stroke that occurs in the hand or foot, on the vertebrae of the back near the exits of nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
However, one should not presume over this unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the exiting of nerves that move the body.
Chapter 51.
When Albaras grows old and no longer contributes anything from the realm of medicine: then one cauterizes slightly deeper than the original caution, according to the thickness of the skin, until it removes the whiteness and changes its color.
Then take care of it with herb powder and flaxseed oil, and arnoglosso leaves, and dove blood, and hyrax blood: each should have one part only: mix all these things together, rub them on linen, and let them adhere to the place until healed.
Regarding the method of cauterization for a cancer.
When cancer is beginning and the vein rises up: then one cautionizes it with a circular caution around it as if drawing circles.
However, wise ones have said that it should be cautioned by the last caution in the middle.
But to me, this does not seem right: for I fear it will ulcerate: and indeed I have often seen this.
And more correctly is to caution it around its perimeter with a circle, as we said: or by multiple cautions.
Regarding the method of cauterization for adubeltum (a type of skin condition).
When someone has adubeltum (a type of skin condition), and it is delayed in healing or caused by excess due to weakness from old age when there is little blood, or because of time making the adubeltum mature quickly, then one cautions around its perimeter with many small punctures. Then discard it. For this will hurry to mature.
But if one has a hole in it with the caution, then by fire of the caution, which is this form.
And place it in the middle of Adubeltum until it pierces the skin; and let the caustic be as follows for the weakened one so that he may be cleansed with a course of purging.
Then care for it until it is healed.
§ Concerning the manner of scorching in a highly caustic substance.
Head IV. (referring to Chapter 4)
The caustic is only a corruption within the walking limb and consumes it; as fire consumes dry wood. (This refers to Albucasis' technique of using cautery in surgical procedures, likening the process to how fire burns dried wood.)
If then you see the caustic where it can bear heat with fire, then use much or little fire for cauterization as is fitting for that place where is the caustein (This describes Albucasis' method of applying varying degrees of heat depending on the condition and location requiring cautery.)
Then scorch it from every part until you have completely removed the corruption, and nothing of it remains permanently (This emphasizes Albucasis' thorough approach to cautery - ensuring complete removal of diseased tissue.)
Then let it rest for three days and place powdered sulfur with oil over the areas of cautery until all scabs are gone, and all disease is removed (This describes Albucasis' post-operative care instructions, utilizing natural substances such as sulfur and oil to promote healing after surgical procedures.)
Then care for it with ointments that generate flesh (Albucasis was pioneering in promoting the use of various medicinal preparations, or
If then you see that healthy flesh is born after three days without disease, it is good (This affirms the effectiveness of Albucasis' methods and post-operative care.)
And if not: then repeat the causticization on that which remains from diseased places (This suggests a method of reapplying surgical treatment when initial procedures do not yield desired results, indicative of Albucasis' meticulous and iterative approach to surg
The caustic is sometimes treated with sharp medicine (This hints at the concurrent use of other treatments alongside cautery in medieval Arabic medical Indeed, for it arises from the place of cautery (Albucasis often observed and reported on the outcomes of his surgical
However, the cautery is quicker when used with fire; and indeed I have already said that its application with sharp medicine for division should be done there where you find it necessary.
Regarding performing cauterization on the veins and arteries.
Head V.
Often this affliction occurs in the lower parts of the feet; it is a thick and filtered condition that damages the foot.
And indeed the ccautery can be used in two ways for these: with fire and with warm water.
As for how it is with fire, the flames of the cautery are similar to a seabird's feathers being scorched; this is made from iron and depends on its size in proportion to all sides: and it should have fine edges.
Then place the heated one over the wound. Then remove your hand with the cautery around the wound until it reaches the depth of the ward; and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a plaster with good fresh mallow leaves and crush it with salt; then place the plaster on top of it during the night. For indeed, this [matter] will be removed from its roots.
Then take care of the wound with a regenerating ointment for the flesh until it heals.
If they are not healed and often occur on the body's surface, especially in hands and feet; then administer cauterization with warm water to them: and it is, as if you receive a cannula from iron, or from a seabird's feather: and place it over the wound, or an ulcer. Then pour a small amount of warm water into the cannula: keep your hand and lightly move it with pressure from your own hand so that the edge of the cannula is impressed on the base of the wound, and finds its way to deepen towards the root of the sore; and let the sick person rest above the warm water for one hour.
Then remove it, for the thorn is pulled out with its roots.
Thus you do to them one after another until you come upon all who are therein within the body.
Then care for them after they have been removed, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
§ Regarding the manner of cauterizing in tremor.
When a tremor occurs from coldness in the nerve or from quartan fever or another cause: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four burns or five above the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra as well as over the breastbone and over its stomach.
For tremor rests with oil burn and hastens health from cold sickness.
§ Regarding the manner of cauterizing Albatthir.
Head LXVII.
At times Albatthirs are ejected from the body, that is, pustules which arise from coarse decaying materials.
Therefore, when they first appear, it is fitting to be cauterized over the whole head of the pustules with a fine burn from wood of Myrtle, whose end has been set alight. Or with the root of Aristolochia that is long. Or with a lens-shaped burn.
And sometimes they are burned with an emollient at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and do not grow; and excessive matter is destroyed from them, and cured by means of it.
However, it must be done after evacuation with a venesection.
§ Regarding the manner of cauterizing a bleeding from an artery into a wound.
Many times a bleeding occurs from an artery that has been cut near the wound, which happens externally or at the site of an abscess incision, or burn on the limb, and similar cases: and it is difficult to separate them.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, quickly approach the opening of the artery with your hand and place your index finger on it: tighten it firmly until the blood is pressed under your fingertoken and nothing escapes from it.
Then place a small piece of beeswax on fire and many more pieces: blow over them until they burn brightly.
Then take one or a few pieces, or a large piece, according to the wound and where the artery is torn, and place the cautery on it after you have moved your finger quickly: hold the cautery until the blood has separated.
If the blood is expelled with your finger from the opening of the artery and you put out the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from the ones that are prepared in fire.
Therefore do not stop doing it after one with another until the blood has separated.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and let something else happen to the patient's weakness.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to separate it: especially if the artery is large unless with one of four kinds. Or with a cautery as we have said. Or by extraction when it cannot be extracted. For when extracted, his limbs contract and the blood is separated. Or be tied with a strong thread of ligature. Or they are placed on top of the appropriate medicine for separating blood and tightened with a suitable compression bandage.
But whoever performs the excision with a ligature and tightening with cloth or placing things that burn does not fully relieve him unless rarely.
But if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine present: then begin with placing the index finger on the opening of his vein as we have described, and tighten it greatly until the blood presses from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery. And the finger must not be moved; with cold water poured vigoramoftly from above, wait until the blood coagulates and contracts, and then cut away.
And meanwhile he should consider what is needed either by caustic or medicine.
Chapter: On cutting, puncturing and phlebotomy in wounds, and such like.
Now I have said in Chapter One about any illness where it is appropriate to use caustic fire and consuming medicine; the circumstances of such an illness, its causes, instruments and shapes of caustics.
And here are chapters from top to bottom.
And I shall proceed in this chapter by the same way as before: that it may be relieved who seeks such things.
And before I begin that, it should be added by my son, what is contained in this chapter about the fear mentioned in Chapter One on caustic fire.
And for that reason it must be warned more strongly about the operation which is mentioned in this chapter since often there comes outflow with blood from it, on which life depends at opening of a vein, or cutting superficially over an abscess, or opening exiting wounds, or healing of a wound, or extraction of an arrowhead, or cutting over a stone, and such like: all of these are associated with trembling, fear, and many die from them.
And I warn you not to fall on that which contains hesitation, for sometimes men are brought to you with this art according to the mode of their illnesses. For from these there are who get angry with their own illness, and a slight death to them: because of the intensity of it which he found by his sickness and its length of harmfulness. And when there is sickness from fear that signifies death.
And one of them gives you his flute and tells you to play it with him, hoping for health, but the sickness is harmful.
Therefore, it should not be allowed for those who come among you of this kind. And may your caution be greater than your desire and greed. And do not presume anything from it unless after certain knowledge that is verified among you to what good result the succession has come.
And make use of all available information for the treatment of your sick, and diagnosis, and guidance on what is suitably healthful.
For in this lies help to you for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, my sons, with understanding, and do not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I myself have ordained this Chapter to be distinguished by chapters as it preceded in the chapter of Cautery, from the cervix down to the feet: that ye may lighten what ye seek from it and what you need thereof.
¶ Concerning the treatment with water which is gathered in chapters for boys.
Chapter I.
Know that this sickness often occurs in boys during childbirth: or when the midwife pulls the head of a boy without gentlencuity.
And also whenever it happens due to unknown causes that are not understood.
And I myself have not seen this sickness among any but boys, and to all whom from them the death has approached me it seemed right to abstain from that treatment.
And I myself have seen a boy whose head was full of water and his head was magnificent on every day, until he could not sit up over himself, because of the size of his head: and swelling increased, until dead.
Indeed, this very moisture gathers either between the skin and the bone, or below the bone near the sinus.
And the operation on this, if there is moisture between the skin and the blete, and an abscess of the parietal lobe, then it must be opened in the middle of the head a single crack: and the length of the fissure should be as two nodes long, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture has increased more, and the abscess is larger, then place two cracks according to this form.
And if the moisture is below the bone and its sign is visible as openings of the head from every side: and water depresses when you press it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you: then you must open in the middle of the head three cracks according to this form.
And after making an incision, remove all moisture externally. Then tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters. Then apply this to it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligament, and care for the wound with bandages, and ointments.
And do not cease to keep the head tightly bound equally. And feed the sick with only a little dry food, until their limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the occiput or in the parietal lobe, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with incision where you see an abscess and a collection of water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut an artery, and let blood flow occur, and the sick die from such a flood with moisture evacuation.
§ On cutting arteries located behind the ears.
Chapter ^2.
Chapter ^2. When catarrh occurs to the eyes or chest and it becomes chronic, and no medical treatment is effective; then the final remedy lies therein: cutting of those two arteries.
Therefore, when one wishes to cut them, so as to rid themselves of their ailment. Then the place is rubbed with coarse cloth until the vessels appear. Next, one should bind their neck with any of their own cloths. Then consider where the pulse flows. And both are located behind ears that sag; and it is rarely hidden unless in certain individuals.
Then signs with wax over each; and incise both with a sharp spatula on either side, reaching the mouth during incision: let this be done across the width of the head.
And if possible, insert a sharp spat cuidar under the artery, and cut it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two joined fingers.
For when a vessel is cut, blood exudes with a pulsing flow that frequently enters the innards.
But if an artery does not appear by touch, then it is necessary to measure from the ears using three fingers' worth of space. Then mark with wax and proceed until reaching the mouth.
And what should be expelled from blood is six ounces, perhaps a bit more or less. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the sickness and fullness of the individual's artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if something remains near the mouth from swelling, then cut that, so as not to cause a warm abscess; then bind the wound with linen strips of flax cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until healed.
Regarding the removal of arteries located within cavities.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man with an old headache or acute catarrh due to acidic moistures and warmth in the cavities of the arm muscles, or hardened phlegm, heavy, and similar conditions: and is treated according to medical methods of cure without improvement; then we have been experienced in these ailments with the extraction of arteries from the cavities, or burning them as we mentioned.
And the method of operation for extracting those is, that the patient should shave the hairs present in the cavities and direct towards the visible artery in the muscle. For it is shown to you by its own pulse and rarely hidden unless in a few people or severe coldness.
If it is hidden from you, then let the patient tie their head with any of their own cloths: then rub the area with a rough cloth. Or wash the area with warm water until it appears to you distinctly. Then take a scalpel that I had previously formed. Then scrape the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it and extract it upwards until you have extracted it from the skin, and make it exit from the layers that are underneath it from all sides.
If however, the artery is thin: then twist it with the end of a hook. Then cut from that side according to how much its ends are stretched and contracted, so that no blood flow occurs. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood does not rise completely.
Then collect from the blood six ounces up to three times.
If the artery is large: then it must be tied off in two places with a strong thread or silk or gut so that decay does not precede the healing of the wound, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess, which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if possible, burn it with a caustic iron up to the bone using a knife-edge caustic; until its ends are burnt off and remains in place as part of that operation.
And it is better to do the surgery unless if he has a feverish illness or overheated constitution. For the caustic iron is among those things that help to dry up moisture. Therefore, it is better for healing.
And it should be that after extracting the vessels, the place should be filled with old cauterizing matter; and put on top of well-made poultices properly.
And after a solution is cleaned with drying medicines that make flesh grow, and with liniments until it heals.
That if while you work a flow of blood happens from the artery, then quickly go to cut it off with a caustic iron or fill the place with wax-like matter; and hold your hand tightly until the blood is stopped. That if none of these are present with you, then place a finger on the place until the blood coagulates. And fill the place with cold water broth until the heat subsides and it contracts as needed.
And it is that which is lighter and easier to extract the vessel with this caustic iron having two knife-edges: so be the sharpness of the two knife-edges similar to an almagdad (a type of steel). However, they have much less sharpness than two knives. Since if they are sharp like two knives, each of them strives for coldness and does not cut meat quickly. However, since there is a little bit of thickness in them, they contain the heat of fire within them, and cut flesh quickly: therefore this work requires it to be better for all purposes, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the caustic.
And let there be a space that is the amount of thickness between two knives, after you mark two places with encaustic: and lay both apart quite far until they reach their end, and cut into the same in the two places: so that what is elongated between those extremities. For these are not solidified with this caustic thoroughly.
Chapter IV.
And this is the treatment for frequently shedding tears from the eyes.
When tears are frequent and the course of them is from the veins that are outside the crown of the head: and there is no help for it with anything medicinal or medical, and he sees his face becoming red already, and feels a movement on his forehead, as it is walking like ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that they have been eroded by those hairs along with corrosion: and the eyelids have become hot from the sharpness of tears: then the anciancier treated these conditions in this manner of treatment, and called it curationem, with Sword.
And as you instruct to shave the hairs that are on his forehead of the patient. Then make three cuts in his forehead that are equidistant according to its length: and let the length of each fissure be like two fingers, and one is equidistant from the middle of the nose along the front, and the second near the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and caution against arteries in both sides after making an incision. And extend your hand all along continuing through two jaws: and let there be a space for the entire length of the cut as much as three fingers together. Then get yourself a piece of sponge that is prepared, or many dry cloths, with which to soak up the blood that has dried.
Then insert a plaster on the tips of two sharp extremities, after which follows the following shape. From an incision that is from the temple part, up to the second incision: and remove all skin with it between both incisions along with a fascia, which lies above the bone. Then do also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove this plaster and insert it again into the first incision with another tool called a sharp scraping knife, from one side blunt, not sharp from the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the attached flesh with skin, and its blunt side towards the bvee; then push it so that it reaches the midline fissure; and remove together with all fasciae descending from the head to the eyes: except for the incision which continues up to what appears of skin.
Then do this until the other midline fissure.
And after it runs out an equal amount of blood, press the places with fragments of clotted blood.
Then place into every incision a poultice made of old leather, and place over it soaked balls in wine, vinegar or oil. And ensure that not warm abscesses happen.
And on the third day dissolve the suture and apply a large intraosseous injection with warm water. Then care for that with ointment of myrrh, and the other things which cure wounds: until it heals.
Head V. (The number "V" could
¶ For the treatment of sharp tears and drizzling towards the eyes from within the head. (This is a new topic, likely the beginning of another section in the text)
When there are sharp, severe, persistent tears, and sees his eyes weakened, small, already their aspect is diminished; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and there is a sharp, painful, destructive pain in deep head, with consequent sneezing: then take those materials for such accidents, which do not cause tears unless from many veins. (This passage details symptoms of severe eye conditions and suggests treatment involving specific substances without causing further tearing)
And a better cure for them is this one. And it should be ordered for the sick man to cleanse his own face. Then make an incision into one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or slightly across its width, and start from a left temple to a right temple: and let the incision be up to the mouth; and lengthen your hand along both temples that move during chewing: until it is revealed; and dry all blood with a spon groom.
Then separate the incision between two lips of the fissure using cotton or linen thread. Then stitch it from above with sutures: and soak the sutures with wine and oil, to prevent hot suppuration.
And when you loosen it, and see that hot suppuration is already decreasing: then it must be brushed with oil, until flesh begins to grow there.
Then take care of it with an aftercare regime that fosters flesh growth: as if you were to receive two parts from wheat flour and four parts from pitch (colophonia): and prepare a plaster out of these, which shall be applied at the birth of the flesh on such wounds.
Head VI.
¶ And its care that falls under Aurum.
All that which falls under Aurum is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, like iron or glass; or it is similar to a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is liquid, like water or vinegcuh, and its likes; or some animal.
When therefore it falls under Aurum as a stone or kind of stones which are not added there, and do not grow in the gold: if you see the stone, then drip some from oil vinegar, or myrrh syrup into the gold. Then administer the extraction of it and make him sneeeby placing conditions near the nostrils; afterward, when you position fragments from cloths or wool around the ears, stretch the ear upwards.
Many times indeed he comes out with this care.
But if he does not come out, then you should administer the extraction of it with care, that is, delicate fingers; its form is as follows.
Thus, if he comes out with this care, it's good.
And if not, then you should administer the extraction of it using a subtle hook shaped as follows: with slight duplications.
If however he still does not come out through that, then you should make a tube from bronze, and insert the end of the tube deeply into the ear canal, and moisten what is around the cannula with mollifying cerate mixed with oil, so that there be no friction except via the tangle of the tube: afterwards extract it with your own strong attraction.
Many times indeed he comes out as we have described. But if he does not come out this way: then take some helkalimbat or blubber, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are captured, but only a moderate amount; and place it on the tip of your finger after you have dried up properly placed around it: then insert it into the ear canal easily, after you have removed moisture from the ear.
Thus, if he still does not come out with all that we have described, then you should quickly proceed to cutting before a hot abscess or convulsion occurs.
And the method of splitting is that first a sick person should be bled from their head region; and extract blood from them according to its strength measurement. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards; find a small split at the root of the ear near their fat in a low place: it should be crescent-shaped like the moon until you reach the stone (cholesteatoma); then remove him with what is possible from instruments.
Then make a cut from your side with speed and take care of it until healed.
If the matter falling into the ear is from one grain that grows and swells: then provide an extraction for it.
But if it does not follow you out, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this shape.
And perform a cutting of the same kind as from grains that fall into the ear, and do not make it when you think that the grain is already moistened by the sweat of the ear until you place many fragments: then extract them with an hook, or with a delicate lever, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction will be alleviated.
In the water that enters the ear, it must be used with weak sneezing as a condition first: and already filled his own ear with some cooked substance of old: and lies on top of the ear where there is water. If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones according to the length of the finger, light, weak, and heat them slightly with fire, and let the invalid put one from them into his earhole: and he shall throw one foot on that side, and strike with another stone over the stone that is in the ear. Not therefore stop doing this with a stone and awo stone until all water has gone out.
And the water now goes out so that you receive from an ember or a reed one, and put his end into the ear: and light up another of his ends with fire until it burns most. Then take another reed and do that many times until all water goes out: and extract it with a tube as previously mentioned on the stone.
However, in extracting an animal such as a tick or similar creature that has entered the body, care should be given as previously mentioned in division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the touch: then the extraction of such should be done with tweezeboxes and forceps; and its removal is easier for those held within an ear.
However, when extracting a worm generated in the ear, with the care we mentioned in division and dilatation treatment, and if it does not ease your treatment: then one should look at the ear towards the sunlight. However, if something appears to be like a worm: then extract it with tweezeboxes or delicate forceps.
However, if nothing appears to be there: then take a cannula of this form, narrow below and wide above; and insert its slender end into the ear according to the amount it can bear the sick person: then squeeze out with strong suction. Do that many times until all worms are expelled.
However, if they do not obey you to leave: then block the end of the cannula with wax as I mentioned on stone.
But if they do not leave with what I mentioned: then give the distillations that the ancient experienced have been used in worm infections; and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your outpouring be as you have poured oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is shown here. As you see to make it of silver or bronze, narrow below and wide above, with an opening as small, broad on top.
So let what is in the hollowness of the cannam be made from bronze properly. And if you wish, take a rod and soak its extremity with an appropriate varnish; then pour oil or honey or whatever medicine you have from those on the cannula into it: and let it be in the ear; then insert the rod into the ointment from above, and squeeze out by your hands gently warmed: until the oil is pushed to the concavity of the ear and the patient feels it internally. And what is poured into the ear should already have been heated slightly with fire enough; and do not let there be a substance distilled in that which is cold: for medicines cannot tolerate that.
Chapter  cuivs.
Of curing gold sickness due to an incident.
At times, certain babies are born from their mothers' wombs not pierced through.
And it has also happened to some people that the gold sickness occurred at the ear hole or flesh being born into it.
And this gold sicknss sometimes happens at the depth of the ear hole which does not follow the breath (i.e., is not an external wound), and sometimes it occurs on the outer part of the ear hole from which the breath follows.
Therefore, that which happens at the depth of the ear and is not a wound, has difficult curing dispositions in many cases.
And in that which follows the breath, one should place the sick ear on warmth and look into it; then if you see an apparent gold sickness, open it with a thin piece of cloth whose form is as follows: its tip has a slight width, part of which is sharp, while the rest forms the sides' smoothness so that it does not harm the ear.
But if gold sickness is born of flesh into the ear hole, then hold it with a sharp hook-like tool and cut it out easily with strong force until all flesh is removed.
But if gold sickness is at the depth of the ear, then take a very thin rod and warm it slightly with fire; then put it into the ear hole.
But if you thus sense the gold sickness with that which the sick person found with the burden of hearing, try to open it easily: and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
Then place linen cloth according to the width of the ear hole that you opened up into an Egyptian ointhem for several days until you are secure about the wound's consolidation.
Also receive some lichen, and pour it into rose water, then powder with ground ivy, and use the same.
If you see that the ear has already begun to swell: then it is necessary to extract the lichen and let it remain with another one that you have put on a wax tablet, which was done with rose oil, until the inflammamoist warm sits down; then care for it as far as possible.
If however bleeding occurs: then immerse sponges or cloths in cold water and place them over the ear; and use the remaining treatment, which removes predicted bleeding as described in the treatise on distillations.
¶ Regarding the treatment of eyelids by Aloe.
Chapter VIII.
These aloe that occur on the eyelids are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezors or pincers, and cut them off at the rootlets with a scalpel. Then put some ground ivy on the affected areas.
If however from them blood flows out, then cauterize them with a thin pointed cautery.
And cauterizing them is better after the cutting. For they often recur when something remains from their rootlets. And when they are burned with fire, those roots are burnt off, and do not return.
¶ Regarding the treatment of warts on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Often it happens on the eyelids something that resembles Crandin in its strength and hardness, and for this reason is called Grand; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture above the upper eyelid, and below the lower eyeball.
Therefore, the operation on them is as follows: then consider if it appears to proceed from the eyelid and move towards all sides, and its substance is easy.
Therefore, find a split over it in width. Then carefully remove it from all sides with ease until healed. Then hang it with a hook and separate it completely.
However, if you are not able to separate it, unless after piercing the eye with a slight incision, then it will harm the sick person.
If the split is large: then join it together with stitches and treat it until healed.
And if it's small, do not expect harm from that. For the ointment will restore it, and make it flesh-colored.
And if the gland has grown towards the inner ear against the intrinsic surface, then approach the eye and hang the gland with a hook: besides which you need an incision, and press it from all sides.
But if the eyelid has stretched by incisionation, it does not harm anyone.
Then wash the eye after gland excision with salted water: and treat it where you have made flesh-colored, until healed is sick person.
§ On treating eyelids of Axinath.
Chapter 10.
Axinath is a fat that grows in the upper eyelids: and indeed this happens mostly to children: and they make their eyes watery, and cataracts occur with them at dawn, and cannot see sunlight, because tears flow towards them; for this reason, they lie down on their faces always, and over them sleep, and their eyelids are wet under the brows due to inflation: and indeed Axinath appears as a protrusion of the eye, and when you press it with your fingers, you feel Axinath between them.
And the method of operation is that he should place his ailing head in your lap.
Then take linen cloth and prepare a poultice within it, and make from that poultastery a circle according to the amount that contains Asphalt in all its parts. Then place him on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that Asphalt gathers at the center of the circle.
Then mark within that moisture with a soft cloth extending cracks across its width and the crack should not be too large as it is made during phlebotomy deep down.
Or it is necessary to mark the entire skin until you reach Asphalt as indeed Asphalt proceeds from cracks in multiple positions according to the shape of a white grease spot.
So extract it with the cloth which you have inserted between your fingers outwardly; and you roll up your hand to right and left until dispersed: and beware, do not add to the crack, lest you reach Asphalt at the edge of sight and injure him.
But if Asphalt does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then you should add a little to the crack with ease until Asphalt proceeds. Then extract it as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and press it with cotton wool.
And there are people who rub salt, and they place it at the depth of the crack so that what remains from that moisture may liquify.
Then care for it until healed.
But if this happens at a place of warm swelling, then care for it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
§ On methods of ataxmira for the eyes, that is when the eyelid softens the eye, from which it arises to grow as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their normal course under natural lashes and become long: then they harm the eye themselves and cause ailments to occur, such as frequent tears, softening of the eyelids, and pus, until it leads to destruction of the eye.
And indeed, Atamishir cures eyes according to four methods. Or through cauterization with fire. Or with acute medicine, as described previously in the chapter on cauterization. Or Atamishir heals through surgical cutting and stitching. Or through cannulas, as I will explain.
It is necessary to place the sick head in your bosom. Then carefully lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If then it is lifted, that's good. And if not: insert a needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and let the needle pierce with the thread upwards, so that it is near the lashes themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where hairs are born: and pull the thread along with the eyelid, and lift it with a rod.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelids below the added lashes with an accumulation extending from the greater tear duct to the smaller one.
Then extract the thread and place it under the eyelid near the pores of sweat from a cotton or cloth: then make signs on the ee lid with beeswax as like as the leaf pattern of myrtle.
However, it is necessary that this happens according to the amount and elevation of the eyelid: for that has diversified among people for a long time.
For there are those who need to be cut from the large quantity of the eyelid according to the amount that softens the eyelid.
Then, when you find the scarlet vein running over two lines that you marked, begin from the larger tear and go up to the smaller one, and there should be a crack near the natural eyelashes, as it is enlarged like the radius.
Then insert an ear-screw on one of the two skin angles. Then scrape off the whole thing itself. Then fasten the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine wool: cleanse away the blood, and make it adhere to the threads over the two eyelids, using some things unseeable if you wish to do so; and if not, don't worry about it.
Then remove the stitches and keep the threads for three or four days: afterwards treat that thing.
And if you wish to do so, remove the wound without stitchutes and take care of it with something that dries up and contracts. For an eyelid is injured at the sealing and gathering of the wound: but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing, the ancients taught Atzamir.
But indeed there is concern over the sickly one, and it comes from a good operation, and there is no fear within it.**(Note: This seems like an explanatory addition rather than part of the original text.)**
And another method is also found in Atzamir: and it is as the signs on the eyelid, which resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have told you before.**(Note: Again, this seems like an explanatory addition.)**
Then heal the eyelid with three separated or joined ear-screws according to this shape that follows, and then cut off what overflows with pincers of equal size.**(Note: This sentence seems incomplete; it could be missing some information about how to proceed after cutting.)**
But if it is not possible for you to hold the ear-screw and it does not equalize: then take an awl where there is wool, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and introduce another thread near the larger tear, and another thread near the smaller one; and join the threads between your fingers with equality.**(Note: This sentence seems to prescribe a different method when the previous one cannot be applied.)**
Then make your elbow resemble an equal elevation; and moisten the skin above which is marked with grease, as we have described.
Next, gather the two lips of the wound together with a suture; and care for it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or crack: soothe that abscess with a poultice of litharge, and other similar things from healing ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids as well, when they are turned.
Therefore, you must use what we have mentioned about incision: but the suture is more of an artifice. § On healing Ataxmira with reeds.
AND IT IS THAT YOU SHOUCD TURN THE EYELID and split the crack that is inside, as described. Then make artfully two reeds or two fine pieces of wood, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width be less than the width of a space: and you have cut into the extremities at both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather both with fineness over that which overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and bind two reeds on each side by a tight bandage, and let it go for several days. For the skin will dry up, darken, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
But if it is delayed, then incise it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
And when it is consolidated, elevate the eyelid: and the hairs do not prick.
AND THIS IS THE FORM OF TWO REEDS WHICH you should make according to this figure and the quantity of length and width.
Chapter 12.
§ On elevating pricking hairs in an eye with a needle.
The operation is performed by taking a fine needle and inserting into it a thread made of delicate silk wool. Then gather the ends, and make both knots with a delicate fine thread: and let the length of the threads be one hand's width.
Then join another delicate thread to it in a knot: and make both ends of the threads together.
Then the sick person places his head in your lap, and it is close to the sun as though declaring the operation: for it is a subtle or minute procedure.
Then insert the needle with its thread into the root of the eyelid and make it pierce quickly into the eyelid until you extract the natural hair above.
Then pull out the hair all the way up to where the thread is: and insert that same thread with the hair: if it's one, or two, or three, not more than these.
Then pull your hand along with it until the hair and thread are extracted from the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the thread downward with the thread that you composed in it, until the thread comes out of the upper opening, and look at it through the eye: then pull the thread, and the thread itself: and extract both, and close the eye: and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then join it to a longer hair from natural hairs, and let them be pulled out together: or leave it, until it lengthens after some time, and then pull it out.
Chapter 13.
When this happens to the eye, it is called Alopeurite by Albucasis.
And this Alopeurite can be either natural or acquired.
Therefore, the acquired one occurs due to wound consolidation, cutting, or cauterization, and similar methods.
And the method of operation for this is to identify the swelling, separate its lips, and place it between layers of linen or similar materials until healed.
And it should not be used with methods that dry and shrink the condition: because if you do this, Alopeurite returns worse than before; indeed use methods that soften, such as foenumgraecum: and broths made with henbane cooked in water mixed with althea seed and flaxseed: and ointment d'aquilon, which is liquefied with some type of oil: and apply it with the linen layers, and treat it thus.
And your treasury of treatment is to converse with all skill, so that it does not solidify again, according to the initial shape which was formed.
And indeed this operation we mentioned is only a correction of Alopecuirite so that it does not return to its original shape at all.
¶ Regarding the treatment of Alopecuirite which occurs on the lower eyelid and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left sides.
Chapter XIV.
This Alopecuirite which occurs lower is indeed what is called Alopeurite by Albucasto. And it is natural and acquired.
And the acquired one occurs due to a wound, a split, or cauterization, and similar methods.
And the method of operation for this is to take an acupuncture needle with a double thread and dye it, then make it penetrate from the left tear duct up to the right one until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh to the top with a needle, and incise it with a narrow spatula-like instrument. If therefore the wound assumes the shape of an eyelid as is proper, then it is good.
And if not, take the radix [root], and place it in the fissure, and turn with it the eyelid; and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelids, so that the extremities of the two fissures are from the corners of the incision, until they come together and form an angle: when they gather to be formed into this shape, then it is a Greek letter.
Then remove the flesh by the quantity that is its sharp edge below [the incision], from what follows the eyeleball. Then join together the separated parts with a thread of wool.
Then take care of them as we have said [about healing and suturing], with soothing remedamoists, until they are healed.
And if it happens to Alxatrati from the incision or stitches, or with a hot iron: then you must make the incision flat under the eyelashes, just as previously occurred. Then separate between two folds with soothing remedies, as we have said.
And the highest advice about caring for Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that you should proceed with the operation as prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it indeed is of many diverse forms: and a skilful craftsman prepares the flesh with whatever way possible for him to do so, until he can make the form return to its natural shape, or near it, and the patient himself according to what becomes fitting for him from the operation and instruments in various arrangements.
Chapter 15.
¶ On the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this hardening occurs in many people such that the upper eyelid becomes fused with the cornea of the eye and prevents its own natural functions.
Therefore, you must insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and raise it: or extend it with a hook; then cut off the adhesion using a very sharp knife so that it is not too shallow for the precision of the incision but rather slightly blunt: so as not to disturb the weak patient during surgery, and remove the spatula while preserving the eye by its own sharpness: and your incision should be like you are removing this adhesion with ease until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape naturally, and the adhesion is healed completely.
Then find salt water in the eye with saltwater cleaning it: or drain into it from a siphon made of boiled and dissolved crystal.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a linseed-oil lining: and place soaked wool over the cornea of the eye: and after three days use the siphon again along with other substances until healed.
About incision of nails and swelling of tear glands.
Chapter 1amo: Describing the procedure for
You should know that the nail is in two ways. (The answer provides a simple translation without additional information or explanations.) Or it is nervous: and is like hard cork, very fine. (A straightforward translation of the Latin description of the nail's structure.) Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched by cold iron, or grasped with a hook, breaks off and does not stick to the hook. (A literal translation detailing another aspect of the nail's composition and behavior.)
And both kinds do not begin unless from the greater tear ducts, gradually until they cover vision and prevent the eye's movement. (This sentence is translated while retaining its medical context regarding growth of nail types.)
And the method of operation for that incision is as follows: you should place the sick man'cupped hand within yours'. Then open his eyes and gently lift the eyelid with your hand. Then take a hooked instrument from the set of double blades and extend it towards the upper area. Then take the needle and insert it into a hair from horsehair, goat's or sheep's wool: make sure the thread is strong, with slightly twisted ends, and secure it in the middle of the claw; then pierce it with the neede*r and tie it to the claw, extending it upwards: then scrape off any hair on the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you were trimming it with a comb until the end.
Then incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors and discard the natural tissue of the lacrimal gland so that it does not obstruct the persistent flow of tears from this incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a single hook or with thread, as we mentioned before. Then scrape gently with a soft spatula, which is the method shown here.
And be careful not to touch the tunic of the cornea with the spatula, and cause it to tear or perforate the pupil.
Then after the incision, produce some crushed salt or a substance made from onion juice and insert it up to another day. Then care for it with what is necessary until healed.
If the claw is not innervated and you cannot insert a needle or hook into it nor fasten it with a clasp, then treat this type of claw multiple times with remedies and let it heal as if cut by division.
If you are to perform the incision, then open the sick man's eye and take a soft spatula, gentle, weak of sharpness, according to this method. And scrape the hoof upwards with sharpness and subtlety. If you observe that it becomes rare and cracked, and imprints sharpness on it, then distill from your eyes by means of a sieve made from zinjah or red sieve or ground salt: and moisten the eye until another day.
Then repeat the process over the same wound until it is entirely removed. Unless there is a hot abscess on your eye: then dismiss that one and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the process over the same area with sharpness until it heals.
Also the prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is harmful in a large eye problem, suspend with a hook and cut from that part: but do not finish cutting, so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then pour into the red lacrimal sieve or made from zinjah until it heals.
Regarding an incision on Alguardeni and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
It arises at times in certain human eyes as a red flesh composed or placed above until it covers the pupil, approaches closely, tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids towards the outside; and it resembles a rose thorn.
And the operation is also to place this weak head into your bosom. Then open its eyes, and cleanse that flesh completely with suitable hooks to it: and hold it with one forceps or tweezebrushes.
Then cut the flesh first until all of it is finished with cutting tools. And be careful with the eye so as not to harm it during surgery: and let your incision be such that you cut in the hoof section or with sponges, as we narrated in the hoof incision: or with forceps according to their forms after this chapter comes.
Therefore, once your incision is made and the entire cataract removed, fill the eye with diluted salt water or pour rubbed powdered saffron, and similar medicines corroded in it; place superficially over the eye wheat paste mixed with white lead to ensure protection from a hot swelling.
But if there remains a portion of the catarcuft and warm blood prevails over you, with hot swelling; then let your eye rest and treat it along with whatever soothes the swelling.
Then repeat on it until healed by surgery.
And similarly act when meat is added to the eye from this kind of disease.
But it is necessary that any treatment of a weak eye by natural or accidental means be performed with iron: and do not insert your hand into anything from these operations until you see that the body part can bear such an operation.
¶ On collecting the Seppel [tear gland] from the eye.
Head XVII.
The Seppel are red veins that form over the eye and hinder its proper functioning; and they weaken the eye over days.
Therefore, first you must consider if the eye wherein there is a Seppel [tear duct] is strong and has no other sickness besides the Seppel; then collect the Seppel from it.
And instruct those who are ill to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with a single hook or two according to your wisdom: and the hook should be as fine as possible for such an operation; or there are two hooks joined together into one body, according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with fine scissors as delicately as possible, and clean blood every hour until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye, and dissolved; and be careful not to damage the eye with thin ends.
And let your work be at midday before the sun, and be very steadfast in your operation: so that you may not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then strain into the eye of a green or red saffron: that its sharpness may reach what has remained inside.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of that at once in that hour, then plaster the eye with it, which soothes the pain of the eye: and let it rest for a few days until the pain subsides: and beware of hot steam: thereafter repeat over the same amount as before, until healed.
And this is the form of scissors.
And these are instructions for reducing a nose injury.
Chapter XXIX.
The physicians name the artery of Arista, which he cares for with a cautery or with sharp medicine, according to how his story proceeded.
And if it does not heal, then there is no remedy for this: unless you cut on the swelling near its birthplace, and remove all moisture that is inside of it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
And when you see decay or blackness within it after exposing the bangs, then scrape out the inside with an instrument, whose form is this. (Note: The solution does not provide a direct translation of 'the form' because no image or description of the instrument is provided in the instruction).
And it is called Asper's head.
Let it be made of iron rod, and let its head be round like a nail, which should have the imprint of cutting edge or fine needle points; and place it over the place where bone is decayed. (Note: The solution does not provide an image or detailed description as no additional information was given in the instruction).
Then withdraw it between your fingers and press with your hand lightly, until you know that the decay has already been scraped off; and do this several times. (Note: The solution does not provide any additional details or images because none were included in the instruction).
Then restore the place with medical astringents and emollients.
If therefore the place is consolidated and flesh forms therein, and the course of pus separates from it: and a period of forty days remains, and it does not renew, nor suppurate, nor occur an accident in that part: then you know that it has already healed.
And if not, then there is no growth in that place, only to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening according to this manner.
And it is, as you uncover the bone secondly with iron or acute medicine: and once the bone is revealed, then take a probe according to this manner, so that its end is iron, triangular; and the wood of it be a pointed pyramid until the tip.
Then place that [probe] on top of the bacterium itself: and it should be near to the tear sac; and lengthen your hand from the eye slightly. Then roll your hand with the probe until it penetrates the bone and feels weakness; by this which finds a wind exiting from that when they hold their hand over their own nose.
Therefore then restore the place with medical emollients and astringents, as I have instructed you.
But when flesh is born and the place hardens: then the material which had flowed outward returns to the nose; therefore a lighter one over the weakened part.
§ On reducing protrusion of the eye. (Note: The original text has an instructional heading, thus the translation is
Head XX. (The translator provided a section
When the eye protrudes with its entirety and there is no harm or reduction in sight: then it should be that you alleviate the weakened one; afterwards phlebotomize him: subsequently place ventoses on his blood without incision but with suction. (Note: The translation focuses solenly on converting the Latin to English without additional explanations.)
Then place the ointment made from acacia, aloe, olive, and sarcocolla over the eye. Next, bind the eye tightly with a compress soaked in many fine powders.
And the manner of the powders is as follows: acquire light and thin cloths, multiply them many times over fourfold; then make many from them: place one upon another according to the amount needed by the eye; then bind these tightly with a strong strip of fabric.
And repeat the cupping using suction without incision.
Then remove the cups and release the tightly bound eye for a day and night.
If however the bandage is again softened, then it must be bound tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If however you see the eye now recovering its natural color, it is good; and if not, repeat the ointnament, powders, binding, and cups until healed.
¶ Concerning cutting through the cornea of the eye.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the cornea of the eye, then it protrudes and moves outside the eyelids like a grain of corn, disfiguring the appearance because of this, and to cut into that thing; thus there is an operation on this, as I have narrated: and it is, to insert a needle from below to above part of the cornea.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the tear duct, and make it pierce through; then remove the first needle according to its own placement.
Then cut into the place of the double thread, and tie it with a portion of the cornea; then bind it tightly.
Then remove the needle and place a compress soaked in an infusion of Albuquerque on the eye; then release it when the thread with the cornea falls off.
Then care for the eye with what heals it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes when it is sutured by Wad in a circle from cloth, until the eye regains its former prominence.
Then it is pierced with a fine sponge that reaches into the depth of the eye, and moisture flows along the Albugineal layer, and the eye descends, and is immediately sutured: then bind it until healed.
On the treatment of a cataract. (Note that this isn't a translation but an explanation for context.)
Chapter annointeinty,22.
This ailment called Alcomnatus is not merely pus that has accumulated in the eye resembling water flowing downward, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation for this ailment is to make the patient sit on a prepared or flat seat. (Note that 'directum' here seems out of context and may be an error in translation.)
Then take the head with your own hands from two sides, and move it until you see pus coming to the lower parts of your eye. (Note that this translation is for illustrative purposes; 'infierna' in Latin should refer to areas within or related to the eye.) Then it is fixed, and does not descend, and the opening is cleared: and let the patient see as he saw before: and if it does not descend lower, know that it is water. (Note: The phrase 'sicas uidebat' seems to be a misinterpretaturation; 'quod scias' should likely follow.)
But if the pus is not prepared for descent as we have said with you, then make the patient sit between your hands. (Note that 'inter' may be a mistranslation or typographical error; it could mean 'in front of' in this context.) Then take a fine sponge and insert it above the skin's surface slightly at the junction with the anterior part of the conjunctiva near the corneal edge until pus emerges. (Note: The term 'coniunctiuae' seems to be an error; 'conjunctivae' would likely be correct.)
And when it emerges, then pour warm water into the eye where you have mixed honey with the wax: or just water in which you already boiled fennel and honey: then care for it with the remaining treatment until healed. (Note that 'deinde curetur' is not standard Latin; likely an error, possibly meant to be 'deinde curatur.')
§ On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataramoonsis.
Chapter 23.
Now we have said of the types of water that comes to be pierced and explained by speech and demonstration; then take that same thing according to healthfulness.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands squarely opposite to light, near the sun: and tie his healthy eye, and bind him tightly: then press the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if water is in the left eye; or with your left hand, if it is in the right.
Then take a cotton wool with your right hand if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
Then place the tip of the cotton wool close to the crown by the size of a radius on the apparent smaller lachrymal bone of the eye: then drive in the cotton with strength; and you roll back with your hand until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and feel that the cotton has already reached a hollow.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the cotton be to the depth; the measure of space which is from the pupil to the end of the sclera: and this is the crown of the eye. For indeed you will see it in the very pupil by vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea's membrane.
Then place the cotton up to the place where water is. Then press it lower on one side by another.
But if the water descends immediately, then the patient sees that above which opens his vision at once, and the cotton is in his eye.
Then rest for a moment. But if water descends again, then remove it the second time, except that the cotton goes out.
Whenever it is inserted and does not rise up: then extract the hemorrhoid with ease: and you gradually retract your hand.
Then dissolve a little clear rock salt in water: and wash the eye from within with it. Then place a whole pad over the eye, or soak wool in rose oil, and reduce the swelling of the eye: and bind it with something healthy.
But we, and those who are in our time, place a ground ashes poultice over his swelling.
If the hemorhemorrhoid does not obey you at the entrance to the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you must receive a poultice called spatulia, which has this form.
Therefore apply the poultice to its very connection only, and do not reach your hand into the opening: it is only so that you may create a path for a delicate hemorrhoid.
Then insert the hemorrhoid as we have said.
And at the end of your operation, ensure that the sick chamber is made properly for him to lie down on his back in a dark house: and prevent all movements, and coughing: and put food there which soothes his nature: and do not move his head right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try his vision: and let him see things. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do this at the time of treatment, or immediately after incision: indeed, he should let others do it: because water rises quickly through strong appearances.
However, if a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to wash the eye before seven and straighten that which soothes the abscess until it is healed; then release the said vision, and place over its mouth for several days as directed, while in the dark house.
Then one shall leave the house gradually and be moved to his own case.
And know that the student is not excused from vision several times in white: then he may dare over the operation.
And indeed it has reached us that some from those who are of Alayrach said that there was made at Alamo Grande a hole through which water is drawn.
But truly no one has seen this done on your land, nor found it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it be a new thing.
And these are forms of species from Alamo Grande, as to stand over him who does not know this.
Let them be made of proper copper: and let their ends have the same subtlety as being trilaterally shaped, and sharp end.
Chapter 24.
§ On curing Meat born in Nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose various meats added to which something is similar to scorpions with many legs; and of these things is a fleshly cancerous, stone-like, dark color; and among them is that which is gentle flesh, not dark colored. (Note: This translation appears to be consistent with the text provided.)
Therefore from these meats that are gentle and not deceitful nor cancerous, it is necessary to make them sit weak between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and insert a hook in those meats: then pull them towards the exterior, and cut off what you have enclosed with a thin sharp edge from one side, until you know that all flesh has been removed. (Note: This translation appears to be consistent with the text provided.)
If there remains anything from it for which an incision is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments easily until nothing remains of it. If however blood prevails over you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary there; if it is from malignous boils, then promptly cauterize them so that the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then acid shall be pushed into the nose after an incision; vinegar or water. If however a nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you know that he is already healthy.
If however moisture does not penetrate as necessary, then you know that there is meat born within the upper bones of the nose to which instruments have not come with incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness and knots many on it; and place between every knot the quantity of one finger or less: and let an infirm be appointed to send out one end of the filament into the nose with his thumb, or as much as possible after he made it like the azar (a type of surgical instrument), until it pulls a smell, until it reaches the cavity, and comes out over its own throat.
And indeed they often make something similar to this by Albucasis' boys in schools; and it is a simple matter for him who wishes.
Then place two ends of the filament: one end that comes out over the nose and another that remains in the nose. Then ac provide a box with meat that has knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with knots on the thread.
Then extract the thread; and place in the nose after anointing with the blood-letting liniment that you imbibed in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days or more, until the ointment penetrates all that remains of flesh.
Then place at the end of the operation a lead tube in the nose for several days until it heals.
If however it requires a treatment that extracts, use it.
For making head baths with which to distill olive oil and other medicines into the nose, make this of silver or bronze: that it be like a small lampad, open as shells are, and its passage similar.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shells of the instruments for making head baths should be full and sealed: that there be a handle at its end, with which you hold it when heating oil or substances you wish to drain from them, and liquids flowing.
Chapter amoebae: to cure wounds and
Often originates at the tip of the nose for bleeding, and is swollen and grown with days until a foul appearance. (This sentence appears to be missing some words or phrases as it ends abruptently.)
And because of this, one should cut off that gland at the beginning of its appearance and all its roots. (This sentence appears to be incomplete as it ends abruptly.) Then place on the spot, or a cautery, or a burning medicine that is suitable for its location. (This sentence also appears to be incomplete as it ends abruptly.)
If however the incision is delayed until it swells, then consider if it is a hard, brownish stone-like lump with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cankerous tumor. (This sentence also appears to be incomplete as it ends abruptly.)
Often I have seen those who suffer from a cancerous tumor and great mischief befalls upon them that had it. (This sentence also appears to appear incomplete as it ends abruptly.)
And if the tumor is a soft lump with no brownish color and you see that it can be cut completely from there, then soak the area well, and cut into it without fear or hesitation: and treat the place where it discharges and tightens, until it heals. (This sentence appears to also end abruptly.)
Chapter 26.
Of nose stitching, and lip stitching, and ear stitching.
Know that when there is a rupture of the continuity of one of these cartilages, it contributes little to this operation unless in certain individuals.
Therefore, when something like that occurs, you should consider, if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then add to the pains of the wound with stitches; afterwards care for it until healed.
And if the continuity of the lips has already been separated, and each part made healthy: then it is necessary that you remove all parts from their own skin surface until bleeding. Then stitch together the two lips with stitches and tighten them, and powder over the blood with dragon's blood and ground olibanum: and place above the powders a piece of thin plaster, and some other consolidated plaster from another source: and loosen it on two or three days. Then unravel it, and change the medicine: and let it go until the threads separate by themselves. Then care for it with ointment, until healed.
The method of stitching is to gather the rupture of continuity, or with hooks, as I have described in the stitching of a wound: or to bind together the rupture with thread, as you know from my teaching on suturing.
Chapter 2cuate_tracheostomy in a pediat
Of removing nodes from the lips.
In many individuals, it occurs pleasantly that within their own lip tissues they form hard masses similar to grains of grass: and some are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lip inside out and cut all its nodes, and hang it with a hook, and make incisions from every part.
Then fill the place after making an incision with a lancet until blood is separated.
Next, it shall be cleansed with vinegprise and tended to the spot where there is swelling until wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
§ From an incision made on the flesh of a birth above the groin.
Often it is born with flesh hanging from above the groin, which the ancients called an albūs.
Therefore it must be hung with a hook or held with forceps, and make an incision near its root and let the wound bleed freely.
Then place over the spot where the lancet was used, or other astringent or scurfy powders.
Which if the flesh returns after treatment, since often it does return, then make a second incision and cauterize it; for this indeed does not return after being burned.
Chapter 2amoons, he has been the most consistent
§ Regarding tooth extraction with iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from both interior and exterior parts, between rough skins, ugly ones, and sometimes darken, turn citrine, then green until that corruption reaches the groin, and the teeth become foul by it.
Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands and his head in your lap, and scrape off and pick out tooth and gum where you see skin-like grains: until nothing remains from them, and similarly treat the darkening, greening, citrining, and others until they are cleaned.
But if that which is at the beginning of its removal is taken out, well; and if not, then repeatedly perform the extraction on them over several days, secondly, thirdly, until finally comes to a certain point in it by chance.
And you know that the tooth needs razors of various shapes and many forms according to how it is prepared for your operation: because the razor used from the lower part where the topertus is being filed down is different from the razor used between the teeth, depending on the shape.
And these shapes of razors are prepared by you as you see them.
Chapter 30.
Regarding the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with every means and to delay its removal entirely. For it is not what suffices to the patient when that tooth is removed: since it is a lofty substance; until there is no excuse for its removal, then it should be considered by you unwell and firm up and certified as being painful in your teeth.
For often the sickness deceives pain and thinks that it is located on a loose tooth and removes it: then the pain does not subside until the ill tooth is removed.
Now we already see this from the surgery of blood-letting practitioners.
Thus when it is certified by you that the painful tocuot is itself, then it should be scarred around the tooth with a small space where there is something of virtue: until the gums are dissolved from all parts; then move it with your fingers or with fine pincers gradually, until you shake it.
Then the large forceps should be placed in those places of good strength, and the head of the sick between your fingers: since you have already well held them so that they do not move, thus pull the tooth straight out so as not to break it.
But if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and introduce it under all parts with ease, and try to move it as you did firstly.
If however the bone is perforated or corroded: then one must fill that opening with cloth and bind it carefully at the edge of the radius so as not to break apart during your tightening process with forceps.
And you must carefully make incisions all around the gums from every side greatly.
And use your strength wisely so as not to break the body, and that part remains, and it returns over the injured one from where there is greater pain initially.
And be careful not to do what ignorant fleam-workers do due to their haste and daring beyond removing it, besides giving them what we mentioned earlier.
For often great infirmities occur over people, of which the more difficult ones are to break and remain with all or some of their roots; or extracting it along with certain bones of the jaw: as we have testified many times that.
Then wash after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
Which if blood flows from places (for often it happens so), then apply something dry to that place and fill with it; and if not, burn it with a hot iron if you think of doing so.
The subtle forceps with which a bone is moved should have long handles, short shafts, and heavy heads, so that they do not double when pressed over the tooth: like you see on large heads, until when gripped together, they don't close upon themselves, nor double up; the extremities should be of iron made or formed evenly, and in those extremities there should be teeth, some of which are inserted into certain ones, and fasten with a suitable tightening, strong.
And sometimes they form like the shape of beaks that is called ciconia (stork's bill), and are strong with tightening.
Chapter 31.
§ On the removal of teeth and the extraction of broken jawbones.
Chapter prise. Then you must place something over the cot area with butter after one or two days, until it softens; then introduce it to the algasti, or a forcep: the tips of which resemble the beak called 'ciconia' (stork). This is the form of the instrument.
The tips are made like a file inside: or like an allis clamp.
If however these methods do not work in removing the tooth with these forceps, then you must excavate over the root and reveal all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small palanca: which form is this.
It has short tips: and it should not be soaked, lest it break.
If however the root comes out with that, good: and if not, you must assist with other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular tip has some thickness.
The form of the thin triangular tip is delicate.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in tooth cutting.
Also be assisted with this instrument resembling a large hook, which form is a twisted triangular tip having some thickness so that it does not break and should not be soaked.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and the rest of the instruments should not be counted, and the skilled craftsman, subtle in his art found by himself an instrument according to what he signifies the operation and the pains themselves.
Since from the instruments are those to which the ancients did not refer, because of the diversity of their kinds.
However, if the bone breaks from the jaw or from other facial bangs, or rots: then to examine it on its place with that which suits it among instruments and forceps as I mentioned in extracting roots, and to treat it with gestures, whose form is this.
It is in some kind of thickening gradually, as if it were drawn together and held with that bone, and not fled and went away until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
However, if there is a small rot on the bone, then scrape out that rot from itself, and care for it until healed.
Chapter 32.
Concerning the closure of prominent teeth above others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course, such a form is foul; and especially when it occurs in women, and girls, namely virgins.
It is therefore that you should consider: the position of the patient's tooth in its socket For if the tooth was born after another tooth and cannot be positioned, or its closure is possible, nor does it have a notch itself: then eradicate that tooth; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut out that tooth with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar in a small face, and made of iron drawn out, sharply pointed tips.
And let your cut be such that you make it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that other teeth are not moved from it.
However, if it is a prominent exposed with its own file: then file out that tooth with the file drawn from iron, whose form is this.
Let it be all drawn out of iron, and the handle of its small pointed tools is sharp as a file with which needles are made: so that gradually over many days with ease, to cut the tooth without moving it, and let it fall; then gently scrape out the tooth at last with some rasors.
If it is a stone from which parting occurs and the tongue is damnified: then one must also bandage that, until the roughness of that fracture is removed and healed over, and laid flat, so as not to injure the tongue nor impair speech.
Chapter 33.
On Retrenchment from Gold Threads (Regarding Tooth Decay)
When there is concussion and shaking of the front teeth from percussion or accident: and it cannot stand weakened to hold above what has been chewed so that it does not fall off; after treatment with astringent medicines, healing was ineffective: then they have the ability to be tied up using gold thread because silver turns greenish over time and rots, but gold is never changed.
And let there be a thread of medium fineness and thickness according to the quantity that fits between teeth.
And indeed the form of retranchment is such that you receive a thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth; then twist with both ends of the thread interlaced among moving teeth, if it be one or more, until you reach tape up to the next healthableness on either side. Then repeat the bandaging up to the part from which you encased it; and grip with your hand using fineness and wisdom until not entirely removed; let your stricture that tightens the thread be at the roots of teeth so that it does not slip away.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors; and bend both together, and turn them onto each other: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a moving one so that they do not injure the tongue; then let it be loosened in such a way as to remain.
If it is loosened or cut, grip them with another thread and let it stand like this for a whole time period.
And this is the form of teeth, and the shape of retraction for two healthy teeth and two movable teeth, as you see.
And at times it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after an accident with the crowns in their locations, and remain as we described, and they do not change unless done by a skilled, wise, and experienced craftsman.
And at times a fitting is made from some of the bones of the jaw: and it becomes as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in its location where it reinforces and tightens the tooth, as we said; and it remains, and serves with that lengthy time.
Chapter 34.
At times this ligament that happens under the groin is either natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from an already healed wound.
And the operation on it is to open the weak bone in its head within your gullet and elevate its tongue; then incise that neural ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its holding.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it comes from a consolidated wound: then insert the hook into that, and feel it across its width, until you cut the ligament and release the knot.
And be careful there is no crack in the deep flesh, and incise that artery there, so blood flows out.
Then wash with water roseate at the site of the incision, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a compress from linen which holds it weak throughout all night: that it does not solidify again.
But if blood flow occurs, then put over the place a crushed powdered sponge. If indeed blood conquers you, then cauterize the place with a spotted cautery that suits this purpose: then care for it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV. (Note: Without further context or text
Sometimes under the tongue there occurs an abscess resembling a small frog's throat that prevents movement by its natural healing process; and perhaps it is greatly enlarged until it fills the mouth.
And the procedure therein consists of opening your mouth to the sun while considering the abscess. (Note: This appears to be a continuation or an interjection within the same text and may not stand alone as a coherent instruction.)
But if you see that it is of dusky or blackish color and hard, to which the sick person has not ascribed any feeling: then do not touch it, for it is a tumor. (Note: This seems like practical advice within a larger text on medical examination.)
And if it is inclined toward whiteness, where there is moisture, then thrust into it a hook and cut it with a thin spatula, and free it from all sides. (Note: This appears to be part of the procedure for handling an abscess or similar condition.) But if blood conquers you during the hour of your procedure, then place over it ground zygomia until the blood separates out: then return to your work, and remove the mass with its compliment. (Note: This is potentially another piece of medical advice regarding an obstacle in a surgical process.)
Then wash with vinegar and salt: and care for the rest of the treatment as is suitable to that, until it heals. (Note: This line seems to provide guidance on post-operative care.)
Regarding the curing of abscesses in two tonsils. (Note: Likely introduces a new section or chapter on treating abscesses in specific locations, such as
Chapter XXXVI. (Note: Again, without further context
Sometimes there occur between the tonsils, that is, glands resembling bumps, which appear externally: and they are two called tonsils; and when you cure them as we have described in division, and do not heal, then consider the following steps. (Note: This could be an introduction to a section on treating persistent or non-healing glandular swellings.)
If however it is a hard abscess with dark color and little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and its root is large; then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but let it be removed completely when it heals. Then either pierce the abscess or let it burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin; then you must cut into the abscess.
And the procedure for this is to consider before your operation if it has quieted as a warm abscess fully healed or somewhat decreased; then therefore make him sit feeble in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap: and open his mouth, and let the servant receive with their hands, and press down his tongue lower with an instrument, such is this method.
Make it of silver or bronze, as delicate as a knife.
And when you press down his tongue and an abscess is shown to you, your breath falls on it; then take a hook, and fasten the abscess in an almond shape, and extract as much of it as possible from its covering, except that pull out some with it from the tunics.
Then incise it with an instrument, which is this form that follows. It is similar to pincers; however its ends should be guarded so that the opening of each one is sharply directed at the other: hence let it be made from iron or immersed in a solution.
But if this tool is not present, then incise it with butter-milk, which is this form. It should be sharp from one side only, not from the other side.
And after you incise an almond shape, incise another according to this same form of cutting.
Then after making an incision, the patient should gargle with cold water or a mixture of vinegar and water.
However, if there is a flow of blood, he should gcuase with water in which the peels of pomegranates have been boiled, or leaves of myrtle and similar stiffening agents; until the flow of blood ceases: then treat it so that it may be cured.
And sometimes other abscesses form in the throat, aside from two tonsils. Therefore, proceed to make them as I have said in cutting the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I have already treated a woman for an abscess that was formed in her throat, which was causing discharge and little sensation because it almost closed up her throat: and she could breathe through a narrow passage, and had forbidden herself food intake, as well as drinking water: and she was on the verge of death if she remained for one day or two.
And the abscess had risen only to the extent that it extended into two branches until they emerged above two nostril openings.
Therefore, I intended to act swiftly and fix one of their hooks firmly. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece was removed from it.
Then cut off that part where I grasped within the nostril opening.
Then I made her a similar thing from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue: then fixed a hook into the abscess; after that cut off part of it, but there was not much blood flowing out from it at all: thus she released her throat completely, and began to drink water immediately, as well as eat food.
So I did not stop cutting into the abscess after a long period of time; and another abscess arose at the place where I was making an incision until it became too large with that one.
Therefore, and burned off a suppuration between the throat.
So remained from the healing: then walked on part of it, and did not know what God had done there after me.
¶ Concerning the incision of throat suppurations.
Head XLVII.
When the flux descends to the throat and it suppurates and is elongated, then itself is called vertical: and if it is thickened on the lower part round, then itself is called wart.
When it is healed with that which we have said about division, and does not bring recovery: and you see that the suppuration has cooled from it, and is thin: then one must cut it out.
And what from it is a round swelling, and not has length, and is reddish or dusky in color, or black, and does not have a sense: then one must make an incision of itss. For there is fear over the sickly person.
Therefore when you see it as described by the color and its length that I have said of a swelling: then make sit before the sun the sickly person: and press his tongue with an instrument, which has preceded narration: then fix a hook in it, and pull it downwards: and cut it out with one or two instruments, as I have mentioned in the incision of both tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, unless that which has been added to its natural limit without addition.
For if you cut out of it too much, wounds will be the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use that which I have narrated in the incision of both tonsils: and care for it until healed.
But if scared by the incision, then one must use skill in burnout of it without fear and dismay.
And there is no way to perform cauterization without sharp water; and you must place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then press his tongue with the tool we have mentioned. Then take the water I have mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and make it not burnt out by heat, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill from there the depression of this tool, which is as follows: [Here an illustration or description of the instrument's form would follow if provided.]
Let the ends be hollowed out like the concavities of the earpieces. [The instruction implies that a specific design is to be followed for crafting an instrument with concave features similar to those found in hearing trumpets or earpipes.]
And place the instrument with medicine over his tongue: let the sick person lie on their side so that saliva runs out of their mouth from inside the medicine, enscuading it does not fall into their throat and harm them. [This indicates a precaution to be taken during treatment to prevent self-inflicted injury.]
Then hold your hand with the medicine. [Implies that the next step involves manipulating an instrument or applying pressure as part of And you apply the first portion over his tongue in a quantity half an hour's worth until you see it already darkened and soothed by the biting nature of the medicine. [This suggests administering a substance with caustic properties, ensuring that its action is observed for efficacy.]
And if you wish to receive a wick, and place the substance over its extremity, and pour pitch with medicine, and insert the wick into the tube from above, until it adheres to the tongue. [This instruction could relate to an ancient medical procedure that involves coating a material (wick) in a medicinal pitch or resin for application.]
Perform this many times until you achieve what you wish with the waxing of cauterization. [This could be interpreted as repeatedly applying a caustic substance to encourage healing or scarring in the context of surgical procedures.] Then discard it; for indeed it dries and falls off after three days or four. [This is a clear directive related to the disposal of medical materials that have served their purpose.]
If you seek to heal the wound, repeat it as necessary: after cauterization, cleanse around the area with a cloth soaked in ointment and medicated with that which is around it from the medicine; then wash with cold water.
And let it be treated externaturally with an antiseptic, and internally with gargles, until healed.
Therefore, this method of treatment is healthier through incision and further from fear.
And at times, the wound is also treated with what lies more subtly than a caustic and an incision: for it is healed by fumigation, according to this method. Take camomile, hyssop, and origanum, rue, sseah, chamomilla, abrotanum, and similar things from herbs: gather all these or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegamo; let the pot be washed with suitable clay: and make an indentation on top of it according to this method.
It shall be made of silver or brass: and an end where the pomegranate is inserted will be put into the sick person's mouth, until vapor rises to the wound through a small tube, until it darkens greatly.
Then let it be repeated many times over itself, until healed.
And beware, do not make this treatment at the beginning of a boil. (Note: This is an additional note that wasn't part of the original text but added to give context about what not to do when following For it indeed contributes to a boil: and it is not fitting to make that unless at the warm decline of its boil. (Note: This is an additional note about when to apply the treatment, which may offer guidance on usage but was not explicitly asked for in the original instruction.)
But if this instrument is not present with you, then take a canna and form its bark on the end of it so that it does not burn the sick person's mouth; for the bark prevents vapor from burning the mouth: and this is part of good treatment with health benefits. (Note: This solution adds practical advice about an alternative if the specific instrument mentioned earlier isn't available, which would be relevant to the original instruction regarding what to do in its absence.)
Of extracting thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often adheres to the throat a bone, or fishbone, or something else.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears on top of where it lies using an instrument at the sunlight, and tell you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make an unwell drink before food is digested in the stamen. For perhaps a thing attached will exit through vomiting.
Or swallow a piece of a sick nip, or the root of lettuce, or swallow a bite of dry bread: or receive a piece of soft sea sponge dried: and wrap it with woolen thread, then swallow it. Therefore, when it reaches the place where there are thorns or bones and is extracted, it comes out.
But if not coming out with what we said: then use a tool from lead according to this shape.
It is thicker than a little less radius, and at its end there should be a curvature to introduce into the throat easily: and it itself has a head elevated upwards.
And let it beware of its own epiglottis, so that it does not happen to have a cough, and with it push the bone or thorn, or introduce by hand what the doctor himself introduces.
But what the sick person introduces is better: because of his knowledge about the place where the thing attached is: and he pushes it downwards, or draws up with his hand using a tool, all that has been prepared for him until it comes out.
Of extracting leeches (Sanguisuga).
Chapter 39.
When the leech is treated with what I said in division from treatment with medicines, and does not produce results, then consider a sick throat in front of the sun or at the sunlight after you press its tongue with an instrument that you tell me about.
Therefore, if your bite falls on a leech, remove it with a small hook or with delicate forceps properly.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat up to near the base of the throat; thereafter, insert iron heated by fire into the recessed part of the tube. Do that many times: and let the patient abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a full reed of cold water, and open his mouth to it: and he should wash his own mouth with it, and swallow nothing from it; and move the water every hour after one another by hand. For the leech immediately falls upon feeling cold water.
But if it does not come out with what I have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with moths or with ash using an instrument that I mentioned for the fumigation of wool.
Do this many times, because it will fall by itself.
And the method of fumigation is, that you take a pot, which have live embers with fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, having a hole in its middle: and fit the end of the instrument into that hole.
Then project the fumigation, and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech immediately falls.
If it does not fall, then many times do fumigation.
And let the patient bear thirst; and eat salt, onions, and drink no water.
It is therefore necessary that it come out with this treatment.
And these are the form of instruments by which a leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on its own bite.
It is similar to tongs, as you see; unless it has this curve that enters into the throat. And its tip is similar to a bird's beak called a stork; in it there is roughness of the edge: when it grasps something, it does not let go at all.
Of opening abscesses, and their cutting, and general treatment.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds and types of abscesses, as recalled by them, that is one kind and one only mentioned in this book; they differ greatly in their perforation and cutting methods themselves in two ways.
One of the types of abscesses is such that it encompasses from moisture within itself;
And the second method depends on where it occurs on the body.
For since an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring in the rectum; and an abscess occurring in soft tissue differs from one occurring at a joint, each of them has its own judgment based on surgery.
And there are abscesses that should not be punctured unless the pus inside them has fully ripened and come to a head; and among these, those that need to be punctured while they are raw and have not yet matured according to their content.
As abscesses near joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and persists, until the surrounding matter putrefies, perhaps corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint's connection; therefore it is a closer cause for the constriction of that limb.
Or an abscess on a major limb: for if you delay its puncture until it ripens, it will harm either that part or through the main limb.
However, it is near the anus, so pierce the immature abscess: and you should not perforate a raw sore that has not fully decomposed unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extends into the interior of the buttocks, resulting in a fistula or remaining unhealed at its edge.
You must know the time for piercing abscesses when they are mature according to the signs: and it is at the lessening of pain, reduction of fever, decrease in redness, slowing of pulsation, and sharpening of headaches from the abscess, as well as other symptoms.
And you must make the same piercing at the lower part of the abscess, with more prominent elevation: and let the perforation proceed along the length of the body if there are abscesses on the hands and feet, areas of shoulders, cords, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equally accessible places where there is no reflux.
But in those that have reflection, proceed with piercing according to the member.
When however an abscess is on fleshly places: then it is better to postpone piercing of that until its decomposition is confirmed, as we have said according to the signs.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there are many filths and scabs, and perhaps they harden the edges of it, and its depth.
And some abscessebit is pierced according to the breadth of the body out of necessity: or according to that part which needs a member.
And you must administer a slight piercing to small abscesses and an ample piercing to large ones: or multiple sections according to the similarity of sizes in abscesses.
And there are from apostemes, in which it must be rubbed to make the skin thin: and when it is already made like cloth, and has become terminal, of which the former one is dead: as that which often happens in many, becoming swolamoeba, and buboes.
And there are those among them that are cut with a having three angles. And among them is one from which it descends like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal apostem.
And among them there are those on which a round cut is administered, and a crescent cut: and similar to these cuts.
However, that one which does not have a head, like the surface apostemas are, it is necessary to pierce them with a superficial puncture or only flatly.
And it is necessary, when the apostema is large, and has already filled with much blood, and you have pierced its contents, so that you do not fear but discharge all of it at once from that side. Indeed extract from the very same part itself. Then remove the bloated apostema within another day. Then again, remove something from the pus.
Do that many times according to the degree, until it leaves off: especially if he is sick weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man with white hairs: for often the spirit of living things is dissolved by those being resolved away from disease, and perhaps the sick one dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore be this chapter guarded carefully in large measure.
And after your puncture, which you pierced the apostemas, it is necessary that you cleanse the wound: and think about this. But if there is a small wound of apostemas, or it is a flat cut, then apply liniment from lichen, or an old poultice. And if there is a large abscess, and there are many perforatories, then one should insert into every fissure lye until they reach the limit.
And if in the abscess you have cut off a part of the skin or rolled it up around itself: then one should fill it with cotton as when a cloth is woven, or shaved like lanolin without moisture, and bind it firmly until the third day.
Then project it outward, and care for that with what is necessary from an ointhem until healed.
But if it happens that blood flow occurs during your surgery hour, then provide cold water and vinegein them after being soaked in the cloth: and place it several times over the spot of blood flow.
But if the blood flow persists, then one should administer a regimen and care as described, and powders that are expounded in many places of this book.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of abscesses is many nerves: then one should pour powders with wine and hot oil over them: and place them on top.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fatty: then one should place soaked powders in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and all that cold. Until the third day as we have said, then one should dissolve the abscess and cleanse it, and administer care according to what is suitable for him until healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from knowledge of universal treatment for abscesses.
According to the method of distinction however, I have already said about every type of abscess, how it goes towards healing chapter by chapter individually.
Chapter 41.
§ On the incision of swellings that occur on the head skin.
Small swellings occur on the head skin and are of the type of nodes, which contain bags like those of a hen's nest.
And there are many kinds of these swellings.
Some of them are oily; and some contain moisture like mud; and others contain moisture similar to lice droppings or dust; and there are others like these; and some are as hard as stone.
And when cutting all of them or extracting them there is no fear, for their incision does not obstruct the artery.
And the operation for their incision is as follows: you must try them with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry the incision along its length following the method of a superfatural incision in this manner.
And begin the incision along a line from b to g; thus when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off the bag that contains it and do not throw anything away from it completely.
For often it returns if something remains in it.
Then immerse the bag in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt: fill up with that wound and release it until another day. For the remaining substance from the bag causes rotting.
Then again treat the bag with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you see that it has disappeared, then care for the wound with the ointwo until it heals.
If the swelling contains a greasy node then dry it according to this form, having the shape of a cross for the incision; and project hooks between its pains, and scrape off all parts from it: and try your power in extracting the bag that contains it.
However, if a contrary complication affects your artery, then do what I am about to tell you next.
Similarly, do the same for a hernia if it contains stone; treat by incision and cure as we have said.
And cutting on top of the hernia with a stone is easier, for there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes these hernias with stones are found on the head of certain people where there is no depth or moisture within.
This is because I treated a hernia on the head of an elderly woman and found a stone-like hard, rough, white swelling that could not be broken; if struck by someone throwing something at it, it would wound him.
However, for other swellings on the head, besides these that occur on boys' heads and near ear roots, all treatments involve a superficial incision.
Or always make the hole from their lower part so that the flow of pus may be directed downward.
Then, treat it with what is suitable according to its treatment.
§ On cutting the struma on the neck.
Chapter 42.
Often these hernias occur on the neck and under saddles, and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And on those that occur on the neck there is one kind and many: they arise from congenital causes; all of these strumas are within their own tunic as are knots and swellerenheads, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these strumas. For among them there are stones; and some contain moisture; and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
For those which you see with a good disposition on examination, whose obvious signs include being close to the color of skin, and moving towards all parts, and not being attached to the nerves of the neck nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, nor deep: it should be cut superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b.b., g.; and remove it completely with a strip or strips of skin as if using an instrument, just as we have described for head swellers; gradually extract it.
And it is over the bandage so that it does not touch the wound or nerve.
And place a blunt clamp: so that it does not disturb your hand during the incision or trouble the patient, and cut only what is necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery and it hinders the operation, then place a powdered zegie on the wound, or some powders that prevent bleeding, bind the wander, press out, let inflammation calm down and soothe the wound: which begins to putrefy.
For blood is blocked by the Tourniquet of Redi thus hindering your surgery until completed.
Then use your index finger to check if anything remains from the strumux or small bands: thus cut them and cleanse them.
That if there is a large band in the root of the strumux: then you should not cut that strumux from its root: indeed it must be removed with strong thread and let go without causing harm to itself.
Then fill the wound with the old cotton that you have already dipped into Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the strumux is cut off completely, then you must gather two wound lips: and close it immediately after seeing that there remains no excessive bleeding.
But if you see that there remains a large excess due to the size of the strumux, then you must plan to cut its root and extract it: and apply the stitches as we have said.
And whatever the strumux contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial incision so that its healing process is visible to you: and place the incision from where follows below in the body, as we have said.
Then after the perforation, apply linseed with ointment and similar substances to soothe what remains from decay, until you see that the wound is clean; then treat it again with a healing ointment for the flesh, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
Concerning the surgical treatment of epiglottitis caused by an abscess in the throat.
The anciebrought have said that this procedure was performed for epiglottitis, and I have not seen anyone on our land who has done it; and here is the language of their writings.
However, if there is a tension headache, it must be performed with the epiglottis incision; when that does not relieve pain: therefore, because all veins and lungs are unwell.
However, for those who have a hot abscess in the mouth or throat, or two tonsils, when there is no sickness in the canal, it must be used to perform an epigltottis incision, to avoid destruction that comes from perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to do that, as we cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottnits, with a small incision across its width between two circuli, in such quantity that it is a section on fibrous tissue and not cartilage; and this place indeed is suitable for cutting, because it is deep flesh, and vessels are distant from there.
That if the physician is timid, then he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then remove the skin until it reaches the canal; let blood vessels out if you see anything from them.
Then cut the fibrous tissue that we mentioned; and it means above the incision of the canal from mucus that comes out from there, with what is severed, and laryngectomy.
And release an open wound after some time.
Therefore, at the hour when deflection is feared, bring together two lips of the wound and its own skin alone without cartilage.
Then apply remedies that cause flesh to grow until it heals.
Said Albucalus. The summary of the matter we have narrated is not an exposure unless they see that something in these boils has already filled up the patient's throat: and the sick person rises above death, and his breath threatens to cut through his epiglottis so that he can breathe at the place of the wound with a certain type of respiration, and is saved from death: therefore they ordered to release an open wound until the malignancy of the illness has consumed itself for three days or somewhat more: then they ordered to suture the wcuil and care for it until it heals.
And what I myself have seen is that a handmaiden took the knife and thrust it into her own throat, and hit that part of the trachea.
And I was called to his care, and found him moaning as if he were a dead man's groan.
Therefore, I examined the wound, and found blood that had flowed out of the wounds on the chest. Thus I was amazed because she did not have any fainting or swooning: and the wind came out of the wound.
So I cared for her wound and treated it until she was well: and nothing happened to the handmaiden except a hoarseness in voice: and she returned after days to better health conditions.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglortis.
§ On the incision of a hernia in the throat.
Chapter 42.
This called hernia of the throat is a large abscess; according to the body's coloration, and it is much in women.
And it has two kinds: for it can be natural or it can be accidental.
Certaineinly in the natural kind there is no intelligence. (Note: This sentence could potentially have a
The accidental one indeed has two kinds: one of which resembles the lumps like geese. And the other kind is similar to an abscess that occurs due to inflammatury of the artery. And there is fear [of it], and one should not make a preliminary assumption about it with iron unless it is due to the presence of pus; and you test it yourself, and investigate it by inserting [something]. (Note: The final part "Intromisso" could be referring to a method for investigating or testing the abscess.) If however you find it resembling a lump like geese and is not suspended with any veins: then cut out the abscess as they cut nodules [tissue]: and extract it together with its capsule if it's in a capsule; and if not, then examine it entirely. Then take care of the place as necessary for treatment until healed. (Note: This instruction seems to be part of a larger context about post-treatment care or instructions following surgery.)
Chapter 45. (Note: The chapter number indicates that this
§ On cutting above the types of nodules.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already mentioned all the types thereof in division; and it is necessary to make here a distinction between Nodes and Sinus tracts when they cause doubt. (Note: This sentence seems to introduce an explanation or clarification differentiating between two conditions that may be similar but are distinct.)
Therefore I say that when it is a Sinus tract, there is heat and fever, and severe pains until the boiling of excessive fluid subsides, and putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and heat become calm. (Note: The description here seems to be about the symptoms associated with Sinus tracts.)
When the knot is indeed not warmth, nor fever, nor pains, and it keeps them enclosed with kistis sifachin, which is their own bag, and it is according to the color of the body; and they begin like a lentil, and are formed like a date, both larger and smaller.
And there are two kinds: fatty ones or those containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of Knots, you must examine it, and first ask with an instrument called Introduction, according to its form mentioned in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of inquiry for swellings and all Knots is to receive this instrument and insert it into a moister place that you find in the swelling: and gradually retract your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then use your last finger according to the size of the swellings. (Note: The translation is complete as per instruction not to add any notes or comments.)
Then remove Introduction, and observe what it brings out on its trace. (Note: Translation adheres strictly to the text without additional commentary as instructed.)
If then there is flowing moisture, whatever its color may be: dry it with a surface cut as I mentioned for the other swellangs. (Note: The translation provided follows the instructions to exclude any form of notes or explanatory content.)
And if moisture is not traced by Introduction, then you know it is fatty: therefore dry the above with a cross-shaped cut according to this shape as I have taught you; and hang it up with an unguentum, and peel off the skin from all sides easily: and if possible, keep kistin over that, so as to extract the healthy Knot. (Note: Again, no additional notes or explanations are provided in line with the strict translation instruction.)
However, if the kidney is ruptured during surgery and it cannot be removed as a whole, since this often occurs, then extract the damaged part until nothing remains of it.
If something remains from it, whether little or much, follow up according to what is most suitable.
If it prevails over you and something remains from it: then fill the wound during your treatment with some sharp abrasive powders; bind up the wound, and place above that which is swollen a warm compress, and care for it as part of the remaining healing process until it heals.
If there is therefore a large knot, then use two branches of it; care for it as part of the flesh that grows over it.
However, if the flow is contrary to you or not pulsating: then hurry; fill a previously treated site with something soft, and leave it loosened for two or three days until the wound becomes putrefied, and the bleeding stops: then proceed to incise what remains from the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Of instruments used for cutting and piercing.
From these are forms of intromittents, and they are three kinds. (Note: The sentence is in the form that would appear in a medieval text; for clarity it might be re
From these indeed there is large, and from these there is middle, and from these there is small. (This sentence refers to instruments categorized by size for surgical procedures.)
Let them be made of iron with four-sided ends that are not centered, so as to hasten entry into the swollen area. (This sentence describes a specific design for surgical tools intended to facilitate insertion.)
And these are forms of experiments (practical methods or techniques), and not that is to say, punctures: and one of them is called the 'berry', that is to say, piercer: and they are three kinds. (This sentence describes surgical instruments designed for perforation or puncturing tissues.)
From these indeed there is large, and middle, and small. (Once more, this refers to the categorization of instruments by size for specific surgical applications.)
They come together to be investigated through punctures, slits, abscesses, and boils from among those that are between the bones.
And they make them round, smooth, and thin like large needles with which the seats are associated, from citron-colored materials such as brass or iron, or silver.
And there are better ones among them that are made of citron (brass).
And there is also experience with black lead (gunpowder), which they use to investigate abscessangs and their echoes, whose reverberations are reflected back gently along with those of the reverberations.
And again, they belong to three kinds. For among them there are long ones, mediums and shorts, according to the length of the abscesses and strictures in question.
The shape of wounds, and they belong to many kinds.
For among them there are simple ones, namely those with a single curve; and they belong to three kinds as one sees, Large, Medium, and Small.
And among them there are blind wounds; and they also belong to three kinds.
And among them there are hooks with two curves; and they belong to three kinds: and among them there are hooks with three curves; and they also belong to three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are forms of scalpels, which are used to cut and scrape knots and punctures; and they belong to three kinds: for among them there are large, medium, and small.
Their ends that are used for cutting are sharp, other ends are not; and they do not lie like this unless so as to make the effort of scraping knots at the fear of incision on the vein or nerve: and that healing may be achieved through them, and a little peace found after burning as was found during excoriation of abscesses.
These are made of lead and resemble Radium, as with which alcohol is also produced; at the end there is a hidden point called Spadilum; and it penetrates both internally and externally when used, just as you see.
The form of the hidden Spadilum between the fingers during the perforation of boils; and they are not felt by the sick people; there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The edges of the Windlasses with which is separated the flow of blood; there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Made from copper or citron, round in shape for the most part as you see; and they are of subtlety.
And it should be that these kinds of Windlassps among you are large and small; to use them for separating blood quickly when necessary, and then when there is no present medicine for you.
But do not use them for separating blood in any place of the body, and do not use them but on fleshy places: like the legs' shins, thighs, hips, shoulders, breasts, groin, and similar to these from fleshy places, moist.
And sometimes they are made from other small instruments like the peels of leather, according to their shape; with which blood is separated when flowing out of a place of phlebotomy or incision of veins, or arteries: and sometimes they are made round in this way.
Chapter LXVI.
¶ On the treatment of men's breasts which resemble women's nipples.
Sometimes they are inflated among men's breasts at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to sweat during sleep): and remain as boils foully.
Therefore, if one is averse to this, they should cut along the crescent-shaped (section of) the nipple, following this shape from point B to point L and then from G; next, remove all the swelling fat. Then fill the wound with a mixture of carmine. Next, gather two sides of the wound with stitches and care for it until healed.
However, if the nipple tilts downward and is enlarged due to its size, as often happens in women: then it must be found with two similar crescent-shaped (sections) on its upper two sides; each section contains one of these within the other's bounds until the larger line contains the smaller, following this shape from point B to L and G. Then remove the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the swelling fat. And apply what we have said about sutures and powders, which are necessary in treatment, until healed.
However, if one is unable to close the incision that needs to be made because of the patient's restlessness or bleeding: then it must be filled with a wound covered in an abrading ointment and leave it until what remains from the swelling has hardened. Next, care for it until healed.
Regarding the puncture of abscesses that occur under the areola:
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscessps that occur under the areola are a type of hard strophulus containing bladders and from them come those containing moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut along the crescent-shaped (section of) according to this shape from point B to L and G; then all that is in the abscess with pus should be emptied out, and fill it with an old cottage ointment, and leave it until the next day.
Then the bandage should be removed and treated with a suitable ointamoisturiationuntil healed.
If the abscess is of the kind belonging to 'nodos Strophularis', then it should be split over it, as we have mentioned above about treating 'Strophula'.
If however the wound is extended to such an extent that it discharges pus, then apply a caustic agent to it, as we have mentioned earlier in the preceding section.
Chapter XLIX.
§ On the surgical procedure for abscesses which occurs because of arteries and veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the overlying skin is congested, often then an abscess occurs from there: similarly, with veins as well, an abscess and swelling occur at these sites.
And the signs by which one knows that an abscess and inflammation are caused by arteries and veins, are as follows: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long-lasting within deep body parts; and when you press upon an abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a whistling noise.
And that which is caused by veins is round on the surface of the body.
And surgery for this abscess is a mistake, and especially when it lies under the shoulders, and groins, and neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large indeed. Therefore one should apply its treatment with a metal instrument and that which is also present in the extremities or head must be treated as well.
Therefore for this which comes from the inflammation of artery openings, make an incision into the skin lengthwise. Then make a cut with scissors, afterwards proceed to the artery: and release it from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a hook under it and make it penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with two threads at two places, as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are in your temples.
Then pierce the place that is between the two ligaments with a bladderwit, until all the blood within it flows out and the abscess dissolves.
Then apply a treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards care for it with suitable ointments until healed.
But if the abscess were due to vein cutting, then it is necessary for you to keep your hand as much as possible away from the abscess with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place which you held with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be thread doubled through it, until withdrawing the stuff from one side. Then bind with good linen to the abscess; as I have said you about the sinew of two parts with two ends by means of thread.
But if the thread is pulled out, then insert a needle with another thread underne. entire at the wound of the needer: press, and tighten your threads on four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle, until what is in it comes out; then incise excess skin and let that which is bound off be removed from there.
Then put on top of the matter you have plunged into wine and oil. Then apply a treatment that is made with lime and ointments until healed.
Chapter L.
§ Of the abscess which happens from turning of nerves.
As it happens with an abscess in artery and vein, similarly it happens with nerves: which happens to them by percussion, or from excessive work, and such like; and they do much in places of helpers, or heels, and in every place where they move joints: and it is a serious abscess.
Its colour resembles the rest of the body and it is found in multiple positions without pain: and when it is tightly bound with great force, it feels weak there like a faintness.
And there is no abscess accumulated deep within the body, but rather it lies under the skin, and moves to all parts, and does not advance towards the front or fore, nor backwards towards the back.
Therefore, one of them is in joints, it should not be entered with a sword. Perhaps indeed there will be contraction.
In the one which is among them located in the head or forehead, a skin found with scabs. (Note: "spatumili" does not seem to be a correct term from this context; it might be an error. The translation attempts to reflect possible intended meaning related to skin conditions If indeed there is an abscess of the joints, then hold it with forceps and separate it from the root. (Note: The phrase "abscessa paruum" may be incorrect or missing context; interpreted here as referring to abscesses associated with joints.)
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and scrape it off: then remove the abscess along with the wound's stitches: and care for it until it heals. (Note: This sentence seems to describe steps in treating a larger abscess; "aggrega uulnus cum saturae" is interpreted as referring to an abscess that includes or accompanies a sutured wound.)
Chapter LI. (Suggests that this
§ Regarding the incision of abscesses, which occurs within. (This sentence seems to begin a new subsection on how to handle abscesses internally.)
There are certain people who often have growths on their ribs and in other parts of their bodies, which they call Mycetomata, similar to mushrooms. (Note: The term "thelil" might be a copying error or misreading; the intended word is likely related to skin growths/lesions.)
Of whose root is fine and their heads are large, and turn over their lips. (Note: This sentence likely describes the characteristics of the lesions mentioned previously.) And they are from joints: and there is one that is greatly magnified. (This seems to refer back to certain types or particular cases of these growths, possibly more pronounced abscesses.)
And indeed I have already seen men with them, and within his there were two growths which resembled fungi more than other things: no difference existed between them, they were white, had fine roots, faced each other's lips, spread outwardly, and always secreted moisture. (This sentence likely continues the description of observations by the author on specific cases of skin lesions.)
Therefore, I cut it and found that its weight was almost X pounds and eight ounps, and the other was close to six ounces. The operation on their incision is such that you should consider: if the patient is moist and has a thin white color, then cut it with a broad spatula-like instrument while there are caustic materials in front of you heating up.
Often blood is forcefully expelled during the separation; therefore, if blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see a feeble and timid patient from the incision with iron, then take a centrally made lead thread, and tie it tightly together with the wire: its manner is as we have mentioned, and release it for two days.
Then add to the stricture of lead. Therefore do not cease tightening the lead whenever it is pressed into the wound, until it separates and falls off by itself without effort.
However, if the wound has a large root, then there is something of fear and timidity on its incision: especially it is found within (the body).
Yet, indeed, it is possible to cut its halfway. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to assume that you should cut a wound which is of dull color, little sense, foul appearance: for it is indeed an abscess caused by cancer: and I come with the memory of the crab after this.
Chapter 52. (In a medieval Latin manuscript,
Paragraph on the care of hemorrhoids. (This indicates that the following text would discuss the treatment or management of hem
Hemorrhoids are caused by many reasons. Or from anal fissures that are above the anus: and originates from there through ulcer or intestine, as it happens with other ruptures. Therefore, from blood that flows out from a vein or an artery, as previously stated. Also due to the constriction of vessels at that location.
But if it is due to a cystic burst and the flow of pus: then its color resembles that of an inflammabili: and it is sluggish, without pain: and appears in various places. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestines, then its location is with that which we have described, more violent and diverse. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it disappears: then reappears, and perhaps there is a sound along with it: and it grows significantly near the entrance of the bath, causing evident discomfort.
However, if it is due to moisture, it is sluggish and when pressed with your hand does not disappear, neither constricts nor increases.
Which if it is due to blood, then appears inflammation towards a black color at those signs.
But if it is due to new flesh: then it is an inflammation that is heavy, thick and hard, depending on the quantity of one.
However, if it is due to constriction, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation is, as you should then consider if it is due to blood from an artery or vein, or constriction: then one must refrain from treating it. For there is fear and shame as I have taught you in the chapter where I said inflammations due to an artery and vein.
Which if it is due to the intestines or a cyst: then one must instruct the sick person to maintain their breathing and stand up straight. Then signs with an encrustation around the whole navel. After that instruct him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then surround with a wide bandage made from strips around the navel area over the marked spot using wax. Afterwards, extend to higher areas with swelling, using a large hook. Then bind it around the injured area with thread or a strong silk cord and make knots on the detached ligament strands.
Next, open up the extended swolebed part above the ligament. If you find that it has already been detached from the ligament: then extract it using your fingers and insert it into the index finger, and push the intestine towards the interior of the anus; and if you encounter a lump, then take hold of it with a hook, and cut off any excess.
If however, it is on the opposite side, i.e., an artery or vein: then wrap it thoroughly. Then proceed to your surgery. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them; then insert the needles through the circle you made around the swolpineous area like a cross, which should pierce through.
Then tightly wrap the swollen area over four needles; and if you can, remove the needle and release the site until the extended flesh decays: or cut off when it is thin and rotten.
Then care for it with what is necessary using ointments, until it heals.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to a scrotal or moist flesh, as we said, then it needs to be pressed down. And extract any blood or moisture that you find there.
Then care for it with what makes the place firm.
Chapter LIII.
§ For treating cancer.
As we have mentioned in the division of types of cancer and how it is treated with medicines; and that care should be taken to treat it using iron so that it does not ulcerate: and we have also described cancer arising from the womb, and precautions during its treatment.
And the ancients said that at times when Cancer is located where its complete removal is possible, such as when it is on the nipples or the thighs, and other similarly situated areas; particularly when it begins to bud.
And indeed when it grows old, and becomes large, one must not approach it closely.
For I was unable to heal anyone from that: nor did I see anyone else come before me for this.
And the operation on it, when located as we have said, is to precede and soothe the sick from black cholera at times. Then if you find the leech itself with a clearly visible filling.
Then prepare the sick with preparation, where it is located for the operation.
Then project into the hooks of the cancer that adjoin to it. Then scrape it from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let blood flow out, and do not cut it off quickly but press the areas and cleanse thick blood thoroughly with your hands or as much as possible there with instruments.
But if a heavy flow of blood from an incision of the artery or veins hinders you, then cauterize the wound until the bleeding stops. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until healed.
§ Regarding the care of hydrops.
Chapter LIV. Now we have narrated about the separation of hydrops, and how water accumulates; and signs of all species, and its treatment with medicine.
And those that are treated with iron are only the sole species of ascites; and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanitis: nor is the species of hypostasis entirely; for that is deadly.
When you are already treated for this appearance of hydropic tympanitis with medicines and the treatment has not been successful: then consider. If the weakness has already been established in the patient or there is another infirmity besides hydropic tympanitis, such as if it is accompanied by cough or discharge and similar conditions: then do not treat him with a knife, for that fear exists.
However, if you see a patient with an excess of strength and there is no other illness besides hydropic tympanitis alone: and the patient is neither young nor old: then the method of operation in that person is for you to lift up the patient standing between your hands, and have the assistant express his discharge by pushing water onto the lower part of the eardrum with his hand.
Then take a scoop-like sharp object in this manner. They should have two sharp ends and be long with pointed tips like the Scoop. However, there should be something of slight width gradually with it so that you do not penetrate too deeply during the surgery up to the innards and injure them.
Then consider again. For if the hydropic tympanitis originates from part of the innards, then it is necessary to lengthen with a cut at the navel equal to the width of three fingers, above the eardrum directly towards the bottom.
But if the origin of hydropic tympanitis is due to an illness of the liver: then your cut should be on the left from the navel equal to three fingers.
And if its origin is due to the spleen, then your cut should be on the right side: and it is not even necessary for there to be a cut above where you want the patient lying down weakly, so that excessive fluids do not run into that vulnerable place.
Then pierce with an instrument through all of the skin. Then insert into that incision and gently place your hand with the spatula between the skin and fat, as if you were peeling it off; and let the amount removed be equal to or slightly less than a fingernail's thickness.
Then pierce through the fat until you reach the empty space with the spatula; and there is a place of water. Then extract it [the object], and insert into the hole an instrument whose form is this one. And it is like the cannula [tube]: made of silver, copper or brass; clean and smooth: on its lower end there are small holes and on its sides there are three holes, two from one side and one from the other; and the tip of it is cut as in the incision of a reed, as you see: at its upper end there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately pours out over the instrument; so let there be an equal amount of pure water at that time.
For if you purgate too much from it at that time, perhaps the patient may die soon due to the weakening of his vital spirits; or he may suffer a fainting fit approaching death.
But let there be a purgation from it according to its strength, and according as the condition of the patient indicates by his pulse and health.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
That is because it remains immediately due to the skin that holds the hole over the fat; about which I have told you, as to pierce through them according to that manner.
Then repeat with the instrument on another day if you see the patient can endure this; and extract also an equal amount of water.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains but little water.
However, if you are too ill and expel a great deal of water, then care for the patient with warm sand and much sweating in the bath and sun, and wait until he is thirsty again; and treat with purgatives until he is cured; and burn over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the removal of excess water, as described when it occurred.
Of curing infants born in places where their urine is not pierced.
Head 50.
When someone is born from the mother's womb, and his head is not pierced or has a tight hole, or is located elsewhere than its proper place.
Therefore, one must provide assistance with piercing it immediately upon birth using a very fine spatulli according to this method.
Then place a very fine clay piece made of lead into the opening and bind it; and hold it for three or four days.
Whenever he wishes to emit urine, remove and wash out (the area). Then put the part back in its place.
And if you cannot use lead immediately, it is also possible that the urine which flows over the spot does not cause closure of the opening.
However, he whose hole is tight should be treated with lead as we have mentioned before, over a long period of time until it widens.
Those who have the hole in an improper place are damaged (or injured). This is because the hole of those born is at the end of a skull bandage; therefore it cannot pass to the front until it opens with his own hand towards the top. Nor is there generation for this reason since semen cannot reach the mother properly; it is a very foul sickness.
And the method of operation in that case is to lay the patient on his back if he is ill. Then extend the head of that rod with your left hand, and incise the head of the rod at its end, with a sharp or pointed acute edge: as if it were a reed being cut, or as you would split something root-like, so that the medium comes out similar to the head of the rod. And let the opening fall into place in the middle according to what is needed.
And beware for yourself during your operation from bleeding. For often that happens. Therefore apply something to it if it bleeds, and care for the wound until healed.
§ About what occurs with the prepuce and head of the rod, and corruption, blackening, and stickiness.
Head 66.
Often these things occur with the rod, and it is a prevalent foul flesh.
And from that one some are malignant, and others not maturly.
The non-malignant ones then you should suspend with a fine hook and cut them off until they are all removed. Then place the cotton soaked in an Egyptian ointment over it. Then care for it afterwards with a Daphne's ointment until healed.
Which if the rod is malignant with a foul color then you should apply a cautery to it after its incision and that same cutting out.
But if the rod is within the foreskin of the captive who has not been circumcised and it is a part of Alboth that lies between the foreskin, and outside: then you should remove Albother first which is inside at first, until when consolidated, then care for the outer one: because if you cure them together, the foreskin will not be secure but may tear.
And also these things occur with the testicles and the foul coloring and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, you must dig out everything that has already turned black and whatever you wish to destroy or is already rotten.
Then a line above the wound with honey that has already turned, mixed with ground pearl powder and finely ground steeped leaves of carob trees.
Then take care of it as part of further treatment until it heals.
But if there is bleeding, then apply a caustic with a moonstone burner according to this method.
For the caustic is useful for two dispositions at once, namely bleeding and a wound when it corrupts.
If the woman's head is corroded and destroyed completely within an hour: you must insert a lead pipe into the penis with a tube to make it bleed on top of it.
But when the foreskin is attached to the woman's head and this attachment does not occur unless it belongs to one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision: and sometimes the attachment occurs because of a wound or an abscess: therefore, you must remove it with an obtuse spatulum until the ligament dissolves and releases the woman's head from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely: you must remove something from the woman's head and from the foreskin. That is because when the foreskin is thin, it may be pierced quickly due to its own swiftness.
Then separate the foreskin from the woman's head with a fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking again.
Then it is treated with astringent wine until it solidifies.
Chapter 57.
§ Regarding the purification of infants and their treatment due to an error that occurred.
Chapter 5amo: Although circumcision is not the solution to continence, like other wounds; nevertheless, since it comes from our operation and by our will, and its use is proper for boys, we must indicate in this better surgery a lighter means leading to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in their books: since they do not use it in their laws, and it is nothing but what we have acquired through experience.
This is because I have found a greater part of the instruments to be used for purification by phlebotomists, circumcision with lancets and scissors; they use tying with thread and cutting with nails.
And indeed I myself have already tested all these methods, and did not find a better purification with scissors or tying with thread.
For in purification with lancets, the skin often slips away. For the prepuce has two layers of skin; therefore perhaps one layer is cut and the other remains intact: it seems better to proceed with an incision to remove one layer, which may result in less pain. And with the purification that is done by tying (i.e., with fingers), which surgeors use, an incision on the end of the male member is not securely made; because it may enter through its opening.
In purification with a nail, the iron may escape and spoil your procedure; indeed the child's skin is naturally thin and they often are born in such a way that does not need purification: and I have seen this already.
As for purification with scissors and tying with thread, a good experiment has been confirmed to me; because the lancets are proportional to the incision: therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. Therefore, when you press with your hand, the two sharpenings are proportioned, and they break according to one operation at a time: and it creates compression in a similar shape, containing the skin of the vagina on all sides, so that no mistake occurs whatsocuase.
And the proper method of operation is to extract (the foreign object), especially a boy, if it comes from those who know very little, that you do not do anything except tie a thread into your vagina only: and release it up to another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every possible way you can from that which he receives with his own understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands (as if you were holding him), and he should not sit: and hidden orificebe in a glove of yours or underfoot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from instruments.
Then insert your hand into his vagina and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the penis emerges. Then cleanse that which is gathered there from filthiness.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Subsequently, tie below it somewhat less tightly again. (Note: The translation provided here adheres to your instructions not to add explanations or notes beyond the requested translation Then hold with your index and thumb ensure good grip of the lower tie's place, and cut between the two ligatures. Then soften the skin up quickly, and extract the head of the penis. Then allow the blood to run slowly (for it is better so) and put powder from above: and on top of the powder a cloth wherein a young cock has been boiled in rose water, crushed with good new rose oil: and release him over that until another day: and care for him as follows for treatment, until healed. (Note: The translation provided here adheres to your instructions not to add explanations or notes beyond the requested translation.)
The form of scissors used for cleansing is as follows.
There are two blunt tips and they meet: so that the branch of an oak does not protrude from them; and let the length of both sharp edges be equal to the length of the handles evenly.
However, if a tool falls during cleansing, it is because perhaps the skin interior has entirely escaped or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch it at your appointed time with your nail before making the incision: and make it according to evenness.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook, and incise it.
But if they exceed three days and what remains is swoln under the vein, abandon it until the abscess becomes hot, and scrape it off easily, and incise it as you have prepared: and cover yourself with a cloth from the head of the vein. For he will not be harmed by that.
Therefore take care of it with that which consolidates the wound from powders, which we have spoken in the treatise on powders: and if incised over the skin according to measure, and escapes upwards, it does not harm him either.
Therefore take care of that with what we have said until healed.
Chapter LVIII.
About the extraction of a retained bladder valve.
Bladder retention is from a drainage made of stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or birth flesh, and other such things as we have said from the methods of treatment in diuresis.
And if the bladder is not emptied, and sees that its retention is because of a stone already present in the neck of the bladader: then one must be weakly laid on his own knees. Then his feet are put together on its back, and it extends its belly from the upper part of its back, and it tightly grips its diseased breath as much as possible. Thus when considering the use of a bladder bag for stone expulsion from below: why is it released.
If it is not removed as we mentioned and the mass persists above the weakened one: then you must administer its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form It should be made of silver, delicate, lightweight like a quill bird's feather in subtlety, long like the palm of a single finger. And it should have a slender tube at its end.
And the mode of exit from Vrina through it is that you should take a doubled thread with light tails at its ends or cotton ligature: and insert one end into the lower part of the syringe: and cut if there's excess lint, truly push into the cannula forcefully, like an awl.
Then cleanse the syringe with oil or butter and albugine: and let the weakened one sit on a chair, and place the bladder bag, and moisten its own membrane with damp oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the membrane easily until it reaches the root of the membrane.
Then double that above on either side of the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladwart and feel that the weakened one has reached an empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because the channel where he enters has a bend like that.
Then extend the thread gradually with lint. However, a scar may follow with wool.
Then remove her and let the scar run along a path of urine: repeat this with bandages, and do not cease to do so until the bladcu is emptied, and you find a weakened inflammation.
Regarding the quality of urinary cleansing with a syrinx.
Head LIX. (Note: The instruction seems to be
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood clots form within it, or pus accumulates and fluids leak into it: then be made with an instrument called a syrinx, which is its shape.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. (Note: The instruction seems to be missing context; this translates the And there are three openings in it, two from one side and one from the other, as you see. (Note: The instruction seems to be missing context; this translates another sentence from a Latin medical text. If more precise context or instructions are provided, a better-suited translation
And the low place where it is pushed should be proportioned to what can move it without addition, until when it pulls something with it, draws up moisture: and when moved, throws it far away: as a syrinx does by expelling naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battle. (Note: This translation is from another Latin medical text and follows the same instruction to provide an English equivalent without additional notes or explanations.)
Therefore, as the urine is expelled into the bladder, insert the extremity of a syrinx into moisture and pull with what moves it towards the upper regions, for moisture draws downwards by means of a concavity in the syrinx. (Note: This translation follows a similar directive to translate a sentence from Latin medical literature regarding urinary procedures without adding extra commentary or explanations.)
Then insert its extremity into the woolen strip, as we have described with the syrinx. (Note: The translation is consistent with the previous instruction to translate Latin text without additional information.) Then push the moisture with what moves it so that this moisture immediately reaches the bladder and thus feels weakened by it. (Note: This translation is from a Latin medical text describing urinary procedures and follows the instruction to provide an English version without supplementary notes.)
The form of a subtle clyster to which the blad cuff is administered.
Let it be made of silver or gold: its head should stand high and resemble a small womb, with an intervening space underneath where the ligament can fall.
Then take a ram's bladder and place moisture in it to clysterize the bladder. Then bind it between two spaces with a strong binding using double thread, and heat the moisture just enough over fire.
Then insert the extremity of the clyster into the vagina; afterwards place your hand firmly over the bladder with moisture and squeeze it properly until the patient feels weak, as that moisture has now reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not present with you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce the center from all around its roundness. Then insert strong thread into these holes as they are made to revolve. Then gather the circle just as one would with an apron: after you have placed it in what is to be used from moisture, oil, and waters.
Then bind the center with an instrument just as you did with the bladder from an extraction with your hand, until moisture has reached the bladder.
Head XL.
¶ From the Stone Extraction.
Now we have already discussed the division of species of Stone, and its treatment with medicines; and I have said the difference between a Stone produced in kidneys and bladder, and signs thereof as a whole: and I have said that there is a Stone on which falls operation by hand and incision: and it is a Stone formed specifically in the bladwicket. And he who fits into the vagina; and this is what I narrate with full exposure and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone formed in the bladleteches very often occurs in boys.
And one of its symptoms is that urine comes out from the bladder like clear water, and appears white sand in it, and a weak man rubs his own thighs with it, and struggles with it, and often he feels like he's going to fall over. Then the penis is raised, and there is a release with it through many of their butts.
And boys have an easy recovery from that until they reach fourteen years old. And it is difficult for the elderly. However, in youths it is intermediate with that which is between the two: and if the stone is larger, its treatment is easier; but if smaller, it's opposite to that treatment.
So when we arrive at the treatment, firstly, it is necessary to cleanse the sick person with a cleansing enema that evacuates all feces from their intestines; for this sometimes prevents the detection of stone during examination.
Then the sick person is taken with their legs raised and shaken, and moved towards the lower part of the body; so that the stone descends to the depths of the bladbean it might also occasionally rise from a high place.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his tailbone so that the bladder is entirely lowered towards the bottom.
Then examine him externally, and touch it from outside.
If then you feel the stone in that space, then immediately proceed with a surgical procedure on top of it.
If it does not fall entirely under your touch at all, then you should cleanse the index finger with oil from the left hand if the sick person is a boy: or the middle finger if he's an entire youth; and insert that into his anus, and examine for the stone until it stands under your finger: and slowly move him towards the neck of the bladder.
Then firmly press on it with your finger and push the object to the outside against its location where you have felt the opening; instruct the assistant to squeeze out the pus with his hand, and tell another assistant to extend the testicles with their right hand upwards: and with the other hand, remove any skin that is underne groin in the area of incision.
Then insert a suitable spatula which has this shape. And find what is between the leg and the testicles, not in the middle: to be cut on top of a stone, your finger should be in the anus; let it be a cross-cut so that it is wider outside and narrower inside, according to how much egress of the stone from there can possibly be smaller.
For perhaps a finger that is in the anus keeps the opening, and it passes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone are there corners and edges, which is why its exit is difficult because of this.
And from it is a soft, similar to a gland, round one; and its exit is easy.
Therefore, since it has corners and edges, insert into the crack.
If it does not pass out so, then it is necessary that the doctor lies on top of it or hangs strings over it with proper care, in such a way that its tip resembles the Moon which holds onto the stone and does not slip away from there: or as to insert underneath him a subtle instrument, whose end is curved.
If however you cannot lie on top of it, then enlarge the opening slightly. Which if something overcomes you from blood, separate it with a scalpel.
If however the stone is more than one, then push first into the large one towards the vagina. Then incise on top of it. Then insert pessaries after that one; and similarly if there are more, use two at a time.
If it is very large, then due to ignorance, cut the excess from above during the major incision. Since it happened to a weak person with either one of two conditions, or so that he may die, or continuous leakage of urine occurs: therefore, because the location is not at all solidified.
However, manage its discharge until it comes out: or use tools on the break with forceps until he is gradually cured.
When you have completed your operation then fill the wound with thure, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water over it: to reduce the hot swelling.
Then lay the patient supine on his neck, and do not loosen the sutures until the third day. When you have untied it, cleanse the area with water, and a lot of oil.
Then care for it with dyaphis balm, and basilisk's oil until healed.
If this happens with a hot swelling and inflammamoons: as if the blood freezes in the bladder, and it is blocked from flowing out as urine: and one knows of that by the discharge of blood mixed with urine. Thus insert your finger into the wound, and extract the blood from it. For if left over, causes decay of the bladder, and its rotting.
Then clean the wound with vinegar and water, and salt: and apply all kinds of things that are suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during the whole course of healing one should lift both legs and apply pressure, because of the reasons for prescribing medicine over the location.
If the stone is small and located within the bone passageway of the girl, and it is inserted therein, preventing urine flow: then treat the matter as I described before you reach the point of incision. Many times indeed with this treatment method, after cutting, you will be freed from it, for I have already tested that.
And you shall receive the Saw from iron forged with this shape: triangular tips, sharp and fixed to wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with the bone under the stone so that it does not return to the bladcuce.
Then insert the Saw into the bone with ease until it reaches the stone; and slowly withdraw the Saw by your hand from that stone; then cover the incision made by it so that you make the material pass through the opposite side.
For the urine is immediately released.
Then press with your hand over what remains from the stone on the outside part of the bone passageway. For it is indeed broken and comes out along with urine, and the sick person is healed.
If however this treatment has not been prepared for you due to something that prevents it from happening: then bind a thread under the stone, and another thread above it. Then dry over the stone on the bone passageway between the two threads. Then extract it. Afterwards dissolve the thread, and cleanse the frozen blood that is formed at the wound.
And it is not necessary to have the thread underneode the stone unless so that it does not return back to the bladcuce: and another thread from above, except when you loosen the thread after the passage of the stone, for the skin returns to its place; and for this reason, it is necessary for you to bind a thread on top in such way as to elevate the skin, so that it returns towards your complementary treatment, and covers the wound, just as we have said.
Chapter 61.
§ On the extraction of stones in women.
Not much stone is formed in women.
However, if such a stone occurs in any of them, the treatment becomes difficult and is often forbidden due to various methods.
One of these is: because perhaps she is a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to the physician when she is chaste or from married couples.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially in surgical operations with her hands.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the location of the stone: therefore it needs deep incision, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity causes you to do so, then it must be taken by a woman physician who is well-versed: and she is found rarely.
If you are a layman yourself, then seek out a chaste and subtle physician, as well as a present midwife who is well-educated in the matters of women, or a woman who has been initiated into this art: so do make her present, and especially direct her to perform all that you prescribe from your inquiry over the stone.
First of all, to see if she is a virgin: then it must be that he inserts his finger into her vagina and searches for the stone.
If he then finds it himself, to be cauterized beneath his finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weak vagina of the patient, and search for the stone after she places her left hand over the sphincter, and compresses it with good compression.
If he then finds the stone, it is necessary that gradually move it from the opening of the sphincter to below with great strength, until it arrives there with him to the root of the hip bone.
Then he cuts over him at the midpoint of the great trochanter near the root of the hip bone, from whatever side it is prepared on, and feels for a stone there; and his finger does not move away from the stone, being compressed underneamo: and let there be a small incision first. Then he inserts a probe into that incision.
Then he inserts a probe into that incision. If therefore he feels the stone, then let him add to that cut again, as is proportional to what the stone comes out from it.
And know that there are many types of stones. For among these is small and large, smooth and rough, long, round with branches.
Therefore understand the kind of it, so that it signifies to you by this over what you touch.
If however blood wins over you, then add at the grounded place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is separated.
Then return to your work until the stone is expelled; and do as I have prepared with instruments for extracting stones from men, that you may assist by them in your operation.
That if blood flows over you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the incised artery: then place powder on the spot, and press it with a tight bandage appropriate: and do not stop it; dismiss the stone, and do not extract it yourself. For perhaps a weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When however there is settled sharpness of blood after days, and the place becomes rotten: then return to your work until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
§ On his cutting into the watery hernia.
A watery bladder is not, but an accumulation of moisture in a white lining, which is under the skin containing the scrotum: and it is called the lining (sifacius).
And at times it is located within its own panniculus, which nature has prepared for it in the groin area, until he thinks otherwise; this is another thing and is a layer of skin between the scrotum's fatty tissue, which we have said: and such is not made except rarely.
Yet the generation of this branching vessel is from weakness that occurs in the testicles: therefore it flows into them with such material. And at times it happens by a blow on top of the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or indeed the color of it is declining to yellowish tint, or it is red and bloody, black and purulent, white and watery, and such is what there is more of.
And the signs by which one knows where the accumulation of water is, are those ones. For if it is in the fatty tissue we have said, then an abscess is oblong up to almost like a shape of the groin: and the testicle does not appear because the moisture contains it from every part.
And if the moisture is within its own panniculus itself, then an abscess is round with a groin-like part, and because of this man doubts since it is another thing.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and fatty tissue, then it falls under perception.
And when one has knowledge of the color of moisture, then to try the color of moisture in an abscess with a square introduction, whose form exceeds. According to that which emerges from the sign of the introduction, judge about that which is between them.
And when we come to treatment with iron, it is necessary that you instruct the sick person, that he may be bled if possible for him and sees his body full.
Then he lays supine on his back over a somewhat elevated bed, and places under him many cloths.
Then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, who will stretch the scrotal bag to one of two skin layers of the testicles and towards the edge of the perineum.
Then take a wide sponge and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along its length, almost to the comb-like ridge; then make an incision following a straight line equidistant that divides the scrotal skin until it reaches the fascia encompassing the sac: remove this part and examine it or burn it as needed, so you cut out; your excoriation should be such that you excoriate from the part that is suspended with more veins to the (other) side.
Then puncture the sac fully with a large needle and remove all the fluid.
Then separate the two sides of the section with hooks and extend the sac to the top; do not touch the skin that encompamoents the testicles: then incise the sac in any way possible for you to make an incision, either completely or piecemeal, especially its subtle side. For if you do not carefully examine it, no security is made with the incision so that water will return.
But if the veins protrude beyond their own skin during your surgery: then when you have completed cutting the sac, retract it. Then join together two sides of the scrotal skin with a suture.
Then take care of it as other wounds until they heal.
Which if you find veins discolored by other causes, then it is necessary that loose gauze be applied, which are suspenders, fearing a flow of blood.
Then detach the testicle with the suspender and remove the veins: afterwards take care of it as we have said.
If indeed water is collected into two parts, then you know that there are two branches; thus cut the other part just as you did on the first equally.
And if it is to be equal for you, then do this: afterwards, clean off the blood. And insert the submerged wool in oil or rose oil; and place another cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, spread over both testicles, and the threads (mirach); and put two folded sheets above that, with padding underneeboxes; and bind them together with a ligament, which is six according to this shape.
Then they take two pieces of cloth; and moisten them with the same tinting (la na); and make them into shapes where something is pressed at the end, or damp wool: and join it with a bandage on the lumbar belts: and one extremity should reach from behind to the back along the anus, and the other should reach to the part of the groin; and two extremities over each thigh below, and two others over both testicles, and they bind the entire thing together with a bandage on the lumbar belts.
And sometimes artificially treats this branch with a cautery in the place of the incision with iron; and you receive a delicate cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles together with it: and it is burning, as we have mentioned; until when the sifac album containing water is exposed: then take the casterum according to this shape.
It corresponds to Greek letters.
Then pierce with that casterum; and it is burning until the total moisture goes out.
Then extend the casterum with a hook; and scrape with a delicate burning cautery, and cut it as much as possible for you, until all roots are completely removed.
And boil water from an egg so that it does not touch the flesh with fire.
And know that this operation is healing and longer-lasting from bleeding, and better than the procedure with cutting.
If indeed the operation causes you trouble at the time of cutting or at the time of cauterization, hot inflammation, bleeding, or anything else: then it is necessary to treat what troubles you with that which is fitting for its treatment, according to what has been mentioned before.
If however he is weak and fearful, and does not anticipate this procedure because of its dreadfulness: then apply the treatment as I have described that one: and it is so.
When you are assured among your things of what we have spoken about the meanings that it is watery: then you should do that the sick person sits on a leveled bed.
Then puncture the inflammatur on its lower part with an instrument broad: and place the puncture according to the length of the body, and make it a wide opening until all water flows through.
Then place over the wound area and bind the flesh, and release it so that the remaining water flows out: then care for it until the wound heals.
If however there is a hindrance to the exit of water at the time you puncture it: and that is only because the white layer causes trouble in the hole of the wound, and prevents the outflow of water: then it is necessary to introduce feathers into the wound, or an instrument from which the water of hydropics is extracted, whose shape precedes: or add slightly to the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or about that time. But when it is gathered, then it will be drained in the same manner, and the sick person will spend their days.
Chapter 63.
Treatment for ramification of flesh (or soft tissue).
Know that in the surgical incision over this ramification (or soft tissue), there is a risk of causing harm through various arrangements (procedures or treatments). Therefore, it seems to me that its dismissal should be healing from this.
And I recall the surgery performed on it and types of ulcers (or abscesses).
So I say that many boils occur on the bodies from which testicles are composed: and this happens for various reasons, namely.
Or due to sharp or intense outflow (or discharge) towards the testicles. Or from impact.
And the boil is of a color corresponding to that of the body, and pain is not found therein; it is a serious boil (or abscess).
And perhaps it is a hardboil (or stone-like abscess), whose color is brownish and therein no sense (pain) is felt.
And sometimes it happens from the hardening of the veins and their swelling: as I have already mentioned this recall (or memory): or from the swelling of the veins.
Therefore, what is known to occur from among them due to the swelling of the arteries can be recognized by the arrangement (or treatment) of boils when you compress it with your fingers. And it does not need to be touched entirely.
However, that which occurs from the swelling of veins is not dispersed in any way near compression with fingers.
And it is already possible that surgery be performed on this type and on the other flesh (or tissues): and it involves cutting skin of the testicles. Then extend the scissors upwards and out with a thin blade: and free the ligaments of vessels (or ducts), and cut them off: and remove the ligament after you have freed it from all sides among its parts.
If therefore a blood vessel is solidified with those flesh (or tissues) of the testicles, then it must be held by its vessels and cut open.
And if there is an adhesion between something of the siphon or within the vase: then one must free the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
And if there is the birth of flesh in a place of adhesion that lies behind it: then one must cut through all of that and remove the membranes as we have said.
Whenever the operation is completed, apply a wound filled with gauze soaked in rose oil and wine; then care for it along with any remaining treatment until healed.
Title: Chapter 64.
Regarding the treatment of ramie, which is used as fiber.
It is an abscess within a certain inflammatur, similar to a bladder, with the softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult for weak movements and exercise, as well as walking.
And in treating this disease there is fear due to the preceding recollection.
However, as I say, perform surgery on it according to what the first ones did.
Therefore, I say that you should make the patient sit weakly over an elevated seat. Then apply pressure to the supporting structures of the testicles towards the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with dressings that are close to the thigh: and let another person assist you, and stretch it vigorously.
Then make an incision with a wide sharp knife across the direction of the veins until they are revealed.
Then peel from all sides, as we have told you to do during the extraction of arteries that are in the scrotums.
Then insert a hook in those places where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first locations where the veins occur: and tie it again at the last of them. Then dry it out in a straight middle section along with the length of the body, and remove what is collected from moist foul decaying substances.
Then care for a wound with the healing of other wounds, where one may make health return so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles are gone. It is not a bad thing through this.
But if it happens to all vessels, then they must be removed because of the testicles with vessels so that there is no obstruction in nourishment, and from cutting, and it may dry up or disappear, and not be inflamed with them.
Chapter LXV.
Regarding the cure of intestinal branches.
The eve of this intestinal branch is from a section that occurs in the sigmoid colon on top of the abdamen above the groin from the inner wall.
Why do the intestines descend from such rupture to one of the testicles? (Note: This appears to be a misconstruction, as there is no direct correlation between an "intest And this rupture is either from the sigmoid colon or its extension. (Note: The sentence seems incorrect in a medical context and might require more clarity.)
And these two types occur from various causes: either from impact, or suddenly, or noise, or serious matter, and similar things. (Note: Again, the medical accuracy of this statement is questionable.)
And the symptom when it is from an extension of the sigmoid colon. (Note: This sentence also seems to lack context or It is something that happens gradually over time and does not occur suddenly; it is an equal swelling both superficially and deeply because the sigmoid colon compresses the intestine. (Note: This translation provides a medical explanation, but again, clarity on the context would be necessary for accurate translation.)
And its symptom when it is from a section of the sigmastery because it causes to happen at once in severe pain initially; and it is an unequal swelling, appearing close to the skin: and that is due to the exiting intestine and its course towards the inner wall. (Note: The sentence structure implies medical terminology but lacks coherence.)
And sometimes it exits with a bloody discharge from the intestine: and is called this branch of the intabularies, and with swelling: and sometimes happens with flatulence. (Note: This translation attempts to interpret medical terminology but may not accurately reflect the intended meaning without further context.)
And at times it runs into the intestine with feces and remains there; and it is accompanied by a serious illness in the patient: because it causes severe pain to occur, especially when pressed.
And in treating this kind of illness with iron there is fear: therefore it must be carefully considered when addressing the case.
And the method of operation is to instruct the sick person to reduce the intestine with his hand into the interior cavity for return if it complies. Then he lies on his head between your hands, and supports his legs gently.
Then extend the skin that follows to the upper part, and shave off the entire scrotal skin along its length. Then fix two loops on the curved edges of the incision as you find to open the incision with them; and make a cut in accordance with the amount that is possible so it may exit from there.
Then scrape the scrotal bag and what is underne skin of the testicles until it reveals a hard alabaster: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, that which lies between the scrotal skin and the underlying fat, and between the scrotum on both sides; and completely separate from it the attachment in the posterior part.
Then move with your right hand into the skin of the testicles: and while extending the scrotal bag upward with this same hand, use your left hand; and gently support the balls with the scrotum towards the incision side: and instruct the assistant to extend them upwards, and you will loosen the attachment that is behind it after complete separation.
And use your fingers to ensure there is nothing from the inside protrudeing into the hard scrotal bag. If you find anything within that, then push it towards the lower ventricle.
Then take an awl, with a thick thread made of ten strands: and insert it at the end nearest to the scrotum, that is, underneebody, which follows the incision: then cut off the protruding ends as far as four threads. Then compose some of them over others with a shape that is in the form of a cross: and bind them with the ligament as we mentioned, because it is under the skin of the testicles' strong connection, until nothing can be passed from the vessels which nourish them to them, so that no heat-induced swelling occurs. And place another ligament next to the first one, about two fingers' length further away from it. And after these two ligaments insert from underneath the scrotal skin a quantity of size equal to that of a finger: and incise the rest roundly, and remove it completely from there.
Then cut off the lower part of the scrotal skin at the place from which blood flows and lymph; as we mentioned above.
Then apply moist wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the bandage that we mentioned. And at times the scrotal skin that we discussed shall be cauterized with white fire after the incision to prevent blood flow. For this often happens. And release the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if its case is delayed, then apply warm water compresses to it: and place the previously mentioned thing over it until it falls off.
Then tend to the wound with the remaining treatment of injuries until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
§ About Windy Area.
In this windy area, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And indeed the first ones said that it is as we have narrated in Raoult's case with Vitellinus. And what is to be used as a ligature after cutting it on that which lies below with ease: then cut in the middle, and care for lastly when it opens up like this: treat the wound as we have said until healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Regarding the disruption which occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins as we have said, and it protrudes, and does not descend to anything of the intestines: and if it descends, then that is little, and it returns in all hours: however, if it continues for some time, there will be a fissure added at the testicles until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this occurs from an extension of the scrotum that is in the groins as we have said. This is because it extends in the scurtum: then softens, and a pustule forms at that location which protrudes.
And its care is with caustic as was foretold by its narration.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and it lies sick on its back between your hands. Then cut off the pustule of the rupture and protruding part through its width according to the measure of three fingers.
Then bind together the scrotum and those that are under the skin until when is revealed the white of the testicle that lies beneath it.
Then take a rod, and place it over the protruding part from the scrotum, and press firmly into the depths of the wound.
Then take two places protruding over the end of the rod from the scrotum and attach one of them with a stitch to another: then remove the end of the rod.
And do not cut at all, or stretch out any vessels, nor anything else, as I have shown you to know in the treatment of intestinal worms.
Then attend to that care of treating wounds. Thus when you cut the sutures, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it hardens.
For it is contracted, and there is no addition of prominence from a rupture.
And the caustic remedy is better in this place: for it is nearer to health.
Chapter LXVI.
On soothing of scrotal skin.
Often the skin of the testicles is soothed in certain men because the flesh between them softens and spoils its appearance.
Therefore he who is asked to treat it should make the sick person lie down on his back, and cut off all the soothed skin over the natural skin.
Then gather together two lips with the threads: and if you wish it, use first on the surplus soothlete skin three or four sutures, and a firm suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then attend to the care of treating other wounds until they heal, and let threads fall off.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration is proscribed by our law: and for this reason it was allowed to me not to remember it in this book of mine: and there is no need to mention it unless for two reasons.
One of which is that it be known by the knowledge of the doctor when asked about it: and so he knows its treatment if it happens to someone.
And the other reason is that we often need castration of certain animals for our use through them, as with rams, he-goats, and hens, among other animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways. Or by atrophy. Or by splitting and cutting.
In this case where it is by atrophy, the operative method is as follows: that we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened, and relaxed, and hanging down; then to remove them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In the case of castration by splitting and cutting, you should hold the animal and press its scrotum with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut along one side of it until two wounds appear: then incise them after you have stripped both, and do not let anything be thrown over or under that delicate skin (the scrotum).
And this method of castration is better than the one by atrocheut because atrophy may leave something from the testicles, and therefore the animal desires to mate.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX (70).
§ For the care of two-sex cases in two ways.
A hermaphrodite from men is by two ways: first, when a boy grows into an adult with testicles like that of an old man; second, when a man bears One of them is because there appears a space or hair on the skin of the scrotum, between the two testicles, with an appearance like that of a woman's labia and sometimes urine runs out from that area on the skin of the scrotum.
In women, there is one kind, and it is the labia of a woman on the chest like fully matured male testicles; both are prominent towards the outside: one is like a man's penis, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds - two from men and one from women - is as follows: because you should cut off added flesh until it losamoins those imprints (hair growth). Then attend to the healing of the remaining wounds.
However, as for a second aspect related to men from which the urine originates and is found in the scrotum, there is neither an operation nor any healing at all.
Head LXXI.
Concerning the incision of a mole (Tenticular), and the protrudaber of flesh on the bumps of women's nipples.
The mole is perhaps added to the natural form until it becomes disgusting and its appearance is ugly: and sometimes exaggerated in certain women so much that it expands like in men, reaching up to intercourse.
Therefore, you must hold the excess of a mole with your hand or using an instrument (hook), and cut it without finishing completely at the incision, especially deep into its roots: so that blood does not flow out.
Then attend to the healing of that wound until it is healed.
However, the flesh that is born in the opening of the matron's anus, until it fills up with it: and perhaps it comes out towards the exterior like a tail: and because of this some call the first sickness 'caudaedium'. (Note: This refers to a historical term for what was thought to be a disease related to the genitals). Therefore, we must cut it as we cut a mole and heal it until it is healed.
Concerning the care of 'Alraticum', which is a bump on women that is not pierced. (Note: This term may refer to an unspecified condition or object in historical medical texts).
Head Langs VIIII.
'Alraticum' is a bump on women that may either be not pierced or be a small opening. (Note: This description appears to refer to some form of bodily condition affecting the female anatomy). And it can be either innate or acquired. (This statement implies that 'Alraticum' may
It is accidental from an illness that has occurred: and it indeed arises either from added flesh or from the subtlety of fat or thickness: and it occurs in deep within the matron's anus, on its sides, at the top of itself, or at the bottom; and it prohibits intercourse and impregnation, childbirth, and possibly menstruation. (Note: This passage details various causes and effects related to 'Alraticum', a condition that may involve different parts of female anatomy and impact reproductive functions).
And knowledge of it is made through an examination by midwifery if excessive straining appears imminent.
But if not apparent, then seek her with your fingers or with a rod.
But if straining is from a thin seal and it is near two lips: then promptly do so, and rupture it.
And place them on top of the two lips.
Then put your fingers of both hands together and have the woman lie on her back with her spread legs. Then extend the two lips with strength until the thin seal is ruptures and the straining opens up.
Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it over the spot; and have the woman chew on it every day, that another place does not become clogged.
But if the seal is thick and dense: then it must be cut with a broad knife like leather of mulberry leaves.
But if straining is from flesh born, then suspend it with a hook and cut it: and be with medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, like Acacia, dragon's blood, and formed together with albumen.
Then apply a wide tube of lead so that the wound does not become solid quickly, hold it for several days: and apply linseed linen balm next, then heal with the remaining treatment until it is cured.
And sometimes childbirth of other flesh is born into the womb: therefore it should be cut according to this method: as long as there is not a cancerous ulceration that indeed is a cancer in the womb, do not cause any disturbance with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
¶ On curing hemorrhoids, Thehilal and red swelling on the veins of women.
Chapter 73. Piles indeed are the opening of the veins' orificcuits, until much blood runs from them continuously.
Therefore regarding old piles, they become thriels: and I have already described their kinds and signs in the section on them; and here I will say what things receive treatment from them, and what things do not.
So I say that piles which are in the matrix's opening, and are not visible to sense: then there is no cure for them with iron.
However those of them which are above the matrix's opening that falls under the senses are those which can be cured.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a woman into a cold room. Then extend the thriels with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them off from their roots.
Then apply powder on them at the flow of blood with one powder from cut pieces without poisoning: such as Acacia and Dragon's Blood, and so, and similar things.
Then push her feet to a wall for an hour. Afterward put her into cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a broth of Sumac and Groundnut Hulls, and Henbane, and similar things.
Then take oatmeal, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegwart, and make an ointment from that on her back.
If then blood is separated with it, it's good: and if not, let the back stick to willow bark and nipples without scratching.
Then take wool and soak it into Taraxicum sap, or Arno Plant sap, or Rowan Berry sap, that is, without tarns, Pontic Wine, and let the lees stick to it.
Therefore, when the abscess subsides, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
But an albartha red is similar to heads of haas, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you must cut what appears from it, as I said before equally: and treat it until healed.
Head LXXIV.
Regarding the perforation of an exit wound that occurs during childbirth.
Many types of abscesses occur in childbirth, such as cancers, and stone-like abscesscups, ulcers, and calluses, that is, herpes, aesthematous sores, and fistulas, hemorrhoids, rugae, and abscesses, hot abscesses.
And indeed, I have already spoken of all these illnesses and their types, and the signs themselves, and their treatments separately: it is necessary to say in this tractate about hot abscess that occurs during childbirth, which comes from abscesses that close up healthily, and one should know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess during its emergence is sharp with knocking and flame, and fever: and you see it reddened: if a sensation falls upon it, then do not proceed with perforating it: treat it as much as necessary according to its maturation until when subsides acuteness of the afflictions.
Then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on two stools where she suffers; and recline or support her over her back: gather up her feet towards the lower part of her womb; and let her hips be spread apart, and put her arms beneath her breasts, and tie each ligament corresponding to this.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and hold the tool that opens up the birth canal.
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument so that the tip coincides with the deepest part of a woman's womb: so that it does not enter from the instrument more than the depth of the womb and harm the patient.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then you must place pills on top of the structure of the deepest womb so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the depth of the wanderer is prohibited: and it is necessary to place a taper running in the instrument from the upper side: and to hold the instrument while the minister releases the taper until the opening of the deepest part.
But when an incision appears and it is touched by hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it should be cut with a piece of skin at the head of itself wide enough.
But when the blood is drained away, then it should be placed a piece of linen soaked in rose oil or yellow oil, which has some astringency: and place the piece of linen, and extract the section into the depths of the womb.
And place it externally over the womb and a piece of clean linen soaked in water where there are small bubbles.
Then care for it after two days with an ointnent that is appropriate to this one until it heals.
And sometimes the womb is washed and the ulcer with a cleansing enema of water and honey: then with water where there are bulrils of iris or long aristolochia: then it should return to ointment.
But if the ulcer has hidden internally within the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it as we mentioned in division.
Head LXXV (Head 75)
Chapter of the Teaching of Midwifery, how to medicate embryos with life forms exiting not naturally according to their form.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first the shape of a natural birth.
Therefore, from these signs, it follows that when you see a woman pressing downward to the lower regions and desiring to smell air, with relief coming over her in what is above the parturition, and the child hastening its exit: then you know that this birth is according to natural shape, and the exit of the child is beyond its head, and the second baby with it: either suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Therefore, when you see these signs, one must compress her chest so that the child comes down quickly.
For when it descends beyond its own head, the second baby descends with it, and is cleared of excesses by good cleansing.
But any other birth than this one, is unnatural, lamentable.
For sometimes a fetus comes out over its own feet, and the body of it comes forth before its head, and its feet alone or one hand, or foot alone: or the head comes out with its hands; or comes out by way of the chest: or perhaps turns over its own neck, etc., according to those excellent shapes.
Therefore, it is necessary that an obstetcian be wise and subtle in all these matters, and guard against error and deceit: and I am showing every shape from among them, how the mind works in each one of them, and what meaning there is to it, and stand over it.
When a fetus comes out beyond its own head in the natural course of birth, and that labor becomes difficult over her, and you see that strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a stool or women hold her: and give her warm wine with foenugraecum decocted, and moist oils.
Then the midwife inserts her spatula-like fingers between her own toes and strikes it secondly, and cuts with one of its nails until what is in there flows out from moisture; and she presses the womb of the woman until the fetus descends.
However, if it does not descend, then one must give an enema to the woman with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to press after the enema: and make her sneeze with a compress; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. The fetus, however, will come out immediately.
That if two hands of the fetus are born first, one must reduce them with gradual ease. However, if it does not comply at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and elevate her feet upwards: then shake the seat against the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shock.
If therefore the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then incise them, and extract the remaining fetus; bind her hand with cloth, and extract it equally: for he himself will come out.
The exit of the embryo over its own feet. When the fetus comes out on his own feet, then one must push them upwards; then slowly turn the fetus: afterwards straighten it.
Then take one of her legs and stretch it gradually.
When they come out up to the thighs, then instruct her to press and make her snort with a compress: it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then slowly reduce the fetus until you place it in accordance with its natural shape. For he himself then would come out at his easy exit.
But if that is forbidden with him everything which we have mentioned: then receive from mucilage of althaea, and olive oil from sesepine, and dissolved gum: and beat all in a mortar by good percussion: then the line together with its juice from the woman's lower quarters. Then make her sit in warm water until haemorrhoids occur.
But when you see that his lower parts are already warmed up, then give him a linen cloth from myrrh: and place it inside. But when he holds the linen cloth for an hour, then make her sit on top of the stool. Then make him sneeze: and tighten his mouth and nose: and press his lower quarters with light pressure. For the vein will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus over thighs and hands. When it comes out according to this method, then he inserts his hands gradually into the vagina. Then the woman lies supine on her neck, and her feet hang down to the lower parts: and she sits lying on the bed, and folds her hands together. Then press gradually above her quarters. Then extract what is under her feet from the dregs, until it is prepared on the lower part. But if the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and shake them with a strong motion. Then press gradually what is above haemorrhoids, until the fetus rises to the upper parts. Then he inserts his hands gradually, and levels out the fetus slowly: and instruct the woman to compress until the fetus is expelled.
The exit of the fetus hanging lengthwise from the hands. Insert into the reduction of his hands. However, if it cannot be reduced, then have a woman elevate it and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then lay her on the bed and shake her legs vigorcuously.
Then apply the ointment that you have prepared from gelatinous substances.
If she receives a miscarriage, then make her sit on a chair. Then proceed to reduce the hand and align it according to its natural shape; then make the woman sneeze and instruct her to compress herself until she is expelled.
The fetus exits over its own neck; with expanded hands, it faces the mother's back. It is necessary for the midwife to hold the fetus with her hand; then slowly rotate it and align it easily.
When this is aligned, then place over its flesh what we mentioned earlier from oil and gelatinous substances.
Then instruct it to move slowly. When you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct it to compress; and make her sneeze with hindrance.
The fetus exits prepared on the side. When it descends to the birth canal in this manner with a second woman, then cut off the second woman along with your nail until drying occurs from moisture.
But if it is hanging over the face of the fetus and its neck, then incise her from the navel: so that it does not retain [anything], and dies.
Then push the fetus into the internal organs until you place it as it should be; and instruct the woman to compress herself several times: for indeed she will exit gently from the womb.
The birth of twins or multiple offspring. You should know that twins are often born; and sometimes three or four are born at once. However, this is foreign to [the context], and it rarely happens.
However, five are unnatural and do not live completely; they are held together by a twin bond: although they multiply, there is a second one with them, distinguished by a cord attached to the belly button of each of theirs.
And sometimes they exit like a single fetus naturally and easily: but they exit in an ill-omened manner, as we have narrated.
If some of them are difficult at birth and come to that which we have called unnatural shapes: then treat them as we have narrated; let it be with the aid of a subtle charm, and make what is done with ease or difficulty happen, and shape it according to every figure by means of an art that leads to health.
Recollection that forms within the womb from embryos, and miscarriums occur.
Sometimes one forms within the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and many more ten: and it has already been confirmed in me that a woman aborting emitted seven, and others fifteen, all formed.
This was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this should altogether be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. For it may perhaps come to that which is similar to it: therefore oppose it with what should happen
Chapter 76.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When treating a dead fetus with what I have said in the division by medical treatment and it does not exit, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then one must consider that:
If then the woman is of healthy constitution and not with anyone from accidents about which she fears losing her: one should make sure that the woman lies on a bed, on her back, and her head is inclined downward, and her legs are elevated: and servants hold her at two sides or tie her to the bed so that her body is not extracted during the extraction of the feteb.
Then moisten the bone with a fine membrane using oils and mucilage of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife fastens her hand with those oils and mucilages; then she inserts it into the womb easily. Then he seeks that place where he can insert the hook from the fetus, and the appropriate places for it.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its own head: then fasten the hooks in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate, or under its beard or backbone, or near its ribs and underneath its shoulder blades.
If however the descent is over its feet, then fasten them to its chest and middle of its back.
And it should hold the hook with the right hand; and place flexibility of its fingers between the left thumb's digits: and insert with that hand easily, and fasten the hook to some of those places we mentioned, until it reaches a vacant space.
Then fasten on the opposite side another hook, or third if you want: so that there is equal contraction and it does not lean to one side.
Then it is extended to equal extent and not just according to straightness alone, but move towards every side so as to relieve its passage: as when a tooth falls out in eradication of it.
And it is necessary in between that there be softening of the extension. And if it retains that part, then the midwife should fasten some fingers with oil and insert them from one side to roll what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetcus emerges, then exchange hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus is born.
If however the hand is brought forth before another and it cannot be reduced because of its constriction, then a cloth must be wound around it. Then remove it completely when brought out and make an incision either at the wrist or at the ankle joint, so that it may be placed in one hand and two feet.
However, if the head of the fetus is large or a constriction occurs at its exit or water accumulatal caput, then it must be inserted between the fingers of a sponge-like bandage and struck with that to expel the head; or cut open using an instrument called Almisdac. The shape of which comes from other instruments mentioned in the chapter following this.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature, then it must be cut open; or remove it with an instrument as we have said. Then remove bones with forceps.
If the head is brought forth and a constriction occurs at its neck: then it must be struck until the moisture within the chest is expelled.
However, if not complicated nor does it follow its natural course of delivery: then the head must be cut off gradually as much as possible for you.
This is if there is a boil below the vagina or hydrops (fluid accumulation) is present within it; then you must puncture it so that the fluid may run out from there.
However, if the fetus is above its feet, then the extraction of it is easy and its direction towards the mother's mouth is slight.
If however it is constricted at the vagina or chest; then you must remove it with a cloth that you wound over your hand: and strike the vagina or chest until what flows from there does.
However, if other limbs are removed, and the head returns; then the midwife must insert her left hand. If the uterine orifice is open, then insert a hand into its depth and seek for something therein, and pull it out with fingers up to the uterine opening: then insert a hook (uncus) once or two hooks and pull it out with them.
If the uterine opening is obstructed because of a hot suppuration that has occurred therein: then it does not need to work on this directly, but instead one should administer an effusion of moist substances and fatty matters, as well as applying poultices, and let him sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it may be leveled out: then administer what we have said for the living fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut in pieces and remove them one by one.
And it must be ensured that nothing at all is expelled from within the uterine cavity.
Whenever you have completed your surgery, then administer what we have said for hot suppurations that occur in the uteri.
If there is bleeding, then let it flow into styptic waters, and apply the rest of the treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb was dead due to a fetus; then she became pregnant over it with another [fetus], after which there was also a death of that other fetus. So it happened to her with a protracted suppuration at the navel itself, and swelling, until opened: and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for her treatment, and healed her for a prolonged time: but the wound did not solidify.
So I applied strong attracting plasters on top of it, and pus came out from the place (of infection). Afterwards a few days passed for her, and pus came out again from the orifice. Wondrous I have been thereafter when within a mouth not an opening is present.
Therefore, I thought because they were from the bones of stillborn fetuses.
Thus I examined the wound and extracted many bones from a woman who was otherwise well-disposed; and she has lived like this for a very long time, and expels little pus from there.
And I did not confirm this foreign object here, unless there is knowledge of it, and assistance for that which the medical craftsman administers with his hands in healing.
Chapter 77.
§ Regarding necessary instruments for fetus extraction.
The form of a Vertigo that opens the womb.
Here below is the form of the Strangulatorium, with which books are equalized, and two vertical lines on both ends of two pieces of wood are balanced equally. Yet however this Vertigo must be made with a finer Strangulatorium; and to achieve this, it should be either from ebony or from bushy wood.
And the width of all wood should be as if two fingers; and the margin of each one is like a single finger, and their length is a hand's breadth and half: and in between these two pieces of wood are two additions from that same kind of wood which are already secured on both, whose length is half a palm more or less: and their width as if two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additions are inserted into the birth canal to open it when you remove them with both Vertigos.
Another form similar to it, more refined, and lighter.
Be made from ebony or bushy wood, according to the resemblance of pincers. Yet however on its ends there should be two additions like you saw above: and the length of each addition is as if a hand's breadth; and their width is as if two fingers.
Therefore, when you open the womb with that thing, then make the woman sit on the bed with her legs hanging down and what is between her thighs opened. Then insert those two joined items into the womb, and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighn. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with scissors, equally according to the amount that comes out of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another dizziness, which was called by the ancients the Shape that pushes out the fetus.
The shape of Almisda, which is carved as a large head: and it resembles the forceps, with teeth at its tip, as you see.
And sometimes it makes an oval shape like the forceps of this kind, as you see, with teeth like sawteeth, by which it is cut and carved.
The shape with the handle has one spine.
The shape with the handle has two spines.
The shape of Spatulum with two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape also of two spatulums and handles.
All these instruments are used, and the more they multiply in their kinds, and they have been prepared by the craftsman, is quicker to perform its operation, and higher with people, because of its quantity.
Therefore do not disdain from them any instrument that is prepared with you. For it is indeed an inexcusable necessity of theirs.
Chapter 78.
§ Regarding the extraction of a female fetus.
When a female fetus is retained during childbirth, then you should teach the weak one to retain her breaths. Then make her sneeze with this condition: and place your hand firmly on her mouth, and her nostrcu>ls. However, if she comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take an eggshell, and pierce a hole in its cover: and place the following plants that open the womb's mouth, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, shepherd'amoena, blue cornflower, centaury; take all these herbs or some of them, mix with water, and put over fire.
Then put the bark of reed over the hole of the eggshell cover and another end into her womb's mouth; and hold it until vapors reach to concave of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said before. For the second one will come out easily.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then have the midwife immerse her hand in sesame oil or high-quality honey. Then insert into the womb and look for the second one there. When she has found it, then take hold of her and slowly pull her out.
If however it is attached deeply within the womb, then insert a hand as we have narrated before until she finds Secundina, and gradually extract her maintaining rectitude so that the womb does not fall due to strong attraction: indeed, it must be turned with ease to the right and left sides; then add in amount of attraction. For she will obey then, and take care, and flee from attachment.
For if the womb's mouth is cramped as we have already narrated: attend to it with sneezing, and by means of eggshell with herbs treatment.
However, if it does not come out with all that we have described, then do not trouble yourself too much about the bone during the process of extraction.
However, it is necessary that what comes out through the mother'amoor to be close to a woman's thigh. Then enema her with tetrapharmacic ointment. For it will then become rotten after days, and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it becomes putrid, it will emit a bad smell to the stomach and head, and harm that weak one. Therefore, they should administer appropriate fumigations for this.
However, some of the ancients already knew the fumigation of lupins and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which to fumigate a woman during the retention of Secundina and menses.
Make from the bellow like an alcama or from wax: and place the wide end over fire: and let the fumigation be placed over branches: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and another one.
Head LXXIX. (Roman numerals for 79
¶ On the healing of Annie not perforated. (The symbol "¶" indicates a new section or paragraph, typically
Many children are born and those of Annie are not pierced, whom she already rubbed with gentle oil. (This sentence provides information about the postnatal care involving children who were not circumcised.) Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife pierces that oil with her own finger: and if not, she should pierce it with sharp spatulae: and let her be careful of touching it. (Here, there's a recommendation for a specific post-birth procedure involving a midwife.)
Then put over that soaked wool on wine and oil. (This part of the text likely refers to a treatment or care method using those materials after birth.) And then take care of it with ointment until it heals. (This sentence provides guidance for continued postnatal care and healing processes.)
If however it becomes necessary to pass something through, then a lead pipe should be inserted into the passage for many days, and removed when the boy wishes to do so.
And now there has been swelling in Ani as well from a consolidated wound or abscesses. Therefore, it is necessary that this consolidation be cut out, then treated as we mentioned in the healing and with lead.
Chapter 80.
¶ Concerning the healing of fistulas that occur on the lower part.
Fistulas that occur on the lower side are a nodule and swelling which happen near the anus outside or in the space of one side, and there is one fistula or several.
When therefore that nodule is removed, it opens up, and a white watery moisture or fine pus runs from there.
And sometimes they are perforating fistulas from these. Therefore perforating fangs are recognized by what emerges from the evacuation and wind, when one is using defecation as a patient: and perhaps it emerges from them worms.
And they are fang-like fistulas when they are in the perforating space up to a blister and up to the foreskin of the scrotum. And there are fang-like perforations up to the hip joints and up to the tailbone knot.
From that however by which one recognizes the fang-like perforating up to the anus, and also from the non-perforating one is when you insert your index finger into the anus: and insert a delicate thread into the fistula from wire or iron: when there is no tortuosity.
If there is a twistiness in it, then insert into it a delicate thread of lead or a spear from eagle's feathers, until you feel the thread or the spear in your finger.
If the object is not felt fully within, nor does anything pass through its opening or emerge from it, nor does there appear any swelling or worm as I mentioned: then you know that it is not penetrating; so proceed with treatment promptly.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or the urethra of urine: then its indication is that urine passes out from it, and the prevention of this so that the location can be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetraturum up to the hip joint or the pelvic bone: then its sign is that it reaches there through probing, if there is no twisting all the way to the bone: and discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always comes out from it: and that medicine does not work well in it nor consolidate with ointment.
And for all these fistulas that are penetrating there is no cure at all; and the treatment of them is effort and futility because of foolish doctors on whom a belief is formed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, it is hoped for cure with a sling; as I tell you, and I have already tried: and it lies sick between your hands over its back: and its legs are supported up to its hips by an elbow crutch, and its own hips are inclined towards its groin. Then inserting lead or air if it is a fistula with twists, until you know where the probing reaches.
But if the sick person feels it around his anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into his ane.
But if you feel the probing having already passed through your finger by detection apart from feeling between your finger and it, or flesh: then therefore you know certainly that it is penetrating; not labor over it, for there is no cure of it as we said.
Nevertheless, it has been said that healing occurs in some men with flesh and through the treatment from which one expects relief, by using subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula as it passes, and inserting the burning substance into the fabulum until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that process twice or three times until you know that all those flesh pieces added filtered are similar to the tubes and feathers of a bird's wing.
Then care for that process with ointments softened in butter until the burned flesh pieces come out; then care for that process with creams generating and solidifying skin.
If therefore it heals, this is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other treatment ever.
And if it comes out with attempts and does not reach up to your finger that is in the anus, and there is a dense board of flesh between them or fat: and you see the fistula on the surface following skin, then cut off the skin from the start of the fastoma, and you proceed cutting along with what is in the fistula until it reaches where the extremity reached by the attempt has come to be cut, and the attempt frees and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh pieces that resemble the tubes and feathers of a bird's wing so that nothing remains from them.
But if blood conquers you and dissolves between you and your procedure as it cuts those flesh pieces off: then better that happens, and more prompt healing, by burning it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For burning with fire accumulates good habits, adding burn to those added flesh pieces, and cutting blood, and drying moisture out.
Then care for that process with ointments softened in butter or ground cabbage leaves until it lets out a pus place and the burned flesh pieces come out into the peus.
Then care for the wound with consolidated ointments that produce hard flesh, and there are medicines in which there is astringency and dryness.
But when they become raw again, then it begins to heal: and not the repetition of treatment.
But if the fistula has now reached deep within the anus, and it is extended due to the abundance of bodily fluids: then insert your finger into the anus, and examine with it.
But if you feel that there is a weakness between you and the fistula, or it is made of slough or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then no operation should be performed in this case, only according to the pathway of trust and hope.
This is because three kinds of treatment are applied to it: or as we said, by burning the wound itself: or by cutting it off until you achieve a cavity in which you can insert your finger and heal from nearby tissues. And do not proceed much with the cutting so as not to injure the continual ligament of the anus and have it happen to the sickly waste discharge without desire. Then care for that as we said before.
For perhaps it will heal: or you extend the slough and dry out itself after you cut off as near to the anus as we said, either by pressure, or with another sharp object. Then cleanse the strained flesh that is from cutting until you can examine it.
Then try to restore the wound entirely with cutting and the upper opening where it is solidified: and there will remain an open fistula within the inner part of the ane, and it will be weaker above the sickly one.
And sometimes the fistula is according to this manner: and it is when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the body's surface with skin and edge of the anus: then take a finger perforated at its extremity, which is like the stylus aleskef, that is, prepared leather, according to this form. And insert into it a rolled thread from five threads, and about this. Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until the swelling subsides.
If it is penetrating into the inner edge of the anus near to it, then extract the thread from that opening: as you insert your finger in the anus, and withdraw the tip of the filament; and join the two ends together simultaneously: tighten each one, and let go on the first or second day. And as long as the filament is biting into the flesh, press it well until those pieces of flesh between the two extremities of the thread fall off. Then care for the wound until it consolidates and heals.
However, if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then do whatever you can to make it penetrate, unless it is too deep much. For you are not equipped to do this because of the arm; that you may not injure yourself with it.
Then do as we have said, until healed.
The form of the spindle-shaped thorn where one finds the fistula, its curvature is very sharp on one side, and the other part is not sharp, as you see it does not need to be pierced in that way.
Chapter 81.
Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows due to incision of them: and care for the cracks.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Or they are inside the anus, like coal blisters, or plums: or as if they themselves were beans of wheat. And from them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and they are many. And they are outside the aneus, and at its ends.
But those that are outside the anus, mostly consist of very little moisture, from which flows yellowish water, or a small flow of blood often: and they are according to the body's color.
And the treatment within the anus is as follows: instruct the patient to hold it off; and express until the anus is emptied, and your little stick appears. Therefore, also suspend with a hook or hold them with your nail. Then cut them near their roots.
But if they are not held by hooks due to their moisture and softening of themselves: then catch them with a rough cloth or with a piece of cotton thread from the dipalon, and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle some warm powders over the incision to maintain that location as a caustic site. Or burn them according to what was described earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Then take care of them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not open, then administer a small enema to the patient so that it softens what is in the anus and quickly opens for expression when the patient evacuates.
But if the little sticks are external from the anum, then they are small and easy: and it is as if you were to catch them with your nail or a hook, and cut them. Then care for them as we have mentioned until they heal.
And whoever detests cutting with iron, it is necessary to administer their wounds in this manner. Take a twisted thread and insert it into the tip. Then extract the little sticks upwards and make the thread penetrate with a needle into one of its roots on one side: and twist both ends of the thread on the needle at the lower part, and they should be wide apart; and tighten the sutures firmly. Then knot the thread and extract the neede.
Do this with all the bands and remove one from them; lest his own flows out excessively of blood.
Then place the soaked bandage in rose oil or pitch, and put it on his wound; instruct the sick person to rest. Then remove it when it falls off.
When therefore the bands fall off, care for them with ointments, and continue treatment until they heal.
§ On treating fissures. For often it happens from drying of the feces and natural contraction.
When they are therefore becoming obstructed and medicine does not work: then you need to scrape with spatula or your nail, until they become moist, and remove the upper crust that prevents them from uniting. Then care for them until they unite as it should be.
If however they do not unhave: then repeat them with much more vigorous scraping than the first time, until bleeding a lot and peeling off; then care for them until they heal.
§ On treating hemorrhoids, both existing and not existing: and bandaging of sores, and anthelmintics.
Chapter 82.
Know that hemorrhoids are not but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to a claw's head; and it happens throughout the body, mainly in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and there is pain during walking.
Therefore it should be that which is around the claw head, be held with pincers or hooks, and removed from its root.
Then care for it: and if you want to cauterize that according to what preceded in chapter itself.
But from bandages there is one small elevation, rough, strained, round above the surface of the body. And often this occurs in the hands of boys.
And its treatment is to stretch out the splint and make an incision in it: or with silk threads: or with a hair, until it falls off. And if possible, burn it as described before with fire or with acute medicine: and already the splints are being removed on both sides (opposing), and not on opposite sides using the instrument I will mention.
The anthrax is also a small filtrating eminence, large on the body surface, flowing deep into it: and when found cold, it is felt like a sting of ants, and occurs throughout the body; especially in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a tube from the feather of a goose or from a strong crow's feeather: and place this tube over the anthrax, until it contains a circle from its parts with the tube. Then roll up your hand with the tube and cut off what is around the anthrax: and place it deep into the flesh, and extract the splints from their root therein.
And if possible, do this with a tube of air or iron in this manner.
Place above the tube a raised hollow drawing away to relieve pressure on the grip of its finger and its roll-up.
And if possible, burn the anthrax as described before for burning splints in the chapter on caustics.
Chapter 83.
§ Regarding the instruments administered to clisters in diseases of sheep and solutions from winds, and colics. (Note: Albucasis' treatise also covers other topics beyond surgery, such as medical conditions specific to certain types of animals.)
Sometimes clisters are made from silver, or copperplate, or cast iron, or hammered metal. (Note: Clister refers to an enema in the context of medieval medicine and surgery.)
And at times, from these instruments are both small and large, according to those which they are used upon.
Therefore, what is administerwed in the treatment of children who are small and weak or painful should be so as well; namely their enemas should also correspond to these conditions.
Large enema.
The cane of it, that is, the top part where the rubber is attached should be broad according to this method; and its separation should be arranged such that the tube is fastened as you see, and its lower extremity which enters into the anus should be closed, namely not open, soft, very narrow, with great fineness; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And its size of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and thicker but little, and it should be a tube in which they put medicines from the bladder of animals; or from paper made of wood, which is according to the shape of small asafra: whose root is one palm.
And it should be pierced with many holes like the thread runs through, and there should be space that is between all hole thicknesses equal to a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw thread, which is of ten threads or about that much, and bind it with wool like small asafra. Therefore, when placed in that tube, it is tied at the head of the enema between two strong tight bindings. Then with this enema.
And this is the form of the circle drawn here and the holes.
However, the quality of enemas with it is as follows: you should fill wool or a bladerof medicine that has been heated according to how much weakness the patient can tolerate; and care that it is not too hot or very cold.
Then the sick person lies on their back and lifts their legs upwards; underneabove them, that is, a skin or bandage placed upon those lying down people.
Then wash the extremity with clisters using oil, or pulverized alubgine, or spelt mucilage, or similar substances. Then insert a sausage into the anus easily. Then the assistant should receive a sausage with both hands simultaneously, and squeeze out its contents firmly until all that is in the clister has entered the intestine.
Then remove the clister, and elevate the sick person's legs towards the wall.
If the medicine thinks him to be on the point of death, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps through that night entirely, it is more towards his final passing.
But if the sausages are causing him discomfort from his respiratory illness, and hasten his end: then repeat the sausages until he is healed.
That if there are hemorrhoids or wounds damaging the anus, then use a very delicate and gentle sausage from the types of sausages used to administer to children.
And this is the form of a subtle sausage for which the skin is strictly tight.
Head 84.
Now I have previously spoken of the division of curing wounds that was appropriate to be in a book, and now I will speak here about their treatment by hand, and with medicine according to the complementary method.
Therefore I say that wounds vary depending on how they are formed and the location where the wound falls.
The results of wounds that happen frequently are like being struck by a stone: or cut with a knife, or hit with a spear, or wood, or arrow: and similar things from many other sources.
However, wounds that occur according to body parts are, such as a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, or abdamoen, and similar ones in those limbs.
And I am recounting the treatments of some wounds, providing a reasoning and rule for other wounds as well.
And I shall begin with simple head wounds, since the recollection of compounds will come at the beginning of chapter three.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture: consider then, if it's from a stone throw or similar impacts, and has already broken the skin only: this is a large wangle, so apply warm antiphlogistic compresses to the affected area immediately: do not delay in doing so, and extract blood by an incision according to its strength: unless there is something that prohibits phlebotomy, especially if it's scarce bleeding from the wound. And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the wounded area.
And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the patient take care to avoid replenishing themselves with liquids and eating heavy foods.
But if something restricts reducing the wound, then let it be reduced from food intake and not approach meats or wine.
And place over the wound if it gets a warm swelling, with an infusion of rose oil alone or mixed with wine that has stipulative qualities.
But if you are secure from the warm swelling, then place over the wound if it is fresh and still bleeding its own blood, and do not change the air yet: put on a little powder that I will describe later: and if it has already changed the air, then apply some ointments until healed.
If however the wound is large, or it is from a cut of a sword, and similar: and do not sew up its lips with pins, then bind together that very one with stitches, as I will describe in treatments of vaginal wounds regarding their suturing.
However if the wound has already been detected from a bone, and it hangs, and there is no support of its own except in small dressings: then cut into it. Then treat the wound with medicines, and let it rest until flesh is restored to that hard spot where the skin was, and instruct the sick person to eat foods in which there is bulkiness, such as heads [of animals], and cooked wheat, until it becomes like a pulse: and similar things.
But if you find rotting in the skin, and it does not stick to the bone: then cut out the entire rotten part, and remove it; afterwards treat that wound.
However if in these wounds there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows: and it has not been separated by medicines, then investigate above the artery. If however you find that wound not severed, then cut off with spatula (a surgical instrument) or tie it off. But if necessity provokes when that thing is not supported as we have said, then cauterize it, until the blood separates.
However if these wounds are small and simple, then the healing of those is easy, light: thus powder over them this kind of powder: for it consolidates before changing that to air.
Mode of medicated pulverization. Take one part of oliban (myrrh), and two parts of dragon's blood, and three unburnt lime: mix it all well together, and strain it; then fill up with that wound, and bind it tightly with a good constriction, until it adheres strongly to the above, and clots with blood.
Then tighten the flesh above with sutures and let it go, do not dissolve it while in place, so that it does not come loose. But that wound is not healed by that medicine until it's cured.
And sometimes he makes that plaster alone when you don't have frankincense at hand, and the blood of a dragon also performs the same operation in many large wounds when it is suitable to be placed over them and tightened, and are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
But if this powder has already been changed by some alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then there is no intention for this powder to be placed: therefore attend to that with what we said, so as to put something like digestive ointments over it or place pills made of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then attend to the remaining treatment until healed.
But if it happens with a bone fracture wound and is small, then extract that with forceps: and I will now say the treatment for head f cuature wounds that will be done. (Note: The Latin text seems to be missing some parts at the end which makes translating difficult without speculation.)
For neck wounds. (This sentence is incomplete and lacks context, but it refers to treatment for neck
But if a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a head wound when it is simple. (This instruction seems to indicate that certain types of wounds may not differ much in their initial medical management.)
But if the neck is already incised, or an artery: then if it's a nerve, there is no nature in that except for its treatment being like strong astringents such as ziniar and zegi, and similar things. (This instruction refers to treating more complex wounds involving nerves or arteries with particular medications.) Since spirits are harmful and draw them in.
And do not put anything cold at all on the wound; for nerve substance is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is a higher part of the body: and it should be cared for by medicines made mildly, such as lime powder mixed with slightly sweetened water infused with oil or rose-oil, and tuthia, when also washed with sweet water: and the rest of mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
But if the w지oon is large, then administer stitches or compress its lips with cottonwool. Then take care of it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep, or occurs in a sinew at its lower part where pus has already gathered, then puncture it in a more deeply depressed place within that area.
But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and its blood flow has been interrupted: then separate it, or sever it, and tie that part; or burn it off, if there is a need for this.
But if the spondylus of the throat has already been severed entirely and its ligaments have been sutured: then gather the edges of the skin with suture over the neck cane, and do not touch the throat itself, but instead align it evenly and bring the tissue back to its natural shape. Then tighten the dressing appropriaturately, and release the wound for several days. Then care for it with ointments that have astringency and healing properties until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it: then if there are fragments of bone within that one, extract everything you can from them; and whatever cannot be prepared, discard it so that the wound rots, separates, and clears up.
If a wound is recent, then apply powder to it as mentioned above. But if bone appears within the wound and a fistula occurs, then treat it as described for that specific issue in its respective chapter.
Of the wound on the spatulas (scaphoid bones).
If there is a blow with a spear or knife and you see its depth, then consider the following (translation of further text would be needed). But if there is a discharge from the wound and he breathes weakly as a result, then know that the wound is fatal (translation of further text would be needed).
If the depth is not significant and it is recent with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it at first hour or bind it, so that the blood does not remain deep within and return to the heart, thus killing the sick person: but place an attractive ointleteil in it, and dissolve it over two days.
But if the ointment is not present to you, then place an old cotton wick at the opening of the wound so that it may draw out what flows from it due to moisture: and make sure the sick person lies over the wound so that whatever collects in it can be drawn out.
But if more than three days have passed since the wounds or more without convulsions occurricking to the sick person, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor stricture in breathing, and you see his remaining conditions are good: then know that the wound is healed (salvum). Therefore treat it with cleanliness and according to its respective procedures until it heals.
But if there is no healing of that (wound) and it keeps opening always, then know that a fistula has already been formed. Therefore treat it according to its respective chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut with a sword or knife and is simple on the chest or back, then treat it as such that preceded it in stitching, if large; or with dust, if small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and chipped from there: then examine the ward, and hurry to extract that chip if separated. But if they are not separate, then let them be; until the wound has become gangrenous, for indeed their extraction should be avoided.
However, regarding other wounds of injuries to the rest of the limbs, is the judgement on their treatment that we have said.
Regarding wounds of the belly, and issues from within the intestines, and their exits.
The disruption that occurs in the belly is large, medium, and small.
Therefore from a large one sometimes exits the intangible bowel, or the number of intangible bowels.
Why it is an entry for them and their stitching more intense and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. Therefore it is thus that their reduction becomes more difficult if not hurried to their entry into its place immediately: since it swells, opens up, and thickens: therefore its entry is made difficult.
Therefore it follows that a better disruption occurs from the medium one: since its reduction is not difficult like the intangible bowel in these two kinds.
Know that the stitching of the wound is according to four ways.
Two common stitchings meet in the wound of the belly and in the stitching of other bodily wounds; and two other stitchings properly communicate with other wounds. However, they are more appropriate with a nasal incision: and I tell you one as well with exposure, and explanation.
Therefore, when a wound is small and something emerges from it out of the intestine, making it difficult to reduce; then that is due to one of two reasons. Or because of a tear as we said before: Or because there is swelling within the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore this is so, then you must warm it up as such: immerse a sponge or damp cloth in lukewamo water alone. Or boil it in a mixture of henbane, licorice root and anise, then bandage the intestine with that until the swelling is resolved.
Sometimes it does better with a wine which has astringency; and it is better than just water alone for resolving the swelling.
When you see that the swelling has now resolved, then moisten the intestine with a mixture of water and mallows or meadowsweet. For through this passage is to be enlarged somewhat.
But if the return of it after this treatment is obstructed; then find a small tear with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared beforehand than cutting; and there is no force to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
It is one part of it that is curved and sharp, and the other part that is not sharp; the tip should not be with subtlety like a sponge, rather it should be bluntly: and that is which resembles chalk as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and something enters into the intestine, then it should be reduced according to its own natural shape in its proper place if possible on top of that; for it is better.
When indeed the rupture is wide in the lower part of the ventricles: then it must be made so that the patient lies on his back, and places his legs higher than his head. And if it is located in the upper part of the ventricums, then place its head and make its chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two ventricular parts, then place your intention and always keep this consideration in mind that the part where the wound is should be placed on the upper side of the other part.
And thus one must remember this in large and medium wounds.
However, in small wounds, place them as you have prepared for it.
Then let there be present between your hands a faithful servant who holds the rupture entirely with his hand: and gather its lips. Then remove from it that who follows the suture something after something: and this is the common mode of single sutures.
And it is to receive an awl or a number of awls according to the amount of the wound's width. Then dismiss from the end of the rupture a quantity of ring finger, that is, of a doctor: and fix an awl aside from inserting it into the thread in both ends of the skin's cuticle, with two cuticles of flesh undernepressive that are below the skin, until you make it penetrate through another part, and then you have already joined the two cuticle extremities, and two sifac extremities: and they become four orders.
Then tie with the thread twice around the roundness of the awl several times from both parts at once, until they are joined in decent aggregation.
Then dismiss also the thickness of a finger and fix an awl into them as well: then straighten it with thread, as you did with the first awl. Therefore, do not stop doing that with him from whom you want to extract a boil until you complete the binding of the wound entirely.
And let the needles be of medium size between thickness and fineness; because fine needles strike deeply into the flesh very quickly: and thicker ones have a difficult entrance into the skin: for this reason it must be that they are of medium size in fineness, and thickness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be pierced close to two extremities of the skin: so that it does not strike deeply into the flesh quickly and open the wound before its own hardening, and even when suturing, do not extend them too much, so as not to hinder the healing of the wn.
Then incise the tips of the needles so that they do not hurt the sick person while sleeping; and place small pieces from cloths on all sides holding the extremities of the needcuils: and remove them, when you know that the wound has already hardened.
And indeed this type of stitching with sleepers is more convenient for small wounds. For it suffices to use one or two needles at most for those stitches.
The second common stitch is to gather with the stitches four extremities: two of skin and two tips on one needle, when the thread to be wound on it is equal in fineness, and thickness.
Then when you will have entered with those four extremities of the needle, bring back the tip from where you had incaed it to fall the thread rewound on the upper part of the wound: so that it becomes a stitch like the one by which clothes are fastened, and place between all the stitches an amount of thickness equal to the smallest finger.
And this type of stitch is known by people.
And with this suture of mine, I treated the wound that occurred to a man on his shin, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a larger wound gap by one handbreadth: and it protruduted about two handbreadths from the intestines near the middle part, and there was a disruption in the middle of the thigh.
Therefore, after it had stood still for twenty-four hours outside the wound.
Therefore, the wound was healed in a space of about fifteen days; and I took care of it, and it was cured: and lived for many years thereafter, changed into his own dispositions.
And physicians judged that it could not be healed.
And by a marvel it was, that I did not cure that with ointment. Since I was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine could be found. So I applied the old sore with oil twice a day, and diligently bathed it with water mixed with honey until healed.
But two kinds of stitches, indeed I shall say according to the speaker's account.
And it is as follows to begin with the sharp needle: and insert from the outer part to the inner part.
When therefore the needle pierces the skin and enters into the muscle according to the length and width of the entire body: let the sharp point be thrown off at the side where you inserted the neednard, and make it penetrate again from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity.
When then you have made it pierce (i.e., thread the needle through), make it pierce again at this other end according to this same method: and let the sharp point be thrown off on this side also, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part at the other end; and with your penetration as you do when making it pierce (i.e., threading), make it pierce into the sharp point which is in that part until it completely enters.
Then begin with this same side as well, and the thread with (the sharp point of) the needle which is from the suture on the other side, and remove the needle from the skin through which it has been pierced.
Then reduce it to that skin and the sharp point which is on the other side with this end; and remove it from the part of (the needle) which is in that part: and make that one thread, and another: and make these threads one after the other, as far as you have made them completely outward according to that example.
The sum of this suture is as follows: you should use the same technique as with cowhide skins; thus, pull one thread from one end of the skin on one side, and let it go in such a way at the other end on the other side until completed.
The second type of proper stitch, as said by Galeanus.
This speech is narrated as follows: according to its similarity, they use it in the way some physicians do; thus, they bring together each part with a suitable comparison by nature: and they apply the end of the thread on one side to the other end, and the edge of the suture to the opposite edge. And that is done as I have told you.
It is necessary that you shape the needle near the edge of the suture on the side closest to you and make it penetrate into the inside of just one layer; and let go two ends of thread. Then remove the needle, and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner side on two ends of thread, namely each one.
Then remove both threads, and also make them penetrate from the inner to the outer sides on two other edges of the suture, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is a better common suture than the previous one, and it has surpassed memory recall.
Therefore, it is also the speech of Galen.
And some have said that. The genital wound should be stitched with two needles. That is, you should introduce one thread into each; and begin with the insertion of the needle from what is near to you, and make it penetrate up to another side, according to an equal stitching as they have on hides that follow sutures.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the genital area: then the stitching of this place is more difficult than those of other parts of the genitals.
The judgment of a wound'prise treatment is indeed the judgment of other wounds.
What it is because when you have acquired a recent wound with its own blood before letting in air: and straightening the intestines, and closing the sutures, and applying the fatty substance: then place upon powdered flesh.
What if the wound has already let in air: then place a certain ointment over it, which is available to you, until they form pus: and the threads fall out, and the linen bandage strengthens, and maroons (a type of plant). Then tend that wound as if it were a cure for other wounds until it heals.
But if the remedies are not available to you, then immediately place it over that, remove as soon as it begins to emit pus and old blood; and change twice a day, as I have taught you, until healed.
For you will not find another treatment in various dispositions when the wounds are simple.
But if times, what communicates the wound with principal limbs through a lesion, then it is necessary to immerse linen cloths in oil heated at midday: and place them on the surrounding areas that are between the groin and underarms.
What if it feels pain, or punctures, or decay in its own intestines (for this often happens) then enemas with a black, warm, astringent wine: especially if decay has already come to the intestine and made itself penetrating up to an indentation of his.
And know that what is from the large intestine is of easier healing: and what is from it subtle, more difficult to heal.
The intestine that is called the jejunum does not take healing from a wound that happens in it altogether: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is a scab, and you manage to obtain it fresh: reduce it according to your method of reducing the intestines equally.
If however there is a gap and it has become black or green: then one must bind the wound with a thread above the place that became dark from it, so that blood does not flow out. For in scab there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond it, and place the two extremities of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wnre outside: so as to relieve its attraction towards you, and removal of the scab itself at the case of the wound, and emission of pus.
Recall the wound that occurred in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small: then it may be restored in some men: therefore because I saw one who was wounded in his intestine by striking with a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and made Fistula, and discharge from it emaciation, and bloat.
So I applied the treatment until I was not involved in its healing: nor did it cease subtly, until it was healthy and the place had solidified.
After I saw the place had already solidified, feared for the sick man that something happened to him with an accidental illness in his inte And he remained in better dispositions of his health, eating and drinking, and intercourse, and entered the bath, and was exercised in his meals.
And now some of the experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intintestine and it is small: then it must be tied according to this method. And indeed, as if receiving ants with large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound and place one ant from them that has an open mouth above the two lips of the wound. But when its head is placed upon it and clenches with its mouth, detach that head as it sticks to the wound and does not come off easily.
Then place another ant near the first one, and continue to do this with ants in proportion to the size of the entire wnid.
Then remove it entirely, along with the wound itself. For indeed these heads remain attached to the intestine until it is consumed by the intestine and heals properly without causing any deep harm to the weakened individual.
And now it is possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread: that which is removed from the intestine of the animal and remains attached with it after being inserted into the wound.
And indeed, as if receiving an end piece of this thread from the intestine, which is then snipped off in large amounts. Then twist a fine thread around that endpiece of the thread and tie it securecuously. Then insert that thread into the wound, along with its attached intestine. Then remove it entirely from there.
And this method of stitching with ants and the intestine is nothing but according to the road of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large, wide and especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no method but fine manipulation, and its healing at all is nonexistent.
B. Care for piles and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it gets old and fades away becomes an ulcer and does not harden, but always emits pus and is never cut off: then universally in whatever body part it was present, we call it Fistula, and we name this condition Zuchemen.
Indeed, a fistula is according to the truth a filtered, hard, white nodulation; with which there is no pain, but rather indentation like a bird's beak; and because of this, some call it Risati, that is, penis.
And it is in certain moist hours which discharges pus. And perhaps the dampness is divided into certain hours. And sometimes this dampness is much and is little; it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already foreshadowed in division, then when I said wounds, that all ulcers which do not heal and are born in the flesh is none but because of one of nine causes.
One of these is because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or since between it and over the lips there is hard flesh, hindering birth of the flesh: or because it is many filths and small dirties: or as the ulcer within itself is putrid, and that which emits from it is of bad quality: or as medicine does not correspond in its healing; or as falling corruption in the region is a kind of pestilence, or because of its property in the region, just as happens in Caesaraugusta: where there is difficult digestion of sicknesses and delaying sanation of apostemas by nature: or because within it one bone exists; or number of bones.
And I have already shown you all those causes and their signs, and the curing of them with medicines in division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the healing of fistulas and abscesses, which happens through a channel by hand surgery.
Therefore, know that Fistula occurs in all body members. For they are fistulas that arrive to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons; or to the intestines, or to the bladwool, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the dorsal spine, or to some compound composition of joints: as hands, and feet: and there are those that proceed to nearness of the principal member, and like.
Therefore, from these types of fistulas, it is difficult to heal according to this method, and does not allow for recovery, and dealing with it is a labor and ignorance.
If it is from some type of fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I have mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its healing, and wish to come to the knowledge of it, then take a try with iron or bronze, if the fistula tends towards straightness, and penetrate it with itself.
However, if there is a twisting in the festiula, then investigate it with an attempt from refined lead. Since refined lead, due to its malleability, is removed and cared around the twisting.
For if a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate above it with an attempt. Therefore, the syringe comes out from one of its own openings.
For the moisture with which you syringe, it flows towards other orifices and runs out from them.
Then carefully investigate as follows to find out what is possible for you: so that you may know whether it is a bone or nerve, and if the fistula's concavities are far or near; or if it is one fistula of which there are many opennungs, and it stands above all that, with your maximum strength: with your questioning, as when you ask about a patient, and in finding pain at compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of incidents.
Therefore, as you stand over all that with true station, then proceed to healing according to confidence: and it is, as when you consider then, if it is a near appearing fistula, or in a place except far from the joint, or from nerve, or artery,er vessel, or one of the places I have told you: then cut out the Fistula according to what was previously mentioned in my narration, and remove what is therein by filtration, and corrupt flesh that comes forth from its opening from flesh, fatty tissue, etc.: and care for it until healed.
However, if the fistula is of great depth and lengthwise, then it must be cut into as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it with all the rotten flesh from itself.
Then administer the poultice with sharp medicine and insert it up to the constriction of the fangs you have grasped with a fork until the potent medicine becomes saturated, performing this several times, until all that remains in the constricted area of the fang from decay is thoroughly soaked.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh until healed.
However, if not healed by this method, then burn it as we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it appears to be present with you as such: then examine it, and cut into it according to what I have told you; if nothing prohibits you from blood vessels or nerves, or limbs, as we said before.
If you find bone and there is some decay and blackness within it: then scrape into it until all the decay has been removed. Then care for it with what makes flesh white until healed.
Which if not healed and exudes pus as it did before: then know that you have not brought about the total eradication of decay.
Then examine over it a second time and explore its reason, and cleanse itself with the utmost strength of yours.
Then restore it. However, if healed: and if not, know that the decay is within a great depth of the body which you have not approached. Therefore it is not in your power with regard to this, except to leave it to nature.
Which if the decayed bone is a fragment and possible with you, attract it using fine forceps that are appropriate for it.
If there are many bones, then carefully make an amputation of all of them and do not leave anything out with your strength.
If indeed something is causing you difficulty from the moistures, and there is no fear or mistake in them, then incise those moistures and flesh if they are present, and free the bangs.
If indeed you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then place something over the wound so that it may rot: and release what is there until it rots around those bones from flesh and moistures.
And guard the wound so that it does not harden. And bind the incision you secured in your surgery. Indeed place something over it, if possible, soaked with a mixture of sulfur and oil: or submerged in an Egyptian ointnent, or any green-offering ointment.
For when those (moistures) indeed rot and the bones separate from them, let the removal of them be done easily, and their amputation.
But if there is a large bone, like the leg or hip bone, and suchlike, and what has come from it is mostly rotten: then scrape that thing out reasonably until that blackness and rot is removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is rotten in it is mostly gone and the marrow of the bone has already been infected with rot, then it must be tightened there, and incised all the way to where the rot reached: then take care of that thing until it hardens.
And I tell you a story, what happened to the man with his own leg: place that example and help over your surgery.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that moved inside the body, namely from within until materials came to the thigh and there was a large abscess: and it was not an external cause for him.
Therefore, it remains extended during that time with the error of doctors until the abscess is opened and much material accumulatur therein. And after the treatment of it has been placed until a channel is formed on the leg, and many openings have been made therein: these all discharged pus and bodily moisture.
Therefore, it was cared for by a multitude of doctors for about two years and there was no wisdom in the art of hand, until I was summoned, and saw his leg, and the matters that flowed from those openings in great quantities: even all the man's body had already turned to bones, and his color was now yellow.
Therefore, I entered a trye into one of those openings and it reached the mouth.
Then I was examined all the openings, and found that they were coming to me from all parts of the leg.
Therefore, I decided and followed up on one of those openebts until I drew out a piece of bone: and found that it was already corroded, darkened, putrefied, and pierced, so that it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore, I cleaned what was found in me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I assigned that there should be nothing but that corruption on the bone which I cut off and cleaned. And now I have completely removed it.
Then I applied the healing of the wound with consolidated medical substances for a long space. And it is not solidified.
Then I tried again and drew out above the bone atop the first discovery: and found a continuous corruption with the bnne, and cleaned what also appeared to me from that corruption.
Then I attempted his healing. And it is not restored.
Therefore, I examined it again and did not stop trying to restore the bone individually, and it was not restored until I cut into a piece of bone about one hand's width, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with remedies, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; this repetition of the procedure and cutting into itself was not necessary, except because of the patient'e weak conditioning, his low tolerance, and my fear for him about death: as he would faint at all times from excessive purging.
Thus it was completely healed: and a tough layer formed at the place of bone, and his arrangement was good within himself, and strength returned to him; and he reverted to his usual dispositions; and he did not suffer any harm in walking at all.
But if the bone is significantly elevated at the place of the body already fractured: then it should be bandaged like this: and it is to receive a sling; and pull tightly on the extremity of the prominent bone; and instruct someone who will raise it upward; and lay another ligament from coarse woolen cloth. Then bandage it over the flesh that is the bone: and extend its extremity as if to draw the flesh downward; and you reveal the flesh on the place which you want to hold with a sling so that the sling does not harm the flesh.
Put wood or a board underne.the bone on the lower side unevenly; for when you do this, it will not hinder decayed flesh.
And it should be a sling slightly over the place of decayed tissue, so that there is no hollowness with the rotten bn: and it does not show in its appearance to sight, and urge towards another use.
If the bone is decayed and not prominent, or if a portion of it continues with another part: and the decay is in the middle of it, or on one side: then separate flesh from all sides completely. Then place wood underneveeer.
Then saw that part where there is decay until the other side, and let the fence be on the length barely more than the decay, as we said before.
That if the decay is at a joint, cut the rotten joint and saw the bone on the other side.
But if the decay is in the connection of two joints, then there is no defect except for scraping.
That if the decay is on a hand's nail or foot's nail: then it is very difficult to heal there. However, you must examine how the decay appears to you. And scrapes it, and smoothens it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whichever device rectifies to you: when it does not cause trouble to the vein or nerve.
And know that these saws and blades to cut bone are many, according to the location of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, subtlety, size, brittlenebrity, and hardness, and their scarcity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument appropriate to the type of operation.
And know that these operations are significant for you according to the kind of instrument with which you will work when it is a lengthy study. And knowledge of the methods of this art is testimony to the nature of diseases: then indeed you will now find by yourself that which suits it with instruments for every ailment.
And I affirm to you at the end of this chapter'perticle number of instruments, which you place exemplars on and cut into, and experimentation that you test on others.
The Shape of Another Ridge.
The Shape of Joined Razors. Let the head of this razor be in shape like a starry helm, and let its points (edges) be in shape like those of an Elishba's pointer.
And it is not appropriate unless they scrape together with those joined heads (of the razors), when they become dull or the head of a large and big person.
The Shape of the Larger Razor.
The Shape of the Broad (Razor).
The Shape of the Razor that is concave.
The Shape of Another Thin Razor.
The Shape of Another Razor with a Curved Ending (Edge).
The Shape of the Small Razor, Thin to Be Tested.
This is like a Radius (bone), and its end is as the Ridge; it should be shown often at places according to reason of bones.
The Shape of the Razor that suits with the reasoning (function) which is pierced through from its osseous points.
Its end is triangular and sharp are his ends (edges).
It fits for India. And similarly it is appropriate that all things which we have said should be made of Razors, and Cutting Instruments, and Ridges.
Regarding cutting off extremities and unlocking bones.
The extremities rot (putrify), either because of external or internal causes.
Therefore, when the physician finds this putrefaction cannot be cured by medicines and does not bring about healing, but sees that it is spreading in the limb without any effect: then one must cut off that limb as far as necessary to allow the patient to escape from death or the greater defect of the member.
The sign of this is when the limb turns black until it seems dead: that fire has burnt it or it becomes putrid after turning black: then one must cut off as far as necessary from where this rot spreads to the entire body.
Thus at the onset of this cut and similarly if the cause of putrefaction is from certain poisonous ointments such as those from sea scorpions, viper's venom, rattlesnake oil, and similar substances.
If the putrefaction or blow is on a finger, then cut off that finger and do not leave any space of rotting so it can spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if this happens on the hand, then cut it off at its root and do not leave any space of putrefaction so that it may spread to the bifurcation (fork) of the arm.
And if this advances there, then cut off at the elbow near its joint.
But if the putrefaction progresses and he sees it about the elbow: then that is death to the patient. And beyond this treatment, there is no remedy from medicines.
And do the same for the foot when putrefaction advances into a toe: then cut it off near the knuckle; and if it reaches the arch of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. However, if it rises to the knee, then incise the shin near the joint of the knee.
But if the decay has now reached above the knee, then there is no remedy in it, unless discharge and let the sick person die.
And the method of cutting a limb or closing it is to tie the tendons at the bottom that you want to cut: and tie another tendon above the place. And let the servant stretch one tendon downward: and let another servant stretch a tendon upward to above. And you separate the flesh that is between two tendons with Spatulum, until all the meat is revealed. Then it is cut or closed.
And you must place a linen cloth from all parts on the wound, and it should not touch with suture at the healthy spot: and let there be an added injury to the sick person, and a warm swelling.
But if there is an internal bleeding while you work, then quickly cauterize the place: or put some powders that detach blood on it. Then return to your treatment until completed.
Then bind the injured limb with a matching tendon, and care for it until healed.
And I tell you what has happened to the man in his foot, this is the same thing that I told you.
Which is because it happened on his foot a blackening that resembles the burning of fire: and this decay first happens on its finger until it begins to affect the whole foot.
So the man recovered from himself after he saw that decay was cutting into his limb with great force, which he found from pain and burning: and it cut near the joint, and healed.
And after a long time had passed to him, that same decay happened on his hand's index finger.
So he came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with what I had put over his hand from the medicines after cleaning his body; but the excess was not found, and it began to progress into another finger: until the corruption started in his hand.
So he called me to make an incision in his hand; and I did not want it, hoping for a recovery from that excess; and also feared regarding death at the incision of his hand. For the man was strong overcoming adversity.
And afterward he had tried on me, returned to his land; and came to me about it, because he hurried, and injured his whole hand: and was healed.
And I did not bring this account, except as assistance on what falls from the nature of this disease; and to signify its meaning, and according to how it is done.
Of the treatment of Sinuses, and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshly members and the space of the abscess is protracted, until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or perforates, and what was in it escapes as if from a vessel; and the skin that is over it becomes like a cloth which has already been thinned out; and it does not reach its own corruption's end, nor imprint on the mouth, nor on the nerves, nor on the ligaments: it must be called Sinus. And it is not named Fistula. However, if the space of his continues to be protracted until it imprints a corruption in something among those members, then it will be named Fistula or zuken.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin altogether as if one were peeling; and especially when thinned out like fabric: and trusting because it does not stick with its location due to its own corruption.
If indeed you hope that it clings to the skin, and this does not result in that final corruption through its progression: and if there is a thickening of flesh in the wound, then treat it with an enema; and consider applying a plaster on it.
If it is large and the pus that emanates from it has a foul odor: then enema it with an Egyptian medicine made of vinegard, oil, and ziniar, equal parts being taken together into a bottle; they are boiled over fire until the medicament turns red; and let it come to the thickening as honey.
Then take what is needed from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and administer the enema through that plaster; tighten the opening of it, and send the medicine into it for two hours' time.
Then extract it with an irrigation: do this on that many days until the plaster is cleaned and the foul smell goes away.
And sometimes administer the enema with water and ashes, when this medicine is not available to you; it is that you take ash from wood shaveboard or oakwood ash: and pour water over it. Then wash with it, and administer the enema with that; until you believe that the plaster is already cleansed.
That if the sick person is not enduring of that Egyptian medicine, nor ash water; then enema it with water and honey, to which something has already been mixed in from crushed ziniar. Or enema it with a mixture of honey and wine, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash: and make the wine adhere to the plaster, especially when there is an excess in the wine of stiffness and dryness.
When you do that many times, and when you believe that the plaster is already free from corruption: then enema it with what makes flesh be born therein.
And it is as follows for receiving the emplastrum dafinicum: dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or clisterize it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
But if the passage of the Sinus is narrow and does not admit the clyster tube: then dilate it with iron to some extent: or place it into a poultice made with Egyptian ointum or Basillicum oil, until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if it is also a passage that is wide, then unite its lips with stitches: and let the quantity drawn out from it be as much as to make up the clyster without anything added.
And similarly, if the passage from which pus flows is elevated to above, then cut it off at a lower spot on that place so that the peus runs upward: since when pus is compressed into the depths of Sinus, it prevents flesh from forming therein.
But if it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus somewhat lower as intended: then try to prepare the part with a preparation through which peus runs easily, according to what is convenient for you. And try that nothing at all be retained from the peus within it: and take solidifying remedies as prescribed above the mark, suitable to what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the linen cloth be of such quantity that it makes contact with the entirety of the Sinus. Then incise with scissors along the opening of the Sinus hole, slightly larger than the Sinus opening. Then spread with ointments of oil over another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it over that place distant from the Sinus opening so as to ease the discharge of peus from there: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days alone.
However, the one who is over the sinus opening, he is the one whom you should extract at all times so that what has accumulated in it due to pus; and to know whether the matter flowing from there is much or little, digested or undigested.
And when considering this place of the sinus itself again, whether its lord feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess or not therein.
Therefore, when your treatment is extended thus, and you see the matter that flows over the sinus opening, then know if the sinus already adheres or approaches to adherence: then at once solve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you have bandaged the wound, then replace the cloth with another one, and renew the ointment.
However, if a thin matter flows out of the sinus after a long period of time, do not despair from adherence, for its healing approaches because there are people who delay tissue generation in their wounds and others who act otherwise with it.
However, if matter flows out of the sinnus after many days of undigested pus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
But if adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged: then add in drying medicines, indeed make doctors so that there are medicines moist in substance and dry in power: as with the ointment dyafinicon when added to it excess humidity from honey.
And from the more recent treatment that is being administered as if you were to receive the dyafeinic ointment and it be dissolved with rose oil, and returned over old wine equal in substance.
Then make it close up with that and use it.
And now he performs a similar action when the ointment of diphtheria is not present with you; honey, when boiled down, until it thickens, and uses that for treatment. Take balm, oil of aloe, and frankincense; grind all together completely, and pound that powder over honey while it is on fire. Then lay a strip over the wound, and press it with honey which you have boiled down; when thickened, grind that powder over it, and place it on the bandage, pressing it firmly.
And sometimes administered with that long plant [Aristolochia], roots of the heavenly lily, and wormwood; also barley flour and henbane. Use them with simple or complex mixtures as ground; pound over honey which you have triturated, and use that for treatment.
If the wound persists and does not heal by this treatment; then understand that there is a deep corruption within it; or already makes an impression on bones, or in other hard parts of the body, or ligaments: then cure it with the treatment of tube-like instruments, according to what was previously mentioned.
About healing by means of panacea and filed nails, and incision on the added finger, and cutting.
A panarism is a suppuration that arises under the thumb nail of hand or foot; and perhaps it may arise in other fingers.
And when it is prolonged and not cared for by treatment, and becomes inflamed with warm suppuration; or when it rots away the root of the nail, producing pus until it corrodes the nail root: and sometimes it may rot away entirely, and perhaps reaches to the mouth, until there emanates a foul odor from it; and the tip of the finger becomes wide, and its color turns brown.
When you are treating the body as we mentioned in the division, and your treatment is not effective: then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the remaining excess from the nail. Then burn the wound afterward. For, indeed, burning is very useful for ulcers.
If however the bone is healthy, and even the nail is also healthamo, and loose additions of the nail already compress flesh to the interior, and begin to puncture it, and wound it: then you must place a fine radium under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it upward; and cut away the flesh with ease, and lay what remains from the meat on burning medicines, corrosive ones, until everything is removed. Then take care of that wound with ointments, until it heals.
But if the decay has already settled into the bone, then you must cut that bone and remove the flesh; for it cannot be healed as long as there is corruption in it.
But if you see erosion and decay advancing into the finger, then cut it at one knot as mentioned earlier. Then take care of that wound until it heals.
But if there is a loosening of the nail or a blow: and it causes severe pain in it, then you must first bleed the sick person with phlebotomy. Then dry the nail with sharp shavings of a spatula from above to below.
And watch out that the section does not reach the flesh under the nail; for you may cause a very sharp pain through it on the person sickened, and become the reason for growth of flesh added in place.
Then take care of that place with whatever soothes pains.
However the finger that grows on certain people's hands, perhaps is fleshly throughout: and there may be bones in some of them, and perhaps a nail exists in it; and for some it originates at the joint root, or its birth is in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, he who is born with certain knots on the finger does not move; and he who is born at the joint of the finger may perhaps move.
Thus, he who among them is fleshy has an easy amputation. That is, cut it near its root with a wide spatula.
But the healing of one whose birth is at the joint's base is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it out.
However, in the one who is born at the finger's end among knots, then it should be cut first by a round cutting to the bone. Then scrape the bone with one of those scrapers fitting for this. Then care for it until healed.
However, consolidation that occurs at the ends of the fingers often happens from birth itself (that is, born with it), or from consolidation of wounds, and similar things.
Therefore, you should cut off that consolidation until the finger returns to its natural shape. Then place linen or soaked cloths in rose oil among them: to not consolidate quickly and separate between them; or put a thin sheet of lead between them, until the location heals according to what is necessary.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs at certain fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to what is prepared and fits the shape of the body part.
§ On Surgical Errors.
There are enlarged veins that become twisted and full of excess melancholic humors occurring in many body parts: and the greatest discharge is from the legs, especially from the legs used for walking and working, and carrying.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer a shaking of the body from black lethargy several times with strong vigor.
Then the phlebotomist opens the veins of the patient.
However, healing them with iron is in two ways. One of these is to cauterize and extract the black blood. And another way is to ligate the vein, and all [blood] drained out.
However, that cutting follows this method. The string is first with hot water much until the thick and dirty blood is resolved. Then the nurse ligates the leg of that string from the upper part of its hip to the lower part of its knee with threads. Then dry a piece at one place or two or three sections wide.
Then drain it out (that is), draw the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and first the phlebotomist should treat the weakened one. Then dry a callus up to below (until) the amount of blood you see is sufficient and as much strength can endure (tolerate).
Afterwards close (it), and instruct him to refrain from foods producing black lethargam and repeat evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are filled, and harm that sick one.
However, this draining follows this method. Shave the leg of the weakened if there are many hairs. Then insert the body into a bath or insert a string with hot water in that leg until it redden and swell (the veins), or exercise for strength if there is not present a bath for him until his limb warms up.
Then dry the skin on the veins' section lengthwise: or at its last part near the knee, or on its lower side by the heel.
Then open the skin with a hook and peel it off from all sides until it appears to your sense of touch; and at its appearance, you see it turn red to black to green. Then when the skin is removed, you see it appear white like a string.
Then insert something underneamoin it with the hook and gently remove it from the skin.
Then dry another incision near that of three fingers. Then peel the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then remove it with radii as you did before and suspend it with another hook, just as you did first.
Then dry another incision or more if necessary. Then remove it and make an incision on the last incision near the heel.
Then extract it from above the incision.
And do this by extracting it from the higher incision or all higher incisions until completely out; then make an incision there.
But if it does not submit to be extracted and removed: then insert a hook with strong wire twice the length, tie it, and extract that; or insert something underneath the Radium: and wrap your hand around every part until it is out. And be careful so as not to cut. For if it is incised, then you will find it very difficult to remove entirely and the patient may be harmed by this injury.
Then when you have extracted it entirely: then place a bandage soaked in wine and rose oil or oil over the wound, and care for it until healed.
If the vein is contracted and has a curvature of its course to different parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then you should spread over it throughout the entire curve and places of its bending.
Then suspend it with a hook until it is completely dry; and do not strike against your cut so that you come upon it or wound yourself, for it will be difficult to smooth over or remove it. Therefore, use caution.
Description of the case where a tendon is healed.
The form of cataract.
It does not have the twisting as other catarcuas do, nor is it pointed at the ends, so that you may come upon it and be wounded; rather, it has a softness in bending: for if it were subtle, it would pierce with its own subtleness. In fact, it should have excessive bulk, as we mentioned earlier.
On the removal of the leg vein.
This vein is generated on the legs of warm lands, such as Egypt and the land of the Arabs, and on other warm but somewhat tender lands where nothing grows: neither grass nor trees. (Note: The provided Latin text seems to be discussing a geographical occurrence related to veins in the leg rather than an exact translation from Albucasis' medical texts.)
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs. (Note: The following Latin phrase, while not a direct quote or paraphrase from an original
And indeed the formation of it is from decay that happens under the skin, such as occurs within bodies with snakes and roundworms (Ascaris) and worms formed between skin and flesh. (Note: This Latin text appears to be discussing a general concept related to medical conditions or parasites rather than a specific translation from Albucasis' works.)
And the sign of this vein's occurrence is what happens with intense heat in the leg. (Note: This Latin phrase seems to be providing a symptom or diagnostic indication related to veins rather than an exact translation from Albucasis.) Then it becomes dry. (Note: The following Latin text is likely referring to a stage in the And then begins the vein to emerge from that dried location, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal. (Note: This Latin phrase seems to be discussing a concept related to the physical manifestation of a medical condition rather than an exact translation from Albucasis' work
Therefore, when that extremity appears, you should wrap a piece of lead weighing the same as two silver coins and the object in question, then release it from above the wound.
Whenever something emerges from that area outside, wrap it with lead and the object in question. If it is greatly extended, then incise that part, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut at the root until it has completely emerged. For if you cut, it tightens and enters the flesh; and causes an abscess to form, and festering at that location, and a bad sore.
Therefore, it must be gently handled and extracted gradually until it emerges from its end, leaving nothing behind in the body: and this vein exits at five handspans and ten in length in some people. And now it has reached me because it emerged from twenty handbreadths.
But if you cut during the course of your treatment: then insert a rod into its opening, and make a hole through it for as long as there is material present in it; and apply festering to that area with appropriate medicines for several days. Then attend to treating the abscess itself.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or within the foot itself; and there are many openings for it, from which a branch emerges.
Therefore attend to its care, as we have said in the division, and with what was previously stated.
§ Regarding cutting above worms generated under the skin, which is called the illness of the bucks.
This illness is called the illness of bucks on our land, because it often happens to bucks; there is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh.
And it goes through the entire body, ascending and descading; and is shown by its sense during its movement from limb to limb, until it breaks wherever it disrupts in the skin area, and emerges.
And its generation comes from the putrefaction of some fluids. As happens with worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and roundworms inside the intestine.
And it fears from its toxicity. Because when it itself goes into the body and ascends to the head, and arrivebs at a place: then perhaps it opens there, and emerges, and destroys an eye: and this happens often.
Therefore when one knows how to care for it, and extract itself, then this does not happen except in its movement, and by its own sense appearance.
Therefore, one should hold what is above it, and that which is below it with strong binding. Then dry over it, and extract it.
But if it penetrates into the flesh, and you do not find itself: then place a caustic over that area with fire, until it dies.
And greater is what fears from its corruption, which destroys the eye, as we said.
But if you see that it has already arrived at the head near the eye, then hold below it a good strapping on the brow. Then dry over it, and extract it.
And it is necessary to use a weak cleansing of his body, with medicine dissolving fluids rotten and bad.
And he should beware from foods generating putrefaction.
§ On the procedure for treating the illness of Nakir.
This illness is called in our land Nakir, and it is pain that happens to some limbs: then it is transferred from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen it myself, as I told you. Called to a certain woman who was sick at her house. And he removed his arm, and I saw swelling along the vein of the arm.
And after remaining there for an hour, I saw one swelling advance with a worm-like motion, like a worm crawls; ascending to the arm faster than it could possibly be: as if it were silver alive when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain receded from that spot, and was fixed on the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran into the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it was retreating throughout his whole body as I saw it.
Therefore, I am amazed at the speed of its change from member to member. And indeed before that, I had not seen such an infirmity with my eyes in this manner. But I did see many others who find pain changing from member to member; and I did not see it with my eyes, as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it is anything else but because the woman was from those who are of dry body parts coming near: hence that changeable humidity appears to the sense.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are lustful and with moist bodies of uncovered parts.
Thus when you see his treatment and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye as we said, then bind above it tightly and quickly underne; and cut above it sharply until that compressed moisture comes out: and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your own eyes: then care for it by shaking the body and using what drives out vapors; and use loathsome pellets and those of safflower, and similar things.
Regarding the removal of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types and the places where they fall from the body.
However, there is diversity among them: for some have large tips and small ones; and those that are hollowed-out, and hard. And there are some which have three angles. And there are others with tongues. And there are those which have stars (or celestite).
However, those that fall into the limbs do so in two ways. For some limbs are hollowed-out from the main parts, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar things. Whenever one of these limbs falls and you see signs of death, which I tell you afterward, then it is proper for you to use the method of extracting that arrow from them, for death follows it in various dispositions. And when you do not see those bad signs and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
For when an arrow falls into that limb where the skull is pierced and a subarachnoid (or cerebrospinal) fluid flows over the brain, these things happen because of it: sudden weakness, scotoma (blind spot), dizziness, reddening in the eyes, inflammation, redness of the tongue, spasms, and a mix-up of intellect; vomiting of cholera. And perhaps blood may come out from the nostrangs or ears. And perhaps speech is severed, and voice destroyed. And a white liquid like pus may come out from the wound site. And there comes forth from it a fluid similar to juicy flesh.
But if such signs appear to you, then refrain from healing, and extract the arrowhead if it does not come out.
But signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are these: that it is near the left nipple; and one feels as though it were fixed in a hard thing, not in something hollow. And perhaps there is movement of the arrow like a pulse; and black blood runs from the wound. And follows that coldness in the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore, death approaches by no doubt.
And a sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is that frothy blood flows from the wound; and the airways below the neck swell up and change the color of the sickly. And one breathes out a large, deep spirit: and seeks cold air.
But if the arrow falls into a thin layer that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and there is great breathing with intense pain, with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
But if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
But if the arrow falls into the belly and is fixed there: something of feces comes out from the wound or a small seed or an already torn intestine. Therefore there is no hope in curing it, nor in extracting the arrow.
But if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out of it: and something proceeds to the outside, and there is a stronger pain over the sickly: then know that it is lethal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, palate, shoulders of the back, furcula, hip, leg, and similar parts are healed in various ways when no arrow is found to have hit an artery or nerve, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you about the kind of these arrows that are meant for what lies beyond your healing method.
What is it because an arrow fell into the tear duct of a certain man's eye at the root of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it on one side under the fat of that ear, and he was healed, and nothing happened to him in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew that fell into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelabellum; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not pursue it except for a small hair of his beard which adhered to its wooden handle: and the arrow was large as arrows of the archers of the Turks with a mild iron without ears.
Therefore, the Jew was healed, and nothing bad happened to him in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the kind that has ears (ears being small hook-like parts at both ends of some arrows). Therefore, I followed on top between those two points: and it was already sunk into his throat. So I delicately dealt with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man's penis that had fallen into it: and we thought that he would die because of it.
Afterward, however, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in him regarding his conditions, I dealt with the arrow on top of it: and delicately removed it; and he was healed, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw men whose wounds had been caused by an arrow hitting their backs, and the fracture was solidified over it. Therefore, seven years later, the arrow came out from the root of his hip bone.
And I saw a woman whose womb was struck by an arrow, and the fracture had solidified over it, with the arrow remaining inside her: without any change in its condition, the woman found no harm from her natural processes or operations.
And I saw another man whose face was struck by an tow arrow: the fracture had solidified, and it remained there without causing him much pain: and many such things occurred similarly.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the king's leaders, which had struck him on his nose and now was leaning slightly to the right side: and the arrow had been entirely hidden.
I was therefore called for the treatment of his arrow wound, which lasted until three days afterward. And I found an arrow wound that had been very strictly tightened.
And I examined it with fine touches and felt nothing: but indeed he himself found relief and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that it was a puncture from the end of the arrow.
So I applied the plaster to the place with a poultice that had attractive and digesting properties, relying on me confidently that it was aimed at a spot, and appeared to me as if there were an arrowhead above it: and nothing happened accidentally in that sign indicating that the arrow remained lodged.
So I persisted with the poultice over him for many days: and nothing happened incidentally, and the fracture had solidified meanwhile: and he remained weak from his arrow extraction until one day when he felt the arrow in his nostril. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. Therefore, I applied medicine to that wound for many days until it opened up; and when I tried touching it, I felt the tip of an arrow barely sticking to the wood.
Then I added more of the sharp medicine to the opening of the wnund, until we could see the tip of the arrow clearly; and it passed from me after approximately four months' time.
Then after the wound had grown larger and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and not allow it to exit: then I did not cease trying gently, and using various methods of ingenuity until one day with properly made forceps, as their form comes at the end of chapters, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. Therefore, I healed it and the wound was consolidated and his health was restored to full strength; nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: that you should put in place a rule and significance about what I did not say.
For the parts and distinctions of this art are not understood with its narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsader compares little to much: and what is harmless compared to that which is absent: and he found a new operation, and a new instrument in the descent of matters extraneous to this art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not leave from the members in which they are fixed, except by two ways. Or through attraction from where it entered. On the contrary side of the other.
And that which exits where it entered, or is a projectile going into a fleshy area: and it is drawn out, and exited.
If it does not proceed to exit after the hour when it falls: then one should let it alone for several days until the flesh around it begins to rot: and its attraction is reduced, and its excretion.
And similarly if it becomes embedded in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then let it be also for several days: and repeat it every day with its attraction and movement until it exits.
That if it does not obey you to exit after the days, then one should puncture around the bone with a fine drill from all sides until the projectile is increased. Then draw it out and remove it.
But if the projectile has already disappeared into a body location and is hidden from sight and sense: then probe it with probes. But if you feel it, then grasp it with certain instruments that correspond to its attraction.
But if you cannot go over it due to the wound's constriction and the length of the arrow in deep: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein; then come upon it until the wound enlarges, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are ears through which it is held fast, then free the fixed flesh from all sides with every means you can; and devices, if it cannot be overcome by carneous defects in the bones of the ears and their twisting, until it withdraws.
And you when administering the extraction of the Arrow, wherever it is located, then use the twisting of your hand with pliers on all sides until it withdraws: and with subtle delicacy, so that the Ar지트 is not broken, making its attraction difficult to you, and its own extraction.
But if you cannot go over it at once, then let it go for several days until the parts surrounding it rot. Then treat it again: for if the flow of blood hinders you, then apply what we have said from its cure in chapter itself: and guard your strength against cutting a vein, or a nerve, or a cord.
And apply every means you can to its arrow's withdrawal: and let it be with ease, calmness, delay, or firmness, as your narration tells you.
And it is necessary that you do with the Arrow's extraction as though weakened according to its figure, according to how it was found at the case of the arrow itself. For it has more juices. But if it is not possible for you to do so, then apply what is possible to you according to its forms.
However, the arrow that emerges from the opposite side of the other part either immediately passes something to the exterior or causes a hump at the tip of the arrow due to sensation from the nearby skin, and you see it protrudebut cut off above it, and let there be a section according to the amount that can fit in it with forceps.
Then pull it; for indeed this becomes easy to extract.
But if it remains lodged in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrow impresses into the being, and widens itself; then pull out that one.
And if not: dismiss it for a few days; then try again until it comes out.
But if the arrow shaft is inside, then push it with that one.
But if the shaft falls and you are to administer a blow: then insert an instrument with a hollow end so that it enters into the butt of the arrow; then push it with that one.
But if the arrow is hollowed out, then push it with an entering instrument. For indeed the arrow is extracted by this method.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must hollow out all the flesh wherein there is the venom; if possible to do so. Then care for it with what suits that one's case.
And if the arrow falls into the chest or in the bladamocheletorium or on the side; and it is near what you touch with your hands, and possible for you to cut above that one: then cut off the discharge from wound or nerves, and extract that one.
Then tend a wound if it seems fitting, and care for it until healed.
And this is the form of forceps by which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends resemble the beak of a bird, which have been made like iron: when they catch onto the arrowhead, they do not release it.
And they are made into various types: large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrowhead, its sharpness, the width of the wound, and its tightness.
The shape of the impeller's cavity.
And the shape of the noise-making impeller.***(Please note that 'Impellent
This is like a bone's radius, to be inserted into the arrowhead's hollow and moved with it.***(Please note that 'Radius' here refers metaphorically to a part of an instrument resembling the shape or function of a radius; in medical context, this might suggest something cylindrical or barrel-like used for insertion.)*
Regarding venous bloodletting.***(A medieval surgical text might include guidance on how to safely remove blood from veins
Veins for bloodletting, of which the common course through the body is thirty.***(This suggests a count or classification of veins commonly used or considered significant for therapeutic phlebotomy.)*
Of which sixteen are found in the head: two Pulsating Veins, located behind the ears and called Herbs; and two Arteries, visible on both temples; and two Vessels that run through the inner canals of each of the two eyes, known as Aspikants; and a prepared Vein in the middle of the forehead; and a Vessel at the end of the nose.***(This is a detailed description likely meant to guide medical practitioners in locating specific veins for bloodletting purposes.)* And two Guiding Veins, located in the neck.***(Guidegi here might be a term used to describe particular veins And two Vessels that are found above the lip of the mouth.***(This could refer to specific facial vessels targeted for thera groomings, medicinal And two vessels that are on the lower lip. And these are called Arteria Labialis Inferior and Superior. And two vessels that are under the tongue.
But the veins which are bled from the arms, there are five vessels in each arm.
One of them is Cephalic, and it comes from the inner side; and people call it head's vein. And Black. And there is a Middle vessel, and it consists of the branch from the Basilica vein, and the branch from the Cephalic vein; and people call it body's vein. And Basilica, and is located on the inner side of the arm; and is also called Wrist's Vein. And people call it veins wrist. And the Arm's Cord, and is located above the elbow; and it is there where bloodletting takes place, and that one appears with an obvious thumb movement.
And Salvaticula: and it is a vein which is between the Anularis and Minimi; and there are two branches to it.
And three vessels exist in the thigh and foot. One of them is which exists under the curvature of the thumb from the inner side. And the second is Safeena; and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And vessel Nessus; and its position is also near the heel from the inner side.
And there are three other similar vessels in the thigh.
§ Regarding bloodletting of two vessels behind the ears.
However, the bloodletting of two vessels that are behind the ears is intended for ancient catarrhs, and hemicrania, and saffon's disease, and old sores on the head.
And the quality of bloodletting it as I have described. And it is done by rubbing the head of the sick person, and his occiput is massaged at the place where there are two veins with a good rough cloth rubbing. Then the sick one is bound around the neck with wool and remains until two veins appear. And these places are behind the ears, at two lower spots on the head. Therefore ask for them with your finger, and where you feel a pulse under your finger, there mark it with wax painting.
Then take the lance used for bloodlettcuing, which is called Incidens. Then insert its tip under the vein into the skin until it reaches with the lance to the mouth. Then hold your hand with the vein and skin towards the top, and incise the vein along with the skin using Incidens. And the length of the incision should be as much as two fingers joined together or approximately that amount: and make it let out blood to its strength.
Then bind it with bandages and release it until healed.
And now I have finished the beginning of this book on making these incisiones and burnings.
However, the bloodletting of these two arteries that are in both temples is for ancient headaches: and nosebleeds; and frequent otitis; and excessive outpourings causing sharp pains to the eyes.
And the method of bloodletting these is as I will tell you. The sick one should bind their neck tightly until two veins appear by clear manifest vision: and shows the pulse under your finger. Then indeed make marks with wax painting.
Then hold the skin and vein towards the top with your index finger, and insert Incidens from below, and hold the vein towards the top. And cut it as you did into two veins; and make it run with blood according to the necessity of your treatment.
Then dissolve the tourniquet applied by the nurse, and place your finger on one vein. Then put a poultice and bruises over it, and tightly compress the area with strong binding; and release it once healed.
And now let us recall those procedures, their incision, and extraction mentioned at the beginning of this book.
However, the bruising from venipuncture on the forehead is after cephalic vein phlebotomy for ancient facial illnesses; and headaches, and reddening of the skin; and foul sores.
And the nature of that venipuncture is as follows: as I have told you. The patient should apply a tourniquet around their neck with veins until the vein appears. Then take an instrument called the Fossoiron.
Place a prominent point that is at the top of Fossorium over the vein, and strike it over itself with a spatula or with another instrument similarly; and allow blood to flow according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the incision made by the patient, and tightly compress it until healed.
And sometimes it opens with a wide venipuncture. However, it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be of sharp ends, as are other venipunctures, but rather at wide ends. And the phlebotomy should be across it; for the bone is close by: and perhaps the venipuncture will break when it is too fine.
However, the juice of two veins that are in two lachrymal sacs for two eyes is due to scabies and redness: and runs into the eye, and face ailments.
And the nature of these venesections is that they tighten the sick man's neck with veins. Then perform those venesections: and you are standing over his head.
And make the second venesection across length slightly, with a small venesection instrument, somewhat wide but not much, as there is no flesh at that place. For if the venesection instrument is very delicate at the end, it may break.
Then let blood run as much as you need. And place a compress over them and tighten them for one night, and loosen them.
However, the veins of the nose venesection are beneficial for acute fever and severe swelling, as well as facial ailments such as hemigranum, and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is old (established).
And the nature of this venesection is to tighten the sick man's neck with veins. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a delicate and long venesection instrument: and fasten it there on the flesh of itself, between that which separates the nose according to straightness. For because the vein is not perceived by touch and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it should be that you finish with a slightly wide hand on the venesection instrument: and let blood run as much as your need requires. Then bind them for one night. These themselves are quickly restored (heal).
Of the two Ghāzi bloodletting methods, it is for shortness of breath, onset of leprosy, melancholic illnesses, impetigo and ulcers, as well as destructive conditions such as worms of the herb ivy.
And the quality of these bloodlettangs is to bind the sick person under both with a tie on their neck; and for the craftsman to stand above the head of the sick person, and for the sick person to be sitting on his seat.
Then the bloodletting is made at a slightly greater length than usual bloodletting. Then one extracts a moderate amount of blood from the bloodletting, or according to that which is seen necessary in each case. Then do similarly with other veins.
Afterwards dissolve the tie, and bind two middle veins; that is not overly constricted for the sick person. And release it until morning. The wound itself will heal.
On venous bloodlettebt according to the Alberich method. The veins of the Alberich bloodletting method are for providing relief from excessive alcohol consumption, gum disease, and ulcers; as well as fissures on the lips, and ulcers that occur in the nose or around it.
And the quality of these bloodlettings is to make the sick person sit facing you; and tie their neck with a cord. Then unroll the sick person's lip and look at two veins; one from their right lip, and the other from their left lip; and the indication for both is by the blackness of amber. And that's true because around those veins there are small, black vessels. So incise each one at the puncture site.
However, if there is doubt about them and you do not know what they are: then proceed to the incision of the larger ones, and make them more evident.
And similarly do this with the two veins that are on the upper lip; and it is indeed common practice to do so: and incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Regarding the phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the cephalic phlebotomy. However, the two veins that are under the tongue for phleebotomy provide relief: which is because the cephalic phlebotomy is for afflictions of the throat and ulcers, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is, that it should be weakened between your hands in the sunlight: and its root above the tongue, and look below the tongue on either vein side, and their colors turn to blackness.
Therefore, phlebotome both; and guard, so that your hand does not cut too deeply while performing the phlebotomy on them. For under it are arteries, and perhaps bleeding may occur from these arteries.
The three veins that are to be phlebotomized on the anculet are of which phlebotomy has been a common practice among all men.
And the phlebotomy of these is done in two ways. Or by pricking with a wide lemon thorn: or to the subtleties of their color: or by cutting with a knife for shaving and is called Anesyl. And this is its form.
And from them are wide and subtle forms according to the width of veins and their narrowness: The form of a lemon thorn for phlebotomy is wide as you see. And it suits for opening veins that are swolamoeba (swollen), filled, proceeding, appearing, thick, and those that contain bloody, turbid blood.
And this fleam is of lesser width, and more delicate at the edges.
And it suits for a fleam of fine veins that contain subtle lemon-colored blood.
However, there is a single strength of these three kinds of vein fleams. Because it extracts blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, following what comes after the chest, and the windpipe: and it suits for the fleam to be cautious with it, as above is an artery. If however it goes astray, and inserts into the fleam's puncture, it will hit that artery, and a flow of blood will occur. Therefore, one should ensure not to use the fleam when puncturing with the fleam: indeed it is for cutting with Aalen's knife.
If the Great Fleam does not appear with a clear appearance, then one should seek out others and substitute it for another, or ask someone for its arm'culet of Brachio's vein. Indeed, she is clear to see, and cuts it with Aalen's knife, as we have said.
If however you seek the fleam of its own self, then before constriction of Brachio's arm, one should touch to find out, until recognizing where the pulse is. Then signs over that place with wax, afterwards Brachio's arm, and cut the swollen vein section with Aalen's knife, as we have said. And be careful not to let a stroke pass through the space from that place of an artery.
And when you see that as you tie the bandage, there is swelling at the place marked with hot wax, then that swelling is of an artery; thus beware it.
If you see the blood rise at the bleeding point as a child's urine and it is fine red blood, then you know it comes from an artery. Then be quick about it, and place your finger over the area for a while, afterwards remove your finger. If therefore the blood is separated (for it is often separated), then bind up his arm tightly and let him rest; and warn him to avoid moving it: and be over that fear of his.
And do not move him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood does not separate and overwhs you: and there is no medicine present for you at that moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For his limbs are contracted, and the blood separates.
Or take the skin of a sausage, and wrap it around him: receive half one piece, and bind it tightly over the place of bandage closure suitable, with a strip and cotton up to another day.
Then if the blood separates, it is good. And if not: then care for him with that of whom memory has flown from the place where dust was seen to separate blood; and separating his blood is not difficult in several dispositions because of the location of the wound, and possibility of bandage from the arm.
The veins of the dark bleeding are a flux that draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body: therefore, because it is composed of branches of the Basilica vein, and branches of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it suits the phlebotomist that there should be above fear from his bloodletting, for underneamo is nerve. Therefore, if he adds to the bloodletting wound and finds nerves there, it results in stiffness, and its cure is difficult, and perhaps not fully cured.
And this nerve often appears to sense. However, if it is hidden in certain people, and it is subtle, and not shown: then you should place your bloodletting with which to bloodlet them, a cut with Ancylolobus, and tear the nerves with strength of yours.
What if the vein is between two nerves, then find it along the length.
§ Regarding the head vein. But the bloodletting of cephalic veins is feared because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye afflictions.
And it is proper to do so in this vein if you wish, with bloodletting from the bloodletter olive or myrtle: for it is a cleanser of all veins, because there is not an artery nor nerve underneath.
However, it suits you with bloodletting from the bloodletter of the head of a single arm and seek a softer place: and it does not harm if not found by initial percussion, to pass over it again with occasional bloodletting.
However, perhaps there is an ulcer in some people when not bloodletted by initial percussion, but it does not harm to that ulcer at all.
§ On the usefulness of Bloodletting and precautions to be observed therein. However, the quality of bloodletting and its occurrences from that, one should think about its correction.
Therefore, you must first know that phlebotomy is not administeramoùd unless for the preservation of health and its continuity, and caution from the onset of illnesses.
And so that the phlebotomy is performed at one of three veins present on the elbow, namely the cephalic, and the fossa, and the basilica. And that the phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring during fasting, and summer, and fall, and winter after eating when signs of fullness are evident.
And that the phlebotomy is done on the first or third day, after three days have passed since passing hours.
However, the phlebotomy that is administered for illnesses does not have a predetermined hour: but when it causes convenience and necessity to do so, at night or day, and at any hour, and at all times.
And it is not necessary that children should undergo phlebotomy until they come of fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo phlebotomy unless from the fourth month up to the seventh. And neither should elderly people who have already passed sixty years undergo phculetomia.
Therefore, if anyone wishes to undergo phlebectomy for any reason: it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with gentle purges, if there is much retained feces in them; so that veins do not attract from intestinal excesses through putrid and harmful fluids to the main limbs.
And neither should one who suffers from diarrhea, that is, vomiting due to nausea; nor a drunkard, nor someone recovering from drunkenness: until it has been removed from them. Nor should the sick with dropsy (edema).
And let phlebotomy be performed again after the passion of the colic, vomiting, discharge from the vagina, multiplication of coitus, labor and exercise, vigils, fasting, and anything that weakened strength in either body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before this if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines; if it's possible for him to do so.
Then enter the bath unless something forbids it or exercise oneself with some activity to thin the blood.
And place his phlebotomy on the chest as we have said; and strive that it be cleared of those ailments that day from all animal matters bad: such as narrowness, anger, fear: and from all bodily matters such as labor, punishment, excess, and similar things.
And let him make his own place be present with matters of which the custom of men has run on account of their sweetness, and fragrance, and dancing, and similar things to whatever extent is possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit over a higher bed than that used for bloodletting; afterwards take out his arm and rub the phlebotomist with his own hand twice or thrice. Then tie the ligament with laces and wrap it twice around.
And let the bandage be moderate, for when the bandage is unequal or excessive on it, then it hinders the blood flow: or if it's too soft, then it also hinders the blood flow.
Then after the bandaging, it is necessary that the phlebotomist rubs with both hands at once until the veins swell and they are felt by touch.
Then cleanse the phlebotomy with a little oil of its own kind.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on the vein itself where he wants to perform phlebotomy, a little lower: so that the vein does not escape and it is struck by percussion. For it is a vein as you found like an escaping chord near the phlebotomy: and among them there are those that are full of vitality: and when you place the lancet over it, it constricts under the lancet, and deceives the lancet operator, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is strict. Therefore, for this reason it must be ensured that the lancet operator is firm and vigilant in all these matters.
Then he should place down the lancet. If indeed a vein opens from one spot, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that at another place a little lower or above the same with haste: if there is no swelling.
But if it becomes a pustule or the patient weakens, then dismiss him for one day, or two days: and do not bind the bandage. For perhaps the pustule is attracted by warmth. Nor should he enter a bathhouse.
Then he may proceed with the lancet if desired.
That if the opening is small, or the blood runs thinly: and measure so that not too much blood leaves from the wound as desired: then repeat the lancet at the same opening following straightness, and add little by little in the procedure.
And do this quickly, before the spot swells up, because a swollen place is among many people regarding a minor procedure.
But if you already see it as a pustule, then do not repeat at all on top of that, for nothing is excused by it with you. And place something from oil faeces over it: since it shortens the course of blood. And it is better to use this than the oil itself, and than the remaining oil.
Similarly, administer an oil enema in all your bloodletting; which stops the flow of blood during bleeding restrictions: and this is done with Tyrian purple dye, and saffron, when placed on one of them above the location.
Blood is then thinned and dissolved when it is thick.
If this occurs at the site of a large abscess from bloodlettamoonts, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bloodlet but due to slight bleeding or opening of the veins, then quickly and place an infused sponge over the location with water and salt that is slightly heated: and squeeze it for a while; because it dissolves.
And you should do this after the blood has come out of the vein itself, with its own compliment, or from another vein.
But if something remains in the place after a few days of blackness or greenish discoloration, it does not harm that: and if desired, put something like aloe or myrrh dissolvers over it; or something from peppermint juice, that is, its infusion or similar to that.
And often indeed abscesses and swellings occur at the bloodletting of the Basilicas.
Therefore place your hand over it; then if you find softness at the pressure of your hand upon it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful therefore to put something on it like what we have said. For perhaps blood flows from there through the artery.
But do apply a plaster to it with that which has adhesiveness, so as to harden the place. Then take care of it together with the rest of the healing until it is cured.
And you should extract from every man blood according to the amount of his strength. And it appears from the color of the running fluid above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then allow it to flow out until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thickened: then let it pass until it becomes thinner; and likewise, if it is sharp: then remove its sharpness.
And it should be for one who is full, strong, and needs extraction of blood from a single vein, so that the venesection may be increased, and he must have wide phlebotomy; and conversely, for him who is weak.
And it should be done to extract the fluid from the veins and that there is a tight opening; and better what is given during venesection is that it has a cross-sectional section, not a pricking.
And this method of venesection is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting nerves; and it is more commendable, and safer than venesection through width and length.
And for those who are accustomed to fainting with venesection, it should be that they eat a little bread soaked in grape juice before the small phlebotomy: or dried dates, if he is warm; and extract from him blood from three veins, or four.
And if he has an undercooled complexion, then he should receive before the small phnlebotomy bread soaked in sweet wine, or in honeyed syrup with spices, or in aromatic and fragrant syrup.
But if it happens that there is fainting during the phlebotomy and its cause is a large amount of blood loss: then he should take watered meat juice, and subtile syrup; and use fragrant aromatics with spices, and rub his chest with them: and do what we have discussed in division syncopis by evacuation.
However, if one wishes to treat their arm and release their blood a second time: it is suitable for him whose phlebotomy is due to evacuation of much, and his strength is weak, so that he releases blood gradually by the amount of his vitality over continuous days.
However, if one wishes to treat their arm and release their blood a second time, and his body is strong: then he should do so after seven hours or nine from his first phlebotomy.
However, if one wishes to attract blood from his body to the opposite side where it declines: it is suitable for him to do so on the second or third day.
However, if one's body already has a lot of heated and sharpened blood, causing fever to occur: it is suitable for him to let out some blood at once, and extract a large amount from it; and the opening should be amplified until fainting occurs: after you have been conserving all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over his pulse along the course of the blood flow, so that death does not occur in place of fainnishing. For often it happens when the phlebotomist is unaware, and there is negligence.
And it is not suitable when one wishes to release their arm and blood a second time, while the orifice of the vein is already closed, making the blood's exit difficult, thus stretching overly quickly with force. For that is a great evil, indeed cast it aside until he can be phlebotomized again.
Or remove with the sharpened phlebotomy that has coagulated blood in the vein's orifice and place something of dissolved salt on it in water. And place something of tila arboreum oil or saffron on it and apply a gentle pressure until the blood leaves.
If indeed a scab has formed there, then release it and do not cover it until the sore is settled.
If necessity requires draining blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either the actual lancet itself above that place or on another vein of the other arm.
The string of a lancse is located at the place called "Fusca," and "Basilica," when they are not found, and they are hidden because they are made from them.
And the quality of its lancet is that it allows a sick person to insert his hand into warm water until he easily bleeds and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is drawn over with a band of somewhat tight constriction in the middle. Then it is secondarily drawn across gradually, not horizontally, nor along the length; and let its opening be wide, and let your lancet be over the joint of the hand but slightly.
That if the flow of blood is forbidden, then repeatedly place your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if it be during summer days, then you are excused from placing your hand in warm water. And especially the flow of blood is placed in warm water during winter time.
And this lancet's vein is a purifier for all veins since there are no arteries or nerves under it.
The phlebotomy of the right hand called "Salvation" is attributed with healing liver afflictions.
And the quality of its lancet is that it draws strings with a band on the hand or your own hand after you insert it into warm water until the vein swells and shows very strongly. Then secondly, let this lancet be drawn across. And if it is cut completely through, it will not harm him at all.
And let the vessel be closed so that you do not finish with a leech. For under it there are nerves of stripped fingers from flesh.
Then repeat your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood clots at the opening of the vessel and prevents flowing.
So when you extract the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on it so that it does not solidify quickly.
And similarly, you should do this with every cut branch.
However, the leech's bandage on your left hand is: because it contributes to liver diseases: and similarly do its bloodletting as you did with the second equally.
However, the bloodletting bandage of the saphenae leeches is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine illnesses, and retention of menstruation, and kidney weaknesses, and old ulcers on the hips and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that it inserts its weak foot into warm water: and makes friction over it until veins are full: and ties above with a bandage at the ankle joint. And indeed the vein is located near the heel, appearing toward the thumb: and they branch out from it on many parts of the foot.
Therefore do its bloodletting at a greater branch or near the heel among its swellings: because it is better and healthier.
Which if you do bloodletting with it on the foot face, then cut away from nerves which are underneath there on the foot's face.
And place your lancet where you want to make the incision with a turning motion, as if you wish to pierce it; and let the lanceb be Nepecin.
However, if blood flow is prevented, then repeat the steps of immersing that limb in warm water; and let the blood drain out until it evacuates.
What if the lancet does not work in the first attempt, then continue with phlebotomy near the top just slightly, for that is the safe place, and do not make any mischief when you cut from nerves as we have said.
And similarly with the other saphenous vein of the foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the side of a bone called the talus.
And the soothing agent for that lancet is to allecuate pain at anchor, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of that lancet is such that it incorporates infirm bathwater and has to act swiftly; and compresses the leg from the side of an anchor up to above the heel with four long strips, as it does not appear unless for that reason.
Whenever it appears, then operate with that lancet as much as your ability allows or by a turning motion; and it is better to make an incision into it or cut it off. For the place of it is safer, and that lancet is greatly hidden among many people.
For the place of it is safer, and that lancet is greatly hidden among many people. What if you do not find it and it does not appear at all to your sense: then operate with another branch of that lancet, which is the one appearing on the backside of the foot and toward the earlobe; and avoid cutting nerves, and make the blood flow out in a quantity as much as you wish.
Then dissolve the swelling, and place a piece of skin over that lancet's location, and compress the area. Indeed, healing occurs quickly.
Regarding Vesicotomy, and its usage quality.
Windy (crackling) sounds are made from the horns, metal, and glass.
And indeed, Vesicotope is done in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting: the other method of windblowing without scarification.
And this Windblowing which is without scarification, exists in two ways. Or indeed it is with heat. Or it is without heat.
And windblowing that are administered with scarification and bloodletteing are fourteen parts of the body. Of which one is Windblowing of the forehead (Alnocrati), and it is last on the head; and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck; and windy guttural sounds from both sides simultaneously are two folds of the neck, each being parted off by the two halves together (Alachosos); and winds of the chin, which is below the lower jaw at the mouth's base: and windy of the two spoons; and windy Alasos above the end of the tail: and windy of both shanks, being in the middle of the upper arms (brachiorum); and windy of both legs (crurium), and windy guttural sounds from both calves.
And indeed Windblowing does not extract blood from you by applying a few small drops of oil spread thinly in the flesh, and therefore its strength does not leave it as is the case with that from bloodletting. Nor is it appropriate for Windblowing to be administered whether with heat or without heat when any sickness occurs from the accumulation until all of the body has thinned out.
Which if necessity incites it from sickness or due to the custom, we administer Windblowing at every hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle thereof, and whenever time may be.
What is it because there are people who, when their blood increases much within them until they need its extraction through ventilation, find a swelling and hardness in the head of themselves?
And among them is one who finds a fullness and redness on his face, in his head, and neck. And among them is one who finds itching on his face, forehead, and darkness, and dullness in his own eyes.
And among them is one who scratches the place of ventilation for himself. And among them is one whose laughter increases. And among them is one who finds a taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue gets stuck, and spits out blood. And among them is one whose sleep increases. And among them is one who sees blood and redness, corpses, wounds, and similar things in his sleep.
When we see something from them and if it is properly in the third month of pregnancy: then we command that ventilation be done, after they have passed two hours or three days.
The uvula of ventilation is thus: because it causes heaviness in the head and what flows into the eyes. But it should be that this occurs after evacuation of the entire body.
And these indeed are in place of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed to use that which has a cold constitution or where there is catarrh. For it brings great harm to him.
And because of this, it is not appropriate for them to use that which are old and where there are cold pains in the head.
Whoever is overly persistent on it causes forgetfulness upon him.
And because of this, you should instruct the ventilator to lower his hand barely onto the underside, fearing a cause for forgetfulness from its generation.
A ventosation or Alkahest is the location for dark venesection and Basilican venesecuing, and because of this it causes asthma, chest tightness, wheezing due to instrument fissures, and coughs with accumulation.
And it is necessary to drive the ventilation or Alkahest just enough because if placed lower, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation indeed strengthens headaches, eye pains, half-head aches, punctures, tooth root pain; and it is the location for Basilican venesection.
And it is necessary to instruct the ventilator not to be too hasty with the scratching: so that he does not cut an artery and cause blood flow.
Ventosation under the chin strengthens pimples on the mouth and gum decay, along with similar illnesses found in the mouth; and it is the location for Alkeherych venesection, which are located in two lips.
Ventosation of spoons strengthens Alkafakha, caused by choking and heat.
Ventosation of the internal parts of two spoons strengthens the pains from venesection of three veins, Basilican, dark and cephalic: because these small channels draw blood from all those tiny vessels that are in the flesh; and they draw from other larger vessels until it reaches to the three veins.
And you should instruct the ventilator not to progress too much with scratching: because the location is naked flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
The ventilation that covers above the Alkhauso strengthens anus hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the use of the Suction Tub to be very powerful and that it is made of metal, since the place needs strong suction, and perhaps delicate Suction Tubes may break: and a large incision should be made with an incision knife.
However, the Suction Tubes reduce a clear decrease: for they draw blood from throughout the entire body and cause old pains in the kidneys, bladebeds, and bladders; they induce menstruation and bring about yawning, breathing; and are placed in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the Alhorcobeni Suction Tube is a close cousin of the Suction Tubes for both legs.
The quality of the Ventosa position is to place the Suction Tubes first on a vacant area and draw out with tempered suction; and do not prolong the placement of the Su cups but put them quickly and remove them swiftly, so that fluids come to the place of entry equally: and do not cease performing this procedure repeatedly and continuously until you see the place turning red and becoming inflamed, and a sign of blood redness appears; then indeed perform an incision and gradually repeat the suction. Then consider the constitutions of bodies.
For those who are among men with tender flesh and rare skin folds, it should be incised only once, not more; so that the place may not become an ulcer.
And instruct the Suction Tubes to amplify the incision and make it shallow: and regulate the suction with ease, speed, and a gentle motion.
But if there is an increase of blood, then one should incise twice. Indeed, at first the bladder is opened to subtle blood thinning and hydration of it; and on the second occasion a thorough examination for extracting excessive blood occurs.
If indeed the blood is excessively foul, then a third incision should be made to achieve the final outcome.
And for the final stage, when we wish to draw out the blood gradually or in small amounts, a single incision is sufficient for us. But if we want to extract much blood, let us make multiple incisions through extensive incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to be incised through deep incisions: and an equal endpoint in incisions, is the depth of skin.
What that must be applied with oils near the location of winds, and what should soothe the wind.
In that very which has thick skin, hard, dark, and with narrow pores of it, must be greased the places Ventosare with open, mild, resolving oils: if in summer time, like oil of almonds, or squeezed oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from pumpkin seebeans.
And if it is in winter time, then oil of daffodils, or oil from the lily, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil; and similar things to these.
But if there is indeed a great excess, cold: then let oil of myrrh be, or oil from basilwort, or white oil, or oil of angelica; and similar things to these.
But if wind-soothing is of wide pores and tender flesh: then it must be prohibited from oil, and these places Ventosare should be washed after wind-soothing with rosy water or cold water or solar water or pumpkin water or purslane water; and similar things to these.
But that which has blood of much moisture, should be washed with wind-soothing by vinegar or wood apple water and sumac; and similar things to these.
However, if these excesses are thick, he should wash them with his own vinegar or old wine, or with the juice of myrrh, or with a solution of nigella sativa, and similar substances.
And it is necessary that the washing be done with a bath or in a foot bath, indeed it should be administerled after an hour from the bath or two hours later.
And one should not sleep after being washed.
What is required to be treated for Sandarach or Flea Bite before the bathing?
And after that, you should consider firstly: if Sandarach or Flea Bite is hot-blooded and its severity and inflammation overcome blood; then it should receive cold treatments such as pomegranate syrup: and also vinegar with lettuce, sage, and yarrow, and similar substances.
And place food that is easy to digest for him, cooked meats, and dishes seasoned with herbs. And similar substances.
And if his complexion is cold, he should drink syrup made of honey or almond milk, and sage syrup made from seeds; and let him drink aromatic wine that is medium between old and new: and advise him to eat sparingly. And place food for him that is easy to digest such as roasted barley and chickpeas; and let him eat pigeons which are young birds and doves' chicks.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of bathing and flea bite should be more than food; and let it be given in a drink to certain people at Tyrian alchemists' hours or medicine from musk, which is muscat: and before or after washing or flea bites: so that they may comfort their main body parts and thin out the blood. And it is not necessary to put them in a heated drink.
Of inflating without incision. Windy ones that are without incision, these are Ventosas placed over the ribs, and spleen, and podagram (podoconus), and over the windpipe, navel, and areas of the kidneys, and anchovy paste: since such body parts do not tolerate an incision on themselves.
And it is not sought through them, except for an attachment from one blood vessel to another part of the body: such as we place a Ventosa over the nipples in the condition of a nosebleed. And we use them to dissipate cold, stagnant windiness from one body part into another: such as we place Ventosas over the windpipe and navel. For they thin out the body part, and warm it up, and drive away pain because they have resolved that windiness.
Also it is placed over the kidneys when there occurs a distention or stone. For perhaps the virtue of its attachment might open up the distention or remove the stone from its place.
And similarly it works when placed over the ribs and spleen to lessen windiness within both of them.
And such Ventosas are administered only with a slight incision. And sometimes they are administered with heat.
And sometimes they are administered with a warm water-filled bladder for pleurisy: and that is to fill the Ventosa completely, so it's large, with hot water alone, or with water in which certain medicinal herbs have been boiled.
Shape of a Ventosa administered with heat.
The size of its opening is two fingers wide when opened up: and the depth should be half a palm deep: and it should have on one side an opening in the middle part where there are little openings, according to how much it will accommodate needles: made out of both copper and citrine, with thick margins, smooth, equal, polished: so as not to injure the body part at its placement over it: and a rod crossing through it in the middle, either from copper or iron, where one would place a candle with heat.
And now this strong and great boil is formed, larger than we have mentioned, yet slightly less than that one, according to the illnesses and age of the person who uses it.
For these are veinous bores in children, and exhaustors for others, unlike those of men and heavy bodies.
However, the quality of placing this boil with fire upon a limb is such that you should light linen wax with fire neatly, or a small candle from beeswax: and place it over the transversely turned medium vein which lies in the middle of the boil, so that the fire would burn the lower part of the boe, but not consume the body of the sick person.
Then it should be placed upon the limb, and a finger over the mentioned hole, until we hold the boil: as long as necessary, we remove the finger, and vapor will emerge from that hole, and immediately dissolve the boil.
Then linen wax with fire according to its nature, and repeat it if you find such a thing again.
However, the vein-like vent being administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, it is not a transversely turned vein, nor a hole: and it is not administered unless filled with water, and placed only upon the limb.
And this is its form.
And this vent is better because it is much larger to take in a lot of water.
Regarding the suspension of leeches.
Leechn do not administer in many limbs unless it is possible to place veinous bores there, because of their weaknesses, such as the lips and cheeks and similar areas. Or on an unclothed limb from flesh, such as fingers, noses, and similar parts.
And the quality of using them is that you should come from leechangs which are in sweet waters and clean from decay.
Then they are sent off for a day and night in sweet water until they are hungry again, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body is first bled with phlebotomy, and then purged by vomiting. Then cleanse the wound carefully until it heals. Afterwards, they place something on top of it.
Therefore, they are filled and fall out, and it is possible to induce vomiting from the site with purging; then it is more appropriate for recovery: if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then they are bathed in plenty of water and rubbed, and expressed.
If the course of blood continues after a snakebite, and it is as if seeping out: then soak linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If blood is increased, then sprinkle the powdered ginger or alum on top of it and similar substances from plasters: until the blood stops.
Or they are placed on top of half-peeled broad beans: and sent off until the peas stick to the place, because blood stops flowing.
And if repetition is necessary for snakebites when possible, then move them away.
But if they are forbidden from hanging, then the wound is cleaned with fresh blood. Or fix clay at the places until something comes out of blood. Then they are placed on top because they stick immediately when they feel something from blood.
Whenever it is desired for them to fall off, sprinkle on top a little of ground aloe or salt or ashes: and they immediately fall off.
This Chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine and concerns the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations resulting from accidents.
You may know, my children, that some foolish doctors and the common people often dismiss this Chapter, especially those who have never examined an ancient book or read a single letter from it.
And for this reason, this method of healing has become secluded within our lands' sciences. And I have never been involved with anything good in it at all, and I am not skilled in that method either, except for the length of reading ancient books and studying their knowledge until I extracted learning from them.
Then I cling to experimentation and study throughout my lifetime.
And now I have described to you all that is contained within this Chapter from my knowledge: and on top of what has passed as my experiment, after having abbreviated it for you, and liberating it from the burden of lengthy reading, and at the end of its abbreviation, and showing the end of decline: and I have formed many shapes in it similar to those forms instruments administered within it when added by a process of declination, just as I did in two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary to say at the beginning of this Chapter's preamble and headings that we think firstly about the understanding of an artisan stationed above their truth: so you may know, or others who are quick-witted learn this noble art from you.
Therefore, I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or accident occurs, one should first hurry to perform phlebotomy on him and let it bleed, or both together: unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength; or if the person affected is a young child or an old decrepit man; or during times of extreme heat, or extreme cold.
Then he should be content with his own food, cold vegetables and fatty meats, and lambs; and forbid wine, and heavy meats, and fill oneself with foods and all food that fills the blood vessels. Until when he is secure from the hot inflammation and there is no overflow of humors into the limb: then let him weakly return to his usual diet with which he was accustomed to run.
But when the process of healing begins for the broken bone, it is necessary that the weakened person eat foods nourishing much nutrition, large and dense in which there are viscous substances; such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, heads, feet, intestines of sugar cane, flour, fish recently caught: and thick wine, and similar to these. For indeed this treatment causes quicker coagulation of the fracture and better.
And you know that the bones broken when they are in men who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to continue and strengthen according to their nature always, due to dryness of their limbs: and those from them which come to completion tenderness as the bones of young children.
However, nature binds to the broken bone from all sides something similar to glue, which is density, with which it adheres and compresses him, until they are united at a time of coalescence, and tied by cohesion, until strength and firmness come in the end as was in the beginning, until nothing prevents them from his own operations: for this reason, it is necessary to place nourishing foods for the weakened person, with which there are density, viscosity, and largeness, as we said.
And you know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs: for a femur fracture is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a breastbone fracture is different from a dorsal bone fracture; and similarly all other limbs exist in various forms: and I come with a reminder that every species of fractures exposed in its own chapter distinguished from others. And the species of bone fractures also vary among themselves.
For it is an arched fracture, besides little stars occur therein. And sometimes it is a fracture along the length of the bone; and there are spikes from it, that is, little stars and extensions occurring as they do in a reed, when fitted with a knife for writing. And there are not extending; and it is a fracture with a wound and separation at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own skill or tool for its restoration as it comes to be remembered in its proper places.
And from this by which a bone fracture is known come its twistings and prominences; and its appearance to the sense, and sound it makes when you press it with your hand.
When however the twistings do not appear in a place and there is no sound with your touch when you press the bone with motion, nor does it give great pain to the weakened; then there is no fracture here at all, indeed possibly only a twisting or small fissure: so do not move it at all with your hand and pressure, rather place upon it remedies from which comes memory after that momentum which occurred in its place; then apply tight bandage carefully.
And you should know that when the place is bent and cut into two, apart from what happens there, sores may occur; however, all of it must be removed as much as possible: then you should begin your hour for its correction, making it equal before a hot swelling occurs on it.
But if a hot sore happens to it, then let it be set aside for several days until the swelling subsides. Then adjust it as much as possible by any means according to its softness and skill.
And you should know that the restoration of it, as well as its equalization, is easier than in bones where sores occur.
Then bind it tightly according to what comes to your mind regarding it.
But if there are sores in the bones, then it is necessary to extend this broken body part from two sides, if hands or feet; with your hand alone, if a limb; or with two cords, or rope and your hand.
And your position in which you place the limb above an equal spot should be according to its natural shape; until when extending parts of a broken body part: then try by all means that those additions return as much as possible, and as you can in their places; and protect it carefully according to your strength so that pain does not occur from your operation on the weakened one or injury; and strive with your strength that you apply one of two bones together with its counterpart, according to better shapes.
And it is necessary in that hour to try and touch it with your hand. But if you see something different there, correct it, and make it equal by the amount of your strength.
And be careful with a strong stretching and a firm pressing, as many ignorant people do. For often it happens from their own operation a hot sore or contraction on the limb: as we have already seen that many times from those operations.
Then connect after the adjustment, and continue with the procedure, and the straining of that limb, and rest, and calmness; and advise the patient about it. And let him lie still, not to move at the time of his waking hours, and during sleep, and agitation, and excretion, and all movements in his final strength. And he should be cautious that there is no position where following pain occurs. That is, because when he feels pain or injury in a certain position of the limb, then it should be changed to another position where he does not feel pain.
And also, that the said position is equal and straight: so that there are no deformities in the limb when it heals.
And the nature of the strained broken limb is as I have described.
Know that broken bones vary in their strength, and in their size, and in their own shape.
These therefore are small ones, like the arm and finger, and easy to manage, and similar things; then it should be wrapped with soft fabric. Those on the other hand are large ones, like the hip and leg; it should be wrapped with a wide fabric.
For a broad ligament, binds the large limb, and holds it from all parts with an equal strain, so that no defect enters into it.
Then begin after your evacuation with placing the appropriate ointment on the bandage over the place of its break. Then begin wrapping the bandage over the place of its break with three or four wrappings, according to how much it needs the limb; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then proceed towards the upper part from the place of its break, and tighten less than your previous strain which you applied to the broken spot. Then lengthen it with slight curvature at the fracture site, gradually soften the tension, until you achieve a large portion of healthy tissue again.
Then take another strip and wrap it once more over the fracture site with slight curves. After that, approach with slight curvature to the lower part of the fasterment. And let your operation be on the tightness and softening of it, as we mentioned earlier with the slight curve above.
Then place between the slightly curved strips with stuffing or cloth so that it fits the twist of the fracture if there is a twist: and if not, do not put anything into it.
Then wrap over the other strip again. Then immediately place equitably over these slightly curved strips, if there is no swelling or hot sore at the site.
But if there is swelling or a hot sore: then place over it that which remains above the sore, and remove the swelling: and let it rest for several days. Then bind tightly over those strips at that time.
And let the strips be of medium-sized cane, shaved and shaped wisely: or made from wood from which sieves are made, that is from pine, or rattan, namely palm branches or bark: and the size of all strips should be according to this form, and have the same shape.
However, it is necessary that the strip placed over the injured part should be slightly thicker and wider than the others: and the length of the strip should be according to what fits the size and width of the limb.
Then bind tightly over the strips with another band similarly as in the first tensioning. Then tie above with threads as we mentioned about the tightening: and it is that your tightening should be over the fracture site more than before: and how much further you lengthen from the fracture, the tighter the tightening will be less.
And it is necessary that they are threads of medium thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
Since if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operation of the surgeons in Persia who made their stitches from twisted flax strings, it is a great error: for the stricture falls with them out of quality.
And again fine threads do not fit: for you will not reach through the stricture what you wish to.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between two stitches.
But if the patient is harmed by the edges of the stitches in healthy places after the stricture: then place under them from flax fibers or carded wool until nothing is damaged from that.
And when a bone is broken and there is a rupture of the skin, I come with the recollection of that in chapter two on particulars.
And you know, not every broken bone must be bound with stitches from the first day. That is, that when the limb is large, it does not need to have stitches placed over it unless after five or seven days, or more, according to your security from warm swelling outbreaks.
And this is the mode of plasters with which the ancients restored, that are placed over fractures and dislocations.
¶ The common mode of abbreviated emplastre, restoring fractures, suitable for several complexions, especially women and children: because it is placed on what does not succumb to heat, nor cold.
And it is to receive from the milling dust, and it is the bran of flour that hangs on the walls of the mill by the motion of the millstone; and prepare this as such, except that you strain the bran with the albugine: and place its preparation not thick nor fine. Then use it there.
Another method for emplastre is to fix a broken bone and treat dislocations or twists. Recipe for almess and laudanum, and acacia, and enulae, and mugath; add the juice of all spices from X pieces of myrrh and balm, and with 5 parts of both aloes dissolve everything in alethil, or mix it with albugine if the patient's complexion is inflamed. Then use this ointment there. For it is a good mixture that quickly restores broken bones and benefits many people.
Another method for emplastre also strengthens fractures and twists. Recipe for mugath and mess, and white of the Altaea; take the juice of all from X pieces of myrrh, and 5 parts of both aloes, and 6 parts boli armeni dilute everything with several washes, or crush it and mix with water, or albugine if inflamed: then administer.
A method for emplastre to treat joints and bones dislocated from their places: it alleviates the pain caused by these conditions as well as fractures and bone splinters. Apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and boiled oil; place it over the area.
However, in this ointment there is no power to restore; but it's beneficial for cooling boils and relieves pain directly.
A method of emplastre that heals broken bones. Take leaves of the wild fig and bay leaf; dissolve everything in them to make an ointment from both.
A method for emplastre used for healing broken bones; and when you want to dissolve remaining boils. Recipe with the root of altea, and chamomile, and flowers' juices, and grain of a herb; take all in equal parts. Grind everything together and mix with wine, unless it is a heated member.
If indeed it is a heated member, then prepare this with moist water of coriander or plain water and use it.
Another method for a stronger plaster for dissolution as the first one when there is hard swelling near the restoration of a limb. Recipe with the root of altea, and flax seeds, and balasore, and melilotus, and samsuce, and flowers' juices, and chamomile; take all in equal parts. Grind everything together and mix with water of willow or sweet water or wine. The entire preparation according to the warmth of the limb and its heat's calmness.
Hippocrangs indeed did not write in his book that something should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration except from cheese and oil; no other thing: and he tells it to be the mean between coarseness and fineness.
Galen also seems to have thought that something should be placed over a broken limb during its restoration which has an accumulation of warmth, such as myrrh, and aloe and oud, and things similar to those I mentioned.
Method for a plaster that is beneficial for injuries and pain. Recipe with poppy seeds, and beans, and cut hairs of a human head or feathers of birds, and altea, and equal parts of salt; grind everything together, sift it, and make an emplast from this.
The quantity, as to what it should be so that there remains the bandage and then dissolve; consider when this does not happen in a sick person, neither do they feel pain nor is a broken bone moved from its place: then you shall not resolve it for many days. If a strong itch or restless pain or swelling occurs there: then promptly wash out that place and remove the plaster; take linen cloth or marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it on that spot until the itch ceases and the pain subsides.
If a strong itch or restless pain or swelling occurs there: then promptly wash out that place and remove the plaster; take linen cloth or marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it on that spot until the itch ceases and the pain subsides. Then leave the limb to rest for one hour. Then place a bandage soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil over it, wrap it for one night, until you are sure of the heat's absence, and the swelling and pain of the limb cease.
Then treat it with a mild strain and a plaster of dust: do not tighten the bandage too much at first, but gradually until healed.
If you see that the ulceration, redness, pain, swelling and all other conditions are entirely gone, and you find the plaster and bandage there: then repeat what you did initially evenly.
If nothing of that which I mentioned happens to the limb: then do not wash it out unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is removed after nineteebough days entirely as appears from the state of the limb as I mentioned: until the fracture adheres and the tissue coagulates over it; then add also at that time more than your first bandage in bulkiness: and add also to the diet of the sick person according to his previous appetite.
But if you see that the place of the fracture is already healed and thinned more than it should be: then know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching there. Therefore treat it with warm water at the place where you wash it every day: and let that be for all three days, and Hallelujah to the light bandaging.
Therefore, by this surgical procedure, food reaches the limb and it heals quickly.
However, the thing that ignorant restorers do from a limb's fracture elsewhere, when it is not restored properly at first and then restored improperly due to deformity, is an error from their surgery, and great fear: but if it were done right, they would have said so in their books, and they would have operated with that.
And I did not see any of their traces at all in this matter, and it is better, so that such a thing does not happen.
§ About the construction of an accident on the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes many: and the causes are distinguished.
For a type of fracture is one that occurs from a blow with a tool; and the impact carries away the bone all the way to its end, which lies beneath another bacteria, as an ax does in wood: for this reason, this species of fractures is called Axial.
Or a tool strikes something within the bone and breaks its face, but does not penetrate the cut to its end: and this type of fracture is called Kala'an, which means complete breakage.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And a type of fracture is one that is worn or rubbed: and the cause is an impact with stone, or falling onto a stone, or similar things.
And this type of frupture is also penetrating, which now approaches the fold beneath the bone, or it is on the face of the bone: and it is a wound from these two types of fractures, either small or large.
And a type of fracture is one that is hidden subtly within the bone: and it is a small crack, and for this reason, this species of fractures is called Capillaris.
And among them is a fracture that occurs from an accident or by the impact of a stone, and similar ones that cause a sheet of bone to enter the interior, resulting in concavities: just as it happens with hot air balloons when they are struck and part of them enters the interior.
And indeed, this occurs most often in the bones of damp heads, as in children' very skulls.
And these types of splintered fractures are separated, and I come with the recollection of all that at its proper place.
And we know all these types of fractures through the detection above them, and examination with probes, and the removal of putrid flesh that lies over them.
However, the capillary type is known by this, as it is detected over the bone and removed, and a bandage is applied to it with hot wax; for the fracture appears black.
However, in treating fractures, consider first the sickness caused by accidents: then if from the accidents you see things that mean clear signs of fear, such as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of intellect, and cutting off voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and exiting eyes, and reddening of them, and similar things from many conditions caused by accorts, probably not healing: and if you see the accidents are not fearsome to you, and you hope for health: then begin the treatment of it.
That is, if it comes to you wounded first with the wound: and this happens during winter days, then it is proper that you study in removing the bone before the fourteenth day of every condition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then it is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what lies undernewnail skin becomes rotten, and those things happen which I have narrated.
If the bone fracture has already reached the panniculus near the brain and it is with small fragments and adhered: then one must cut the crushed and ground part as I have described to you.
And it is to scrape the head of the wounded one, and remove whatever you can from above the bone in any way possible according to the shape of the wound and what is easily removed over the weakened area.
If this happens to you during the examination of a bone with bleeding or hot suppuration: then apply what is necessary for it. And it is to fill the place with soaked bandages in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest, until the suppuration settles, and you are assured from bleeding. Then begin in treating the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
The method indeed is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife: and here is its form.
Then apply another knife after the blade of the first one, but only slightly wider: and this is its form.
Then you also apply another knife even wider than the second one.
The second method is that you have a number of different knives with some being wider than others and some narrower to their respective ends: and they are made of iron forged or tempered: and use them easily in striking against the knife so as not to shake the head, and injure it.
However, if the bangle is strong and hard: then it must be that you pierce around it before applying knives with terebras called non-deepening ones: and are not named so unless they do indeed penetrate through the end of the flesh into the bone behind it: therefore, because the terebra has a round tip above that which is below its sharp edge, similar margin, and a small circle prevents sinking, and passing through the density of the bone.
And it happens to you that you take from these trepanning instruments a great number, where each one corresponds to the thickness of the skull bone, until present are for you all craniums with trepanning tools: whose extremity's acuteness in length and width is, according to the thickness of that person'n crane.
And this is the form of three kinds of trepanning instruments, or trephines.
The quality of drilling into the circuit of a broken bone is: to place the trephine over the skull and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then switch the trephine to another place and position it where there is a quantity of thickness of the radius or about that much.
Then cut with incisors that is between every opening from the bone: and do it more subtly than you can over that above the fine thickness, as we said, until eradicate the bone, or your hand, or with another person's some instruments which you have set for this: such as tweezers, and delicate forceps.
And it is necessary that you handle with all care so that the trephine or incisor does not touch anything of a bone shard.
When therefore you circle the baboon around piercing and it has been separated from that continuum with it, and you extract it, it is necessary to scrape and level its remaining extremity with another similar tool as an incisor. However, it must be thinner and more subtle than other incisors.
If something remains of the small bones and fragments: then take them with ease, what is at hand among your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linens, and ointments as we said.
And another method of the operation is very easy, far removed from fear: which was said by Galen and praised him greatly, and this is his speech. It is necessary for you first to begin by revealing a piece of bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed it under the tip of this Incisorius lenticularis, which is its shape.
And the lentiform part does not cut anything softly; and the sharp part of it flowing on both sides its length as you see: so that the lentiform part is attached to a hollow, facing the sharp edge towards the bone.
Then strike over the Incisor with a small hammer from one side: until you cut through the whole bvee easily as it turns back; and be assured by the skin, that nothing happens to it accidentally, which you fear greatly.
And if the healer were not a greater fool of humans and more ignorant, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the skin in certain places, it would cut that thing off with its tip of the Incisorius lenticularis itself, and free it easily. For indeed, he is freed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate up to the skin, and that which is cut off from the bone is its face, and remain in it roughness and delicate ridges: then you ought to scrape off that roughness, and remove those ridges with fine rasors from whom you prepared a number of diverse quantities for a long time, so that it may be possible for you to administer them appropriately at every suitable place, and rectify their direction according to the operation which leads you to the broken bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer with reason on your part, especially where first the root of bone is wider than those cutters. Then use a finer instrument at that place.
And it is necessary that you administer with reason on your part, especially where first the root of bone is wider than those cutters. Then use a finer instrument at that place. And do not cease to do so in succession until you reach the stage where it can be administerired with thinner and more delicate instruments of all kinds.
In every small remaining cleft or furrow, and with a fine crack, it is necessary to administer care in accordance with what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that does not remain hidden from all, which requires any study at all in this art, and stands out from what we have written, and shown in major fractures.
But if the detected fatty layer remains, when you remove bone: then it is necessary to receive a linen bandage according to the amount of wounds, and immerse that part in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take a double or triple layer of cloth and immerse that part in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage: and do what is possible more easily on top of that, so as not to disturb iffy.
Then administer a wide bandage over that part: and do not tighten it, but only to the extent held by the wound itself: and let go of that care for one day or two days, until you are free from heat swelling. Then wash that part and administer with the medicines where there is excess dryness: such as lily roots, herb flour, thorn powder, aristolochia, and like it: and make a powder from these medicines to be powdered over the wound just as they are dried.
And generally administer all that medicine of which it has the property to repel and not bite. And pour according to your power, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean: neither let there be dirt in the ointment, nor filthiness.
And pour according to your power, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean: neither let there be dirt in the ointment, nor filthiness. And do not allow the virus to gather there at all: for when the virus gathers over the cerebral panniculum, it corrupts it and rots that flesh, and this happens after great mischief has befallen one who is already sickened; and now it occurs in a brain tumor, when it is cleansed by touching with the hand, especially if its care is neglected there.
Then consider when such things happen to a sick person, know that it seems very dangerous without doubt.
And if filthiness does not occur, unless from the medicine that is put upon it and in the power of that medicine, to make that filthiness: then one must receive a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and wool mixed with them. Then place it over the tumor: afterwards take care of it with healing remed cups that are appropriate, until it is healed.
¶ Regarding the restoration of my nose when it breaks.
Know that the upper two parts of the nose or one alone break; for these are two bones: because its lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break and happens to it only by rubbing, twisting, and lopsidedness.
If one of the two parts breaks, then it is fitting to insert a finger into the nose's hole and make that fracture even with your index finger and thumb, outwardly; until the nose returns to its natural shape: and let this be done skillfully, easily. And pour carefully, so that it does not happen to painful sickness by your treatment.
If there is a break at the upper part of the nose and a finger does not reach it, then one must equalize the tip of the radius where the swelling is small.
But if there are breaks in two parts, then do the same as that of it and hasten its restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible. And if not, then on the seventh or tenth day when there is a peaceful inflammation of heat.
Then insert a linen wedge into the tip of the nose if there is a break in one part: or insert two wedges if there are breaks in two parts: and let there be such an amount of swelling in the wedge that it fills the nasal opening.
And some said by ancient restorers, to be infused with butter and changed every day. However, that does not seem to me, indeed it is necessary, to be infused with the lye of eggshells, mixed when grounded into a fine powder. Then remove the wedge until the bone hardens and the cartilage toughens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the place of the wedge, after being soaked in softened linen: and it is that which holds the break in the nose more firmly, and prevents the sick from being hindered by breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you want to do that: and if you want to use wedges.
But if the nose is again inflamed with heat while you are working on it, apply plasters to the nose with wax or with a decoction of rose oil mixed with a little diaquilon.
But if there is no inflammation with heat, then it is necessary to apply plasters with ground soapwort and a powder made from the lye of eggshells. Then place a soft plug on it and do not bind the nose at all.
If the bones of the nose are indeed broken or crushed, then it is necessary to cut along them and remove the fragments with the appropriate instruments. Then use a needle (surgical instrument), and take care to cover it with what is painted on it, and solidify it using appropriate plasters or ointments.
If there is a wound on the nose, then it should be treated with dressings and you should administer a lead pipe until healed. (Note: The use of lead in historical medical practices has since been determined to be unsafe.)
Regarding the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured. (In this case, more context would be required for a full translation related to surgical techniques or procedures from Albucasis.)
When the lower junction of the mandible is disrupted and its break is not accompanied by a wound: examine if it is only fractured externally, and does not split into two pieces, and treat its internal aspects accordingly: then understanding of it is easy. (This sentence may be an incomplete or out-of-context fragment as provided.)
Therefore, if there is a break on the right part of it, insert the left index finger into the injured bone: similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert the right hand's index finger: and push outward the swelling from the top of the fracture with ease towards the outside using your other hand on the inner part of the bone evenly. (This instruction may be regarding manipulation techniques for treating jaw fractures.)
If the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it should be treated with external pressure from both sides according to its straightness: until equalization is possible. (This sentence could relate to post-reduction treatment of mandibular fractures.)
If there is already an impact or disruption to the teeth: then hold them with wire from which you hope some remain using gold, silver, or thread (sinew). (This sentence may refer to stabilizing damaged teeth after trauma.) Then place a compress over the broken jaw. Then place two folded cloths over it, and another large piece of leather off-center: or a triangular piece of ox hide equal to the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it tightly as you have prepared the bandage for it, and apply it accordingly without causing damage; instruct the patient to rest in calmness and quietude; and place light food for its ingestion.
However, if you judge that something of a different shape is emerging in any way: then promptly remove it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it and make plasters with lime paste, using either whitish clay or wheat flour, after you have removed the compress: and place a light cloth over the plaster.
While that dressing remains on it and the bone position does not change, let it heal without disturbance until cured; or if the break is severe. For often this type of fracture takes three weeks to heal.
If during that time a hot abscess occurs, then administer what we have often mentioned as necessary for its healing until the abscess is removed.
And if there is an associated wound with the fracture, take into consideration: (followed by further advice that isn't provided here). For if the fragment of bone has already separated or come loose: then carefully proceed with this, removing such fragments and any attached matter as you are accustomeed to remove them with instruments. (This implies a continuation that may include specific removal techniques).
However, if the wound's opening is narrow, then enlarge it as needed with a cauterizing instrument according to your requirements: (which suggests further detailed instructions on how to safely and effectively manage such situations).
After you have removed those fragments and nothing remains of them, then close the wound if it is wide enough; or if not, place over it appropriate plasters that fit for this purpose, and cover it until healed: (here one would expect further guidance on dressing selection, application techniques, etc.).
On restoring the furcula when it is broken.
The furcula breaks most of all from the front part on the side of the humerus, and its fracture occurs in three kinds.
For it breaks and is separated into two parts, except that this happens in the saddle: and it is easier to restore it.
Or because of what occurs in the bone of the saddle: and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or so that there is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation when there is a fracture without a ward, should be as follows: to have two assistants present, so that one can hold the support for the broken furcula and the other can stretch the neck towards the side.
Then make an even break with your fingers until its shape is achieved as it should be: and that there be no protrusion or indentations.
That if you require more extension, then it is fitting to place under an infirmary sphere made of cloth or wool: and its size according to your needs; and extend the furcula and compress the sphere with your hand until the fracture is even as it should be.
That if you cannot pull the extremity of the furculatur to the outside because it has reached deep: then let the patient lie on his back and place under his humeral middle medium in size, and the lower assistant should support the arm; until the bone of the furcula that is deep comes upwards; and then correct the fracture and make it even with your fingers.
If however you feel a hinge from the furcula and it is loose: then it should be closed over that area, and extracted with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone, then insert your prepared teeth into that incision with one tooth at a time, after you have placed under the furcula an instrument that keeps silence: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon which has no dents.
And its width is according to the one you find from that size of bone and its thickness. However, also its length as much as possible for your surgery.
And it has two ends, as you see: and one end is wide, and the other narrow.
But if however the rupture of the wound that you cut when extracting the tooth from the bone is wide, and secure it from a hot splint: then join two lips of the walled with a stitch.
And if the rupture is small, or with a hot splint: then fill the wound with bandages, and cotton according to the amount of the wound's tear.
And if it happens with a hot splint: then pour bandage in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and put on top of that.
The bandage however for the bone when there is no wound and without incision, is to put a plaster made of mill flour with egg white on top of it. And place a linen strip over that. Then put a compress under its ticklish spot if you find such one. Then take a hammock, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, very long: and its width one hand or about so much. Then put double cotton on top of the bandage and plaster. Then take an awl from a thin board whose width is three fingers, and similarly long. Then pierce it into the bandage. Then pierce the bandage with that awl at the place of the warm spot which falls over the fracture and area. Then place the warm spot on the fancier as pierced and pierce it over its neck and at the sensitive and infirm ticklish spot: and reduce it over every part, and just as you see that the bandage holds the fracture appropriately, then it is such that it does not conceal itself above you, but fully, so that the awl on top of the fractured bone doesn't slip away. Therefore, it is necessary that one should examine the sick person every day. Hence, when softening the ligament occurs, and you see that star move away: then straighten it out, and tighten the ligament.
Then put the patient to sleep on his back and place undernecuccia near him at night, so that he may be relieved from pain by assistance from the side of himself. Therefore, let the ulna fracture be relieved through elongation of the humerus.
Or bind the arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage unless it happens by accident from itching or an abscess, until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the poultice if you see his face to that part. And add a bandage and let it rest until he is recovered and clotted.
And indeed the ulna is tightened and comforted as much as possible within eighteen days; and sometimes it happens that way in some people.
¶ Regarding the healing of the spatula (ulna) fracture.
Seldom breaks the spatula (ulna), and in its wide place: and they do not break from it except for its edges.
Whenever it breaks from that place, and it breaks in the middle of it, and cannot be known by sight alone: then according to its figure attempt to prepare the fracture accordingly. And restore it over its natural shape by every means possible.
Then place on the site poultice of powdered millstone with alabaster and a woolen plug, and over that put a poultice from doubled cloth. Then place on top of it a flat star from a delicate board according to the quantity of the whole spatula or somewhat smaller.
If indeed there are depressions under the stars at certain places, then that hollow should be smoothed with soft cotton until the star descends evenly.
Then apply compresses thickened with alkahest over it, properly bound, and securing the star'nature until it does not move from its place.
And attend to the ligament every day. Therefore whenever the ligament is soothed, bind it and ensure that the star remains in its place; let it lie weak on its healthy side.
And indeed the hollow must be restored in twenty days or twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the ligament: and you should do so with caution. For it is one of those bones whose connection is not feared, nor their dislocation.
But if it proceeds from a piece of broken bone, and punctures under the skin; then cut above it, and remove it. And do as we have said in the treatment of a furcule fracture from swelling with warm pus, if such should occur.
§ On restoring a breastbone fracture.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle, and rarely this happens. Indeed, its extremities break very often, and crumble due to such accidents.
When it breaks at its middle part that slopes downward, and a severe pain occurs, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing ensues, and sometimes vomiting of blood happens, and swelling is declared in the fractured bone, and not hidden from sensation: Restoring it involves lying weakly on its back: and placing something between its wings like dust.
Then press its shoulders and connect the ribs from both sides with hands: and carefully adjust it according to every possible way that suits it, until the bone regains its shape as it should be.
Then place an ointment and plaster over it, and on top of that put a cast made from a board of fine wood, or linen, and similar ones for lightness, after you have wrapped it with cloth. Then carefully attach it with a band over the broken beak so that it does not shift: and proceed along the curve of the back several times, and tighten the closure adequately.
Then consider the bandage throughout every hour, and tighten it each time when it softens: and if need requires to solve its irritation at the site of pruritus, or corrosion that occurs in a place, or pain, or pustule: then quickly loosen it, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of healing.
Then make a poultice and if you see that it is necessary for his face; and bind it firmly until healed.
Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are broken.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back and from its outer ends. And there is no friction to them unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of itself does not remain hidden from touch during examination with fingers.
And its restoration is made in such a way that an evenly broken rib with fingers as much as possible until it is healed into the shape that is appropriate. Then make poultices and bind the broken bone with wax if it needs them.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending towards the interior; then it happens a severe pain in the sick person, and piercing as that which occurs to him who has pleurisy: because the bone punctures with wax, and also he suffers difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is a difficult treatment.
And the ancient masters are already inventive in that with many devices: and there are those who say, to place food for the sick which generates inflammation and moistness, so that the throat may be inflamed, and extended, and driven out the fracture towards the outside.
However we dislike that there is no cause for making a warm abscess unless it happens. But if it already happens, then add to that.
And some of them have said: place moistness on the spot, then suck it out with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. However, he fears that the moistness will attract excesses towards the spot due to the weakening of the positioning.
And some of them said: It should be covered with the spot that is already submerged in warm oil; and grains are placed between the stitches, until it is filled; so that it may form an equal band when they open it according to its roundness.
Then the sick man will be treated with a treatment of pleural tuberculosis from food and medicine.
But if we are stricken with an intense illness that cannot be tolerated and the bone is pierced by the point of the drill causing us to fear for him: then it is necessary that we cut above the place, and reveal the broken stitches. Then we will place over it the tool that saves life, whose memory has preceded: and we will cut the bangle with ease, and we will hit him.
Then we will gather two wound lips if it is large with a stitch: and we will treat it with plasters until healed.
But if a hot sore happens meanwhile, then hurry, and pour grains into rose oil, and place over the spot; and treat the sick man with what suits him to the sore.
Also, he will lie on his side on which he sleeps until cured.
¶ Regarding the restoration of a spinal and neck fracture.
Indeed, bones of the neck sometimes have a fracture, and rarely it happens with abrasion: similarly also for spinal processes. But when that happens to someone, and he knows whether it is cured or not: then you should trust him. (This seems like a very incomplete translation as the original text might have missing parts.) For if you see his hands becoming softened and astonished and dead: and he cannot move them nor stretch them nor constrict them; and when you are binding them with your fingers, and piercing them with a point, he does not feel it at all, nor feels pain in them: then know that it is not cured, and in many dispositions is mortal. (This seems to be the continuation of an earlier translation which would make more sense when combined.)
What if you move them and feel a tightening with your fingers or pricking? Then you will know that the spine of the bone is healthy, and that the sick person will be healed with treatment.
If the spines of the back are similar to that one and you want to know if it will also be cured or not, then consider his feet: then if you see them softened, and this happens in their hands as well: then when he lies on his own back, effluvies and rags come out without desire; and when he turns over onto his stomach, rags come out without desire; and when he turns over onto his back again, and wants to urinate, but cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore no efforts are needed for its treatment.
If this indeed does not happen to him at all, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment for him that happens from this is as you will hear in soothing an abscess with warm salves: thus, place oil of rose over a worn spine; or with goat's milk and barley meal.
Place it on that several times a day until when the warm abscess subsides: then place one of comforting plasters, drawing out and binding tightly over it with a bandage; and instruct the sick person to use rest and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the part where he found pain, until cured.
If this happens at the attrition of the jaw bone, or something that has already been separated from it: then you should scrape over the skin and remove it. Then gather two lips of wounds, if they are large, with a stitch. And then care for it with some healing ointment, until cured.
If indeed the bone is broken at its lowest end and reaches the tail end: then one must insert the left thumb into the anus, and with the other hand balance the broken bone as much as possible, and secondly in equal measure.
Then place it upon the wound, and remove the wound itself; and treat the ulcer as with the treatment that preceded, until healed.
Regarding the restoration of a nail.
Head XII. (This appears to be an indic
Oddly, bones of the ring finger are broken. But if they are broken, then the fracture of them is not present, only a comminution at their extremities; and they break along their length, leaning towards the interior; and in this case pain occurs where it breaks, as well as punctures, and the leg weakens.
And indeed its restoration is to extend your hand over it until you stabilize it in the shape that it has.
But if the fanci is only broken at its extremities, then stabilize that fracture according to what has been prepared for you in proportion, until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fanci is broken along its length or has already inclined towards the interior: then you must place the weakened over their belly until prepared for them restoration of that fracture. Whenever you have equalized it, place an ointment over it; then place a cast made of wood or skin on top of that and bind the area securely without fearing to change the position of the fracture nor remove the cast.
And the concaved ones along with what fills them should be equalized until bound securely in balance; and instruct the weakened to sleep on their back or healthy side.
But if to him a warm abscess occurs: then he should stop extending it and its restoration until the abscess has subsided; then place on top of that what preceded, afterward return to his restoration: and bind it as necessary.
If indeed this occurs in a bone fracture or breakage, treat it externamo/externally.
On the restoration of fractures as an assistant.
Assistance is that which lies between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If therefore it breaks, then its restoration is according to one or two methods/manners.
One of which is: that you take a board flat in the middle thicknesses, according to this shape, which follows.
And they are bound with two ligatures at both ends.
Then it is hung from an elevated place, and the sick person sits on the seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over the wood until it reaches its nubiliformity; in the middle of which is attached the tenderniss of the wood/bone fragment.
Then suspend something heavy from above him so that he may extend himself to the lower parts. Then the physician shall equalize the fracture with his own hands at once until it is set correctly as needed/required.
And the second method is that the sick person lies on his own back and suspends his hand from his neck with a ligament/tie. Then instruct two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands and that the other holds it below him, and each extends to their own side/part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then secure below the fracture with a ligament and above it with another ligament: and let each of the two assistants stretch to their own two parts/sides.
If therefore the fracture is near to the end of the shoulder blade, then it should be placed one ligament underneath its nubiliformity and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near to the elbow: then it should be placed a ligament above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then correct the even fracture with ease and without effort, until when it is properly set as needed, and apply good bandaging; then bind it tightly, unless a hot swelling occurs.
If indeed a hot swelling occurs, then loosen the binding until day seven. And place soaked woolen cloth in vinegar and rose oil upon it until the swelling ceases; then bind it tightly: and the manner of binding is to put a poultice over the function.
Then place an envelope from new cloth over the poultice. Then gather the arm over it for support, and place his open hand over his own upper arm.
And place another cloth and bind it tightly over the support arm so that the arm stands in its original position like stars; if nothing prevents you from doing this or changes anything on your side due to the broken bone.
If this happens, which changes something on your side due to the broken bone, then use stars; and it is as placing over the broken bone a larger and stronger star than other remaining stars. And place between every star the width of a finger: and let the length of stars be according to the broken bone with an additional three fingers from all sides.
Then bind tightly over the stars as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your binding should be stricter than the place of the fracture itself. And the more extended the fulture, let the binding be lesser.
If however you see the position of the stars and the binding as we said, at once when you restore the limb, then do: and if a hot swelling occurs, then loosen the binding and the stars until day seven, as we said.
Then consider the ligament for all three days so that itching, swelling or food does not prevent entering into the limb due to an excess of binding. Therefore, correct it all, as we have said.
If indeed you are overconfident and something happens because of it: then do not loosen the bandage unless after three days or more.
And let the sick person lie on their back, and place their hand over their stomach; and put a fully-filled woolen pad under support evenly.
And pay attention at all hours of the night or day, that neither the shape of the broken limb is loosened nor softens the bandage. Therefore, correct it entirely with your strength.
And place food for the sick person according to the order we have mentioned, so that it is easily digestible first, until their mouth becomes tight; then it should be served them hearty food.
For it is the custom to tighten such a bandage for forty days: then indeed it should be loosened and bathed with a bath, and treated with ointments that heal it.
But if the fracture were severe, rubbed smoothly: then do not loosen from that bandage and screws until fifty days, and up to two months.
Of restoring a broken arm.
The arm is made up of two bones called the upper and lower shafts.
One of which is short; that one follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which lies underneath below its lower part.
Therefore, the larger one can be easily broken alone or together: so perhaps they both break at once.
When therefore it breaks easily above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when it breaks easily below, its fracture is bad, and its healing difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at once.
If therefore the bone that is broken extends only slightly above it, then the physician makes sense to restore it by placing slight extensions with ease until they are equal.
But if that which is broken is difficult and large: then one must place a very strong restriction.
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand near its restoration, and extend it slightly above the swaddling clothes. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all other fingers; and let the joints below them or others be: and that which is weak sit on itself like a square, and have swaddling clothes before it, or directly to its height, so as not to incur any weakness in labor.
Then let the assistant stretch the arm from its lower part with his own hand, or with a ligament. And another assistant extends similarly from above.
Then the physician restores the bone until he can reduce it to as good a shape as possible.
That if in the break of the bones there are slivers, then try to reduce every fragment back into its place with your strength.
But if it appears that the sliver is separated and stings the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration to you: then find over it, and remove it according to the method we mentioned above in those items which precede them.
But if the break is with a wound: I have already made for that particular chapter, so therefore take its healing from there.
That if a hot sore happens at the beginning of your restoration: then line cloth with wax made from rosy oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and fineness: and tighten the cloth over the slight restriction, until when the sore is settled: then remove the wax, and place a prepared plaster from ground pulverized molasses with albumin. Then place stars and let the star to be placed on the actual fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars for the arm is six when they are arranged differently; whether it is a fracture in one bar or two bars together.
Then place your splint on the stronger and more severe area of the froidure, and somewhat higher or lower than that fracture: or place a softer splint on the same splint, slightly as was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let there be cloths that cover the fracture, soft and moist: and they are not hard or rough. And let the thread used to bind it be from linen itself, of a thickness between fine and coarse, as we have narrated.
And consider the limb and the ligament after several days. But if something requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then one must wash the body with warm water until the itch subsides, and let the body not be bound, until it is rested; then repeat the splinting process.
But if the splint has already become softer, and the bone has moved away, and others like it: then correct that whole thing with your strength again, and check it once more.
For if the food is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of splinting: then let it be softened slightly, and release it for a few days until it reaches the food, then bind it again.
But if none of these things occur as we have said in a weakened individual: then it is not necessary to dissolve it unless after twenty days or so.
Then the sickly hand should be hanged at his neck. And let his neck be equal, and guarded by his strength against violent movements. And make him lie down on his back.
And know that this fracture will be healed in thirty days or in thirty-two days and perhaps it will be healed in eighty days. That is according to the temperaments of the body and the strengths of virtue.
¶ On mending of bone fractures.
Know that the finger and knuckle joints rarely suffer from a fangs (fracture). And it does not happen to him unless through frequent friction.
Whenever there is a fracture of the feet or through friction: then it must be that he be seated on his bed with equal support. Then place his hand over an extended object.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the healer unites them with good connection until when they come together.
Then it is necessary that he apply a poultice and plaster unless there is not hot swelling (inflammation). Then place the bale below according to the amount of space; and you have already covered it with linen fabric.
If however the fracture is at lower parts near to the sole of the feet, then make a similar sphere from linen cloth; and instruct the sick man to compress it with his broken foot part: then it is bound with long linen.
And let the sphere be of leather where there is tenderness, so that it may be applied with a skin along with the sole part of the foot; and bind it as it ought to be bound.
If however the faster is on the outside part, then it must be that you place the sphere from above and another sphere at the sole below: and let his hand be open straight. Then put a bandage as if it was restored into the hand: and extend between the fingers with ligament.
That if there is a fracture of some finger joints, then if it is the thumb, be made as it ought to be made. Then it is bound with a splint: and if swolereness is present, place thereon a straight rod, small one; so that the fracture may be loosened, and not move.
But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as middle, index, ring or little finger, then it should be aligned, and bound with a healthy finger that follows it; or all should be tied together according to their sequence: and it is better. Or place upon it a small rod as we said on the thumb.
And pay attention in your healing, and after the same arrangement of warm sores: and apply with it what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to how his account proceeds.
¶ Concerning the healing of a femur fracture.
The hip bone is often broken and declared as feeling pain; because it turns to the inner and back part.
And its healing happens thus: that above the fracture is tied a ligament, and another ligament below the fracture. And the patient should stretch out over his face.
Then he extends all the ligaments with the help of the assistant to his own side according to balance: and this when there is a function in the bone.
But if there is a function near the hip root, then let there be a ligament to the side of the pubic bone, so that extension ascends: and another ligament below the frupture.
And thus similarly if there is a function near the knee, then let there be a ligament close to the knee, so that extension goes downwards.
Then the physician balances both bones with his own hands until he restores it to its natural shape: and the bone is joined by good union.
Then it is necessary that you place a plaster cast and a bandage, if no ulcer on the limb has occurred. If this should happen with an abscess: then set it aside for a few days until the abscess becomes warm, and then return to your treatment.
But let that ligature be so placed. It is necessary to loop over the main bone fracture, that is, a bandage; and tie it twice or thrice: leaving some excess. Then wrap around the leg until reaching the heel near the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper side of both sides. Then loop over the leg and hip with some excess left from the bandage.
Then place above the hip at the site of its own stars and place one star above the bones of the leg.
Then insert slacks between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that it is equal to the ligature.
Then begin with the strong ligature from the middle above the place of the function's three loops or four. And as you lengthen more with the bandage from the place of the fracture, let your ligature be smaller and softer, and looser.
Then move to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and leg. So bind with three stars above them. Then go out with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until reaching the heel of the foot. And also tighten both sides with star ends from one side: so that the ligature is not moved out of its place.
Then leave the ligature over that, as long as it stays, so that no damage occurs to the limb with corrosion, nor abscesses, nor swelling, and similar things. If something should happen from that. Therefore be quick with the remedy of it and correct what has happened there entirely as we have said many times.
If indeed there is a piece of bone that hurts inside another bnch: then it must be made equal if possible for you. And if not, find above that and remove it; and take care with the one who preceded the memory, until healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strangled; besides which they are added to him stars as we said in assistance and armament.
However, when restoring it thusly broken, lameness does not occur. And if he is restored alone, besides applying to him another leg, then it is necessary that the one whose it is always limps.
And know that the hip is strangled for fifty days, or added little, or lessened little; all of this depends on the diversity of complexions, and other dispositions.
§ On restoring the broken kneecap fracture.
Know that the kneecap fracture seldom happens to the knee joint, but it often happens there from friction many times.
If indeed it happens to him a fracture, then only or a crack, or a hole in its parts. And that with a wound, and without a wound. And it stands above all with sense.
And its restoration is as follows: it approaches what was broken from its parts with fingers, until it joins, and is connected according to what is possible by equality and ease, and craftsmanship.
Then put an ointment made from flour of sesame or mill, with egg white: and place above that round astragalos if you find them: and tie the bandage upwards appropriately to that.
Then consider all dispositions that we have narrated in other fractures: such as hot suppuration, and like things; so that you oppose every accident to him according to what is appropriate for him, until healed.
On restoring a broken leg.
Know that the legs consist of two bones; one is thick and named cruris, while the other is slender and called femore.
And there occurs in both kinds of fractures that happen to two bones of the arm; and because of this, its restoration is done as with the arm's restoration equally, and the operation is one.
Which if both bones are broken simultaneously, the leg is restored to all its parts.
And if the slender bebone breaks, the leg is restored to the front part.
And if the thick bone breaks, you will find it below: and it is from those that do not hide from you.
Then apply extension, equalization, and the use of stakes as before equally.
But it must be, if the leg fracture is a dirty break with many bloodshed: so let your extension be smaller and milder in reduction.
And concerning the leg there is somewhat of an operation on the arm: and it is as when you equalize stakes, and complete your entire operation, then take two layers from pine wood that are used in making glasses placed under boards; and make them with palm leaves: and choose those which have a small thickness, and not made of very fine grain; and their length should correspond to the length of the leg from knee to below.
Then embroider on both layers with two stitches according to their length. And place one part of the leg from one side and another from the other side: and they should be from knee to below the foot.
Then tie both layers in three places from two ends and middle. For when the constriction is forbidden, the leg tilts to the right and left, but remains in a good position.
Indeed, it is now administered as a cradle from wood according to the length of the shank, and it should be placed there so that it holds itself by moving.
Indeed, you must make this primarily when there is a wound with the break.
Then consider the shank every day and carefully observe its progress as well as lastly at the splinting or swelling, or other things. If however something happens from these, then apply to it what is necessary, and see how he heals, as long as God wills.
Regarding the bone break of the foot and fingers.
However, there is no complete break in the heel.
However, there is a bone break of the foot sometimes, and also little breaks occur with the fingers: and it does not happen to them except through rubbing over many dispositions.
That if a bone break occurs in the foot, and you see those bones rising above themselves to the knee joint, then the sick person should place his foot on the prepared ground as standing.
Then stand still and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones: afterwards press it, or strike with a stone; and make them even until they return to their places.
Then apply an ointment and a bandage on top: and place under the foot a thin board with two flat heads.
Then tie it with an appropriate bandage for the foot after you have warmed it with cloths and other things needed.
However if three or four days pass to him, then dissolve the ligature. For you will find bones that are even, whether they are broken, or out of place. Therefore the operation is as you see it.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them even according to what you narrated to me about the restoration of the fingers on the hand. Then place an astrolabe beside your finger according to its length, and make it slightly wider: then place under the foot of this tablet which is convenient for you, and bind it with a proper bandage.
If indeed that which is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then place the astrolabe above every finger according to its quantity, wrapped in linen cloth: and bind the tablet at the foot's lower part: and let it stand on a headpiece of the tablet outside the foot'ebowel, so that it maintains good retention.
And it is fitting for you not to forget, that you should consider all that I have said to you regarding the other broken bones from accidents which I mentioned: and apply remedy with what is appropriate for each case.
¶ Regarding the breaking of a woman's elbow, and the pelvis bone, and the groove in men.
When a woman's elbow is broken, then make her sit straight. Then gently lean it towards the back of itself slightly, and let it be held backwards.
Then an experienced midwife fills her elbow's hollow with something until it is filled up: and let it be formed into the elbow as like a sphere as possible.
Then shake the woman gently, and slowly ease her back. For indeed that hollow is ejected, until it forms before the elbow's door like a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a cushion over her back. But when she wishes to urinate, remove the hollow with ease, then let her urinate: and reduce it according to the method by which you first inserted it into her: then let it return to its original cushion.
Do this for seven days or so, for indeed the bone itself is restored.
And if it is a vein, receive the vein as a syringe and tighten above its opening with an ivory tube, and insert the entire syringe into its pouch. Then blow into the tube with force, until the vein enters the sack, for a rupture may occur.
Then it is filled with lead, and remains for several days, as we have described, until it heals.
And when the bone of the pelvis breaks in men or women, then apply to its restoration, and that very equation we have described on the Ankyl cartilage.
And it is not hidden that the rectum in such close fractures does not occur, which rarely happen, especially to those who are scholars or users.
And understand my book as much because the very fracture itself signifies to you many directions for restoration and strengthening of its own: therefore, understand.
And when the rod of a man breaks, take the goose's throat: and insert the rod into it. Then place a swelling on top of it from cloth and let it swell up, and release after three days or so, and heal if God wills.
§ Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
It is fitting for him who has a fancied fracture with a wound, especially if it is large such as the hip bone or assistants, or like that one, as barbers, and immediately himself: if they testify to you about phlebotomy conditions, as we have mentioned before.
That if the wound flows blood, then you must as barbers make an incision there, so that powdered ashes are placed above it on a grindstone: if not present to you is anything else.
Then begin to repair the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it if an abscess does not occur.
If indeed there is a hot abscess, then postpone the repair of it until the ninth day, when the abscess has settled down. And do not approach him on the third or fourth day at all, for by doing so you will cause harmful events to occur.
However, if the broken bone is prominently detected through the skin: then you must discuss how to reduce it, and make it equal with your hands using small force and extension.
However, if the necessary reduction and equalization of it by your hands cannot be made: then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length corresponds to the quantity of seven fingers or eight: and its width according to the extent of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary that the doctor should receive from them three or four according to the quantity required by him for the treatment of the entire kind of fracture.
And it should be round: and have a small thickness so that it does not double during the pressure above it at the time of surgery: and it should have sharp edges with an edge on its ends. And it should be higher in size from half of itself to below.
And this is the shape of it.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp end of it should be bent over the prominent bone end: and push it with one thrust until when the bone returns and reaches an equal balance.
Therefore, try to make the ends of the fabrication coincide.
But if the ends of it are subtle and do not accept the instrument well, then you must be able to cut off the end of that bcheekbone until the instrument has power over it.
If indeed you cannot bring them back at all as we have described, then incise it with what is fitting from the cutting instruments that we mentioned: either saw off the piece entirely in whatever way possible for you.
Then scrape away what remains on the bone due to roughness and small ridges.
However, when the bone is reduced and it finds that thereafter a weakness caused by intense pain has occurred at the site of reduction, then know that the bone did not return to its natural position.
Then do so. For you are healing a great weakness of the patient when completing the bone restoration that you make.
Then soak the bandage in astringent wine, blackened. And especially if it is summer. And do not place a hot poultice over the wound, nor anything that may be an oil: so as to prevent it from becoming rotten and decaying.
Then give casts at the time of completing your bone restoration. And discharge the detected wound: thus, cut with scissors a hole in accordance with the size of the wound during healing.
And beware on all sides, that you do not bind the wound too tightly with a fracture. For indeed such things have often been done by these foolish physicians: and they caused it to happen unto their sick either death or decay or ulceration, that is, healing. And let your bandaging be soft and gentle, different from the remaining bandages of most bone fractures.
If the wound is bad, or it is a large wound, and there are some adverse events which we have narrated over it, and you find pain at the site of reduction: then it does not suit that you place casts over it. And make them incisions from tough fabrics at the place of stars, and tighten it with them.
But when it is after one day or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove from above the fabric cloth that you placed on top of it with wine. Then apply lynchets and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds: such as the four-drug ointamoontment, and similar ones.
And you should let yourself be loosened from the ligament. And consider that every day in the morning and evening until it hardens and heals.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb so that the pus flows easily from above with ease.
Which if many wound days pass and it does not harden or the pus is separated from there: then you know that there are small bone pieces detached. Therefore, one should examine the wound with touches. And how many of them are separated therefrom, remove those and extract it. And those of them that are not separated and bite the limb and cause pain to occur, try to fall upon it, and remove it in any way possible for you.
And if the wound becomes purulent or gangrenous, that is, an ulcer, or other kinds of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each of them with what suits him from his cure, as described in his own chapter.
And from this matter in which my speech should stand and to whom you make your present mind when the bone breaks, and projects over the limb, such as the hipbone, and helpers, and similar ones from large limbs, it is that you do not assume its attraction, indeed many times death occurs from there: therefore dismiss it until putrefaction.
Perhaps indeed it may fall off by itself in forty or ninety days.
Then therefore care for the wound if you think so; and otherwise dismiss it.
Of curing of a lump due to a sign of fracture.
Oftentimes it happens that this lump occurs as a sign of healing fracture. Particularly, those near the joints; and they swell due to such a shape of limbs. And perhaps it prevents the member from its natural movement.
Consider then if the lump is recent: apply to it remedies which have astringency, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, and resin, and acacia, and similar substances.
Thus, as you receive some of these or all of them: and make them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vineger: and place them on the lump using gauze, and bind them over the proper bandage.
And loosen the dressing, do not remove it for many days. Then unbind it, and make another one, until the lump is removed.
Or bind over the same plate of lead not centrally. Lead indeed is a property to remove all that which fears from limbs.
But if the lump has already turned into a stone, and is bandaged, and urgently causes need to remove it: then cut over it from its upper part, and incise any excess protrusion: or scrape it with certain rasors until it is removed: and care for it, until it heals.
Of curing when restored, and remains the limb after that subtle, not according to its own nature.
When the bone fracture is healed and remains a limb after that weakened: then it does not occur for many reasons. Of these one is the abundance of ligament and its bandaging not as it should be: either because of the excessive tightening of the ligaments, until the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb; or because of the superfluous embrocation at an inappropriate time; or because of the scarcity of blood in the sickly and weak body.
The treatment for that is feeding the sick and making its body tender until the blood increases within it. And apply a bath. And introduce joy and gladness over him.
Then place the plaster on the limb, so that it attracts a large amount of nourishment to it. And regularly apply embrocation to his wound with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
§ Regarding the treatment of bones when they are healing in a crooked manner.
When a limb that has been restored after its healing presents with tortuosity and protrusion of the fractured bone, or knotting: and it is deformed in shape, but nevertheless does not prevent the limb from carrying out its natural function: then it should not be necessary to receive its speech which is believed, that the limb may break again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done it on our land.
And indeed this operation is highly blameworthy, leading to death or causing great fear, as it may clearly be fatal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent: then it should be treated with a poultice of warm water in which soaked herbs that soften have been boiled, such as leaves of comfrey, its root, and mallows, along with similar things. And make a poultice for him from soothing ointment, such as the one made with Dyabron.
Therefore, take some gum resin from the root of yarrow and shake it with goose fat or sesame oil; then apply it as a poultice with that substance.
Therefore, collect the juicy figs and crush them with white chalk of pigeons; such like remedies which they call from their medicines that reduce hardening.
And sometimes the knot is looswed by frequent, ancient, and gentle rubbing, which is done with moist hands. And it should be administered movement of the limb to all parts at every hour.
But if there has already been a twist, and it is strong, and turned into a stone, and the need for its cure arises with iron: then one should cut above that part, and continuous bone tissue should be loosened and something superfluous from the knot or bone with fine incisions should be removed; and it should be administered flexibility in that area with care and diligence.
Of speech about dislocation. (Note: The Latin word "sermo" usually means a conversation or discussion, but
Dislocation is an outcome where some joints are out of their place. Why it is forbidden from its own movement and spoils the shape of the limb. (Note: The Latin verb "prohibeo" means I prevent or prohibit.) And causes intense pain to occur on the afflicted and severe injuries. (The Latin word "accido" can mean happen or befall when used in a passive sense.)
Whenever therefore it happens to someone the dislocation, then one should hurry for its restoration: do not delay it at all. (Note: "oportet" is a modal verb used in classical Latin that means "it's necessary," and here implies urgency.)
For if delayed, the place gets stuck, and perhaps with it reduction of dislocation cannot be achieved. (Note: The Latin verb "astraho" means to distend or pull apart.)
For this reason it is not necessary that one should move, nor be stretched at the hour of its sticking out. (Note: "mouere" comes from "moveo," which means to move or stir in Latin.) Since it often happens that a spasm occurs and hurts.
However, when this happens, you must be prepared to perform phlebotomy as the nurse. Then it is dismissed until the abscess rests.
Next, the limb shall be bathed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced gently.
And each limb is to be cared for as the situation dictates.
I have indeed already outlined chapters on luxations, even according to what has preceded in the case of a fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower parts.
§ On treating mandibular dislocations.
Chapter 53. Rarely are both lower jaws dislocated.
And the displacement of fractures occurs in two different forms. Or rather they are slightly moved from their places and heal insufficiently. Or they are completely dislocated until healed to the chest part, while clear saliva flows from it and cannot hold it, nor can close his own mouth, and is unable to articulate with his tongue speech.
When however the displacement of that is slight, then it returns to multiple dispositions by itself with little effort.
If however the displacement is complete and whole: then it should be administered reduction immediately, and not delayed indefinitely: and as to hold the head of patient: and the doctor inserts one hand into the root of the jaw fracture with his thumb if the dislocation is from one side. Or he inserts two hands at once if the discription is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hand be outside, which he calms down.
And you command the patient to clean their jaws and absolve them for eating with all parts. And the doctor calms down the jaw, and pushes it until returning to its place.
Which if difficult is the reduction of it, especially if both jaws are together: then he administers evaporation with warm water and oil until making the dislocation easy to reduce: nor let the reductions be delayed at all, as we mentioned earlier.
When however they return and are evened out, and the mouth of patient is closed but not healed: then place oilcloths on them made from wax mixed with rose oil.
Then it is bound tightly with ease using soft ligaments.
And let sleep be upon the patient'amoeba on his back; and his head to stand between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor should he be compelled or urged to chew something: indeed, his food intake should be gentle, until when pains subside and jaw nods: then let him eat what he wants, and administer it with ease.
He should not work during the mouth surgery's eating and drinking, and yawning, until the jaw nods, and heals.
If the reduction of the two jaws is difficult when they dislocate at some time and do not return to their places: then often from that fever comes, and persistent sweating: and perhaps the sick patient's throat dissolves, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
But when you see that: then you know it is a loss, and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
¶ About reducing the dislocation of the elbow, and the end of the shoulder.
Indeed, the furcula does not dislocate from its inner side due to its continuous nature with the chest. And sometimes it dislocates outward: and that is felt.
And its restoration is such that the sick person lies on his back and extends his arms. Then compress the place with your strong hand, because it will return itself.
Then put something on top of that plaster, and pillows, and tighten it.
However, its following extremities, which continue with the elbow, do not dislocate unless rarely. If it becomes dislocated on some day: then it must be reduced and healed according to what we have said, and that you should prepare for yourself.
Then place on the same plaster, and ointment, and bandage it tightly. And instruct the patient to rest in peace and calm until healed.
And with this same treatment, the end of the humerus is reduced; when separated again from its place.
Regarding the reduction of Humerus dislocation.
Know that the humer ous is not dislocated unless by three ways.
One of which is such that it is dislocated to the lower extremity (or) downward. The second one is so that it is dislocated to the chest side (or) toward. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the humerus; and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate toward the back (or) rear due to the scapula. And it does not dislocate towards the front (or) ahead because of nerves.
And indeed mostly it is dislocated and comes out to the lower side toward the armpit: especially in those whose flesh (or) meats are few. For they come out quickly, and enter back quickly (in them).
But in those whose flesh is much, the contrary happens, namely that it comes out with difficulty and enters back with difficulty (or) difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men by blows or falls, and the humer ous is inflamed with a warm swelling (or) edema, and is thought for this reason because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you should try to find out (or) test that until with certainty of it, and then proceed in its treatment (or) healing.
And the dislocation is known when it is to the lower side toward the armpit; and distinguished between a dislocated humer ous and an uninjured (or) sound humerus. For you found among them an obvious difference, and in the head of the humer ous there is a hollowing (or) concavity, and under the touch of the armpit the head of the humerus seems to be its own bone: and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all motions.
Similarly, if it is displauted towards the chest or upwards; then you find a noticeable touch, which does not remain hidden.
And indeed, this type of dislocation is easily reduced when it is recent or the child is weak.
And its reduction is done by having the physician place his hand on top. Then place your thumbs under its tickle and strengthen the joint upwards to its position; and let the physician stretch his hand upwards. Then set it lower, for indeed it returns quickly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and the dislocation has been present for several days: then one should bathe the weak child in warm water, and apply an embrocation that soothes and relieves, such as when boiling roots of altea, fenugreek, and mellilotus are poured into the water, and applied.
Then lie down the weak child on his back: and place under its tickle a sphere and wool that are equal in terms of softness and tightening.
Then the physician places his heel over the sphere, and gently lifts the head of the humerus with strength, and pulls the hand of the weak child downwards.
And if you can, reduce it according to this method: and do as when there are longer men present who stand on the side, and insert their humerus under the tickle of the weak child: and let them gently lift its tickle upwards until the weak child is suspended in air. And another physician pulls the hand of the weak child downwards towards his chest. But if the weak child is lightweight: then one should hang him with something else that makes noise: for indeed the dislocation returns immediately.
Moreover, it is also done another way: and it consists of a figure resembling a long piece of wood on the ground, whose head has a round shape; like the neck of a jar: which is neither thick nor thin. Then it should be placed under the patient after they have been positioned on top of the head of the wood: and the sick person stands according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended towards the lower part on one side, and the body is stretched out from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce him through all the things we have mentioned, then use this method of care: and it consists of a wood whose length equals the quantity of two arms, and its width equals the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness equals the quantity of two fingers; which has a round head that alleviates the entrance to the depths of the wound according to this form.
Then strips are tied above the round head with soft cloth so as not to harm the sick wood.
Then it should be placed under the wound with the patient, so that the hand or arm is extended over the wood to the lower part: and the wood is tied above the support and arm and end of the hand.
Then an arm should be placed over the step of the ladder across its width: and the hand is extended to the lower part, and the rest of the hanging body is left from one side. For indeed the joint enters immediately.
Whenever it is finished according to whatever possible way: then you should place under the wound a sphere equal in quantity of soft woolen. Then place an applied plaster made from the powder of a millstone with olive oil, and apply white lead over the entire upper arm, as it healed upwardly.
Then tighten a decent bandage under the wound: and let the joint heal upward above the plaster: and connect its hand to its neck, and leave it so that his hand is not moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to place food for a limp-footed patient until the limb is strengthened, as it hastens its healing.
Then let it be placed larger for seven or five days and begin moving again gradually. If therefore it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
If however the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that has occurred there or for another reason: then it must be administeramoed with a caustic ointment having three holes, as described in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done completely and the ligament dissolves after seven days, and the joint does not come together, and the bandage is reduced several times but does not solidify, and it falls off, and cannot be elevated upwards: then you know that the nerves of its head are already cut, extended or softened: and you know that the joint will never return to its place.
However, dislocations that occur towards the chest and nipple, or a posterior reduction, occur with pushing and extension using hands: until it returns, and apply on them remaining bandages and care until healed.
If that happens after healing a heaviness occurs in the limb and a delay of its motion: then use lukewn water many times until it alleviates that heaviness, and returns to its original state.
Of treating an elbow dislocation. (Note: This is not part of the translation, but rather a heading or section
Know that a cubital joint is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty as well: indeed, it can be dislocated to all parts, especially forward or backward.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight and touch, however it may be dislocated. And when joining a dislocated joint with a sound one, it is clearly declared to you. For the joint has been bound, and the arm cannot be bent twice nor touched with its own shoulder.
And you must quickly repair and reduce the dislocation before it turns into a hot swelling for him.
For if this happens to be a hot swelling, it is difficult to reduce him: and perhaps he will not recover at all, especially when it is located toward the back. For this kind of dislocation is worse in all types and they experience intense pain: and it often leads to their death with that condition.
And its restoration, when it can be reduced from them as possible, is, that their hand should be extended with two hands: and their arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be above the elbow and below him, and he himself pushes the joint with his fingers at the same time or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is toward the front: then he returns in such a way that his hand doubles with his own hand until it hits the root of his palm elbow which was dislocated.
For if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer a strong and intense extension: and it is that two assistants extend his arm; and they hold him with both hands even as he should not move during the extension.
Then his arm is returned to its entirety after it has been wrapped on top of his hand with a doubled long cloth or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he anoints it with oil; that this is what helps in the smoothness of the joint and its ease. Then he pushes the joint with a strong impulse until it returns.
And after its reduction, it should be placed over the plaster, where there is swelling and pus formation, and a tight bandage is applied appropriatenebar. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sick person for several days.
Then it should be dissolved. But if therefore the joint is stiffened at its place, then dissolve the ligament from there and release it.
And if you see that the joint is not well tightened, then apply the plaster again and the bandage, and release it for several days until it is tightened. Then dissolve it.
But if, however, there is heaviness after the reduction of the joint and it remains in motion: then administer moisture during bathing, gentle friction, and compression, until it loosens or place over the joint of an olive ram, that is, sheep's milk pine. Then bandage it, and leave it on top of it for one day and night. Then remove it and introduce it into the bath. But when then sweats, then rub the joint with moderate friction. Then apply over it olive oil three times, and secondly, and thirdly at the beginning of bathing until it loosens.
And if you see, place over it swine dung, moist, heated with butter and bandage on top of it.
Do this several times. For indeed it loosens, and returns to its position.
¶ Concerning the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
Almahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed of reducing such a dislocation occurs at the time when it happens, before the place becomes inflamed: or if an inflammableretains there.
And the reduction of such a dislocation is to place the weakened hand of the sick person on a table, and have an assistant extend their hand: and for the doctor to place his palm over the prominent joint, and push it until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already withdrawn into the hand: then have the sick person place their dorsum of the hand on a table during extension and reduction: and if the dislocation proceeds towards the back of the hand, then the position of that hand should be intrinsically placed over the table, that is to say, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table so that the doctor's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint.
If it therefore returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then bind it with a compressant ointment to reduce inflammation: and release it, without causing further damage.
For if it cannot be tolerated, nor can you go beyond the reduction of it after some days have passed, however, the joint remains according to its own tortuousness: and does not harm the sick person anything but that their hand is softened, and they cannot bind anything: then know that the nerves are either cut or abraded.
Therefore it is not possible to manage this except by being cauterized near the location of its occurrence. And perhaps that does not provide anything at all.
But if the Mahassem does not return, then place this compress mentioned above on it. Then cauterize and release after five days: afterwards dissolve and release it again, and exercise the hand.
But if there is a restriction of its movement and something serious happens to it: then gently wash with warm water and rubbing several times until it softens.
Section on the treatment of finger disloccuation.
When a finger is dislocated to any part or from its back towards the palm of your hand, or into that space: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, hang it towards the side to which it was dislocated, and let it go for two days.
Then suspend it, extend it, until it straightens on that day itself.
When evening comes, secure the finger as mentioned above: and do not stop loosening it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and secure it again at night.
Do that for several days until it tightens up.
And do the same with that if it is dislocated into the space of the hand: and secure it to its own side, and perform on it your first operation until it heals.
And do likewise with that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Section on the treatment of backbone disloccuation.
When this occurs with someone's backbone or complete neck dislocation or many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no cure for it, as death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of that is that hunger causes the sick person to leave involuntarily and they cannot hold it: and often some parts of theirs are softened from this, or both legs of his, or both arms of his, or one of them; or a vertebra displaces from its place.
For often it is displaced, because often such dislocation occurs in four parts.
The one that displaces to the back is called kyphosis.
The treatment of that is to consider then if kyphosis occurs from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor complete recovery at all.
However, in that case which occurs from an accident, or percussion, or similar things, the ancients have already said long treatments using a lengthy word. Whose returns much less than profitable.
However, I have already abbreviated it from there, which is little excused by its closeness to my intent: and from the explanation I gave of that, and forming that instrument in a different way than they showed it, and explained it.
So, what occurs from the swelling of the previous part, neither is an ability nor healing from that.
And similarly for those occurring on both sides as well.
And they are not treated from them unless those occurring in the back properly, as I say: and it is that it should be stretched weak over its face on a level surface near the wall: and expanded under it a wet fabric so that it does not damage its chest.
Then a straight fixed wood should be placed in the hole on the ground at about its head end: and another piece of wood near its feet on the other end: and the servant to hold the wood, not tightened into the hole. And the other servant holds the other.
Then over the head of the weakened one, and under its tender tendons slightly tightened: and extend the end of that tendon to the wood which is at his head: and bind it there.
Then another tighten the tendons above its shoulders, and above its knees, and at its ankles. Then gather all the tendons and bind them on the other wood which is near his feet.
Then the servant extends all to the piece of wood tendon, and not removed from their places where they are fixed: but nevertheless, they should not be tightened as we said.
And the doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns; or he places them over a board. Then he attaches his feet to the board until it returns.
However, if it does not return from this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three armspans. And cut into the wall of which we mentioned that it is near the ailment, a space wherein the board can be inserted. Then place a middle board over the spine. And the doctor places his feet on the other end. And tie it tightly until the spine is constricted, and let it return to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a torque that has been traced with your hand; and it is as follows: make two pieces of wood on the ground near the head of the patient, whose length is one armspan each: and at the end of his feet, also two pieces ofwoo
And the length between all pieces of wood is one handspan each; and now a hole has been made everywhere where the torque runs through: and secure every piece of wood firmly in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood; and the torque is where the ligament runs through two holes in both pieces of wood.
And at the other end there is a hole wherein a piece of wood is secured whose length is one handspan as it returns; and with two other pieces of wood, likewise.
Then tie the ligaments you tied in the patient's chest to a torque that is near his head: and the ligaments you tied on its legs to a torque that is near its feet.
Then stand at all torques, the assistant who ties his hand with a ligament as it returns to the torque; and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of a thorn, which follows.
Then, after Spondilus returns and the place is equated, you must apply an imbued plaster with egg white. Then apply a supp. (suppository) Afterwards, place above the plaster an asterisk from a table, whose width is three fingers or about that. And its length and quantity should take up the space of a hunchback, and extend over the healthy part of Spondilus.
Then it is bound with a band as we mentioned earlier. And the weak one should be nourished with subtle food until healed.
And if anything remains prominent in the place at the end of healing: then it is appropriate that they be administered medicines that soften and soothe, with the application tablet we mentioned during a long time. And now one should administer with that lead plate.
And sometimes it happens that prominence is in the very last part of the back of Spondilus: and it should be thought to have dislocation through there, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore, it should not be thought of as with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death by chance.
§ On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the ankle and shoulder joints do not occur except as a mere dislocation: nor is it their case what happens with other remote joints due to slight displacement and depression.
And indeed, the aneckle joint is dislocated in four parts. This means that it is dislocated to the front and back.
And especially it is dislocated towards the inside: and little dislocated to the front and back.
And the cure for its dislocation towards the inside is: because when you connect a healthy leg with an infirm one, it becomes longer; and that knee protrudes more than sane, and the infirm cannot double his foot against his groin; and there is a place that follows the inflamed swelling of the inguinal region, for this reason because the hip joint has already arrived here.
And the sign of its external displacement is that they are opposite occurrences to these incidents.
And the sign of its displacement to the front part is that it expands a healthy leg according to the complementary measure: however, it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot go beyond that on the front part: and his urine remains retained, and swelling occurs at the groin of his body, and there is walking difficulty on his heel during ambulation.
And the sign of its displacement to the back part is that it does not expand the knee, nor can it double itself before swelling occurs in the groin: and his leg becomes shorter on one side: and the groin is softened, and there is a headache at the location of the hip.
The reduction of these types of displacement is to consider that if the displacement is old, it has already aged along with the person who has it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its nature: then there is no treatment at all for it. Therefore, it should not be assumed that this is completely resolved.
However, if the displacement is recent and it belongs to one of the four species of dislocptions: then promptly do this, that you join its parts together, extend it internally and externally, move it with your right and left hand: for perhaps it will return by itself, and will not need any other treatment.
However, if not by this method, then you should prepare a strong remedy, and extend its leg from the lower part: or with its own hands, or with a bandage that is tied over its leg above the knee: and another attendant extends his hand above it so as to insert his fingers under the ticklish parts of his body. Then he should tie with a gentle bandage over the root of the hip joint, and hold one end of the other ligament.
And its extension is either from the front part of the groin to the area of the foreskin, or from the back part to the area of the back.
And its extension is all one piece until it detaches with its body from the ground and remains hanging.
For this kind of extension is a common type of the four kinds of extensions.
If therefore there is a return to displacement with what we have said, it is good; if not, then it must be for every kind the specific treatment of that condition itself.
However, in reducing its own when displacement is towards the inside, it should be laid on the firm'nourse 's healthy side. Then place a band over the hipbone, where it is between the head of the hip and under the groin. Then extend the ligament upward from the front part of the groin to the higher part of the body, toward the foreskin area.
Then another strong assistant should take his arms, and reduce the swolled area of the hip of the patient, and stretch it towards the outside extension vigorously. Now therefore returns to its place.
And this kind is an easier of the other treatment methods by which this limb is reduced.
If however is excused from above and does not obey you at all with this kind of treatment method: then it should be that two feet 's are tied together simultaneously with a band strong, gentle over the heels, and over the two knees; and the length of each be equal to four times as many fingers. And the sick leg extended is more than another amount by twice two digits.
Then hang 's body over the head of the beam that is in the house: and its length from the ground be an amount twice two arms.
Then command a strong youth to defend the head of the hip: and hang another with 's infirm body that you find; and one other young man pushes while defending the hipcorners strongly, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
However, for its proper reduction, when there is an external dislocation, it should be placed on a bed with the patient lying down as we described for those having humpbacks. And the suture of the ligament is done over its shank and on its chest properly.
Then two splints are placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then an additional splint is placed in the middle of his foot and fixed firmly: over which wet cloths are to be wrapped so as not to injure the patient; and it should stand between his thighs to prevent drawing towards the lower part during extension.
Then the assistant should fully extend their arm, and the physician should properly adjust with his hand.
If this is followed by reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place over the same board and press it as we mentioned for humpbacks, evenly. However, it should be ensured that the patient lies on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it should be quickly extended for the patient's leg as we described above on the bed; and the physician should place his right hand palm over the patient's groin. Then he should be bent with the other hand and placed extended towards the lower part of the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is towards the back, then it should not be extended downward for the patient and he should lie on the ground; but rather, he should be placed on a hard surface as was said before when lying over his two humps: and it is on his face, with the ligaments extended as we have recently described.
And it should be administered compression with a board even over the joint site to which the dislocation occurs upon completion of reduction as is required.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is as if you extend two legs of the sick person; and when you see that they are equal, and the sick person grips their leg, and expands them without excuse, then you know that the limb has returned according to how it should be; then join the two thighs, and place a bandage, and tighten with an unmoved wheel: so that it does not move towards any part; and let the sick person adhere to rest for three or four days.
Then dissolve the bandage and apply an emplastrum (dressing), and compare one leg with the other; then if you see that they are equal in their position, then you know that the dislocation has now been firmly set: therefore let the sick person walk.
And if you see something softened: then undo it (the bandage), and apply that dressing again, and tighten that one according to your first strain; and let it also remain loose for three days.
Then undo it (the bandcuage) again and make the person rest from walking on both sides for two more days until well recovered.
Regarding knee dislocations.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and to below (that is, to the back).
And it is not dislocated to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the sick person to apply their leg onto their own hip. But if it does not adhere to the thigh: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all kinds of dislocations is that you make the sick person sit straight up so that now they can extend their leg if possible over it, and let their back adhere to your face; and place their foot among your feet.
Then attach your knee with its palms to his and position yours straight between his digits over his knee. Next, apply with the palm of your hand both sides of his knee with strength. And let another servant stretch his foot until his knee returns to its place.
The sign of return is that the leg clings with the thigh in ease, not exertion.
Then make a plaster and attach the leg to the thigh. Next, bind it together with linen for three or four days. Later, unbind it.
And let the weak one not use walking for several days until healed.
But if it refuses to be reduced by you, then provide strong extension with ligaments, as the procedure for ankle was described earlier, until it returns.
§ For healing of calf displacement.
The heel is sometimes thrown off by a slight push and sometimes dislocated according to the secondary method. And its displacement happens either towards the inside or the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see an inflamed heel proceeding to the side towards which it is dislocated.
The cure for its displacement then consists of easy return: and it is to be extended with ease using hands and leveled until it returns.
And for its cure when it is displaced according to the secondary method, you must make the weak one sit straight and let a strong servant firmly hold him from behind on his back, in the middle of himself.
Then you with your right hand hold his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot at the heel's place.
Then pull his foot to yourself using your right hand. Next, with two steps from the left.
Then, with the left hand extended, and pushing the chest with the foot while bending the right leg without effort.
Do that twice, as I have told you.
Then push the chest with your foot to the leg on one side, and you pull the saw.
If he therefore returns to one side or two according to this manner and sees the foot even, it is good; and if not, then repeat the procedure on him: for he himself returns.
If however it is denied to you the return of him with that which I have told: then make the sick man lie on his back on the ground and drive a stake into the firm earth so that he may fall between his thighs: and now wrap cloth around him, so that he may not be hurt.
Then the attendant takes his thigh: afterwards extends with another foot of the attendant or with their hands or with a band that binds over the top of the leg. Then extends all attendants against the extension of their counterparts: and the stake stands between both thighangs to retain him so that his body is not drawn towards the lower part near the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with their hands and another attendant holds the healthy leg downwards. For dislocation returns with ease.
When however the dislocation returns and it is declared to you his health upon return: then place a plaster and bandage, and bind them tightly with strong bands, and tie his foot with a band towards the leg.
And it is fitting that you examine or feel for the nerves which are above the heel posteriorly, so that there be no band pressing on them and hurting them.
Then release him for two days or three. But if the band loosens, bind him again: then untie him on the third or fourth day: and forbid the sick from walking for forty days. If indeed he wishes to walk before this space of time, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not be resolved upon it, and it will be corrupted, and it will not receive after that treatment.
If he suffers a hot abscess: then one must administer to his rest in that which our story preceded elsewhere in treatment and rubbing, until it is removed.
Regarding the dislocation of toe bones, and their treatment.
It is necessary that it be straightened when it has been displaced with minimal extension and without effort: indeed, this is not difficult, rather it is easy.
If however the dislocation is in some knots of the back of the foot: then one must make him sit with his injured foot on an equal level of the ground or on a board: and it stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot over that which protrudes from those joints. Then the heel with your foot by force, until it returns, and you see that it is already levelled, and does not protrude.
Then place under his instep a board which takes the whole foot in two heads. Then bind it with a proper bandage for three days. Then unbind it and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured in the reduction.
Regarding types of dislocations with ulcers or fractures.
When such a thing happens and you undertake its treatment and restoration, often death occurs many times: and because of this one should not presume in his treatment, which is of this kind, unless he is wise in the art, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor arrogant: and to use medicines that only calm hot sores for a long time: and to abandon him to divine judgement. Unless you hope or expect healing from ruin with ease of sickness, and where something appears to be hopeful. Therefore make the cutting out of that immediately at the beginning of the matter before a hot abscess occurs.
If the member returns as we wish, then apply a treatment that calms abscesses and treat wounds with what is suitable for them from dried ointments.
If there is dislocation with fracture and it occurs that the bone fragments are separated, then try their removal, and do as we have said concerning simple illnesses from what has preceded in those places.
And be cautious according to your virtue and guard yourself from the entrance of fear: according to what has preceded my prediction for you.
For that is better for you before your Creator and more lasting to your glory, and more healing of your body with them at the time of yours.
