O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its revelations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is hidden from all, so it has been lost and neglected; only a few brief references to it remain in the books of ancient authors who have described this work with their hands. And from this has come error and vanity; intentions have become closed off, and knowledge has been pushed aside.
Or it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation, and of abbreviation. And then will come the forms of the cautery irons, and of other instruments for the work with their adjustment as well as an explanation of its preparation as needed.
And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become elongated. And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs and their shapes, connections and separations; be aware of bones, nerves, veins and arteries, and have knowledge of the numbers and movements of them all.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name along with the noun is much, and with work it becomes little. and especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should take care not to fall into error or harm people.
Thus, I have seen many who involve themselves in this science, abandoning it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut her carotid arteries. Which caused so much blood to come out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor treating a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; He carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
And I saw another doctor treating a duke of our land who had a broken leg with an open fracture wound.
And the ignorant surgeon restrains the fracture on top of the wound with bandages tied too tightly, leaving no room for the wound to drain, and thus he leaves it untreated.
And he commands that it must not be untied.
And so it was delayed, causing the leg to swell entirely and the foot to become damaged, leading to its ruin.
I was called upon to attend him, and I hurried to come and release his leg. And when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
However, the damage to his limb had already taken hold, and I could not cure him.
And the corruption kept spreading through the limb until it was all lost.
And then I saw another marvel which aggravated an abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its nature.
For a cancer, when it is caused by melancholic humor, it should not be treated with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corrupted matter can be entirely removed.
And for this, my dear son, you must understand that manual work is divided into two categories: that is to say, work where there is danger in many situations;
and I shall demonstrate in each place of this book where there is fear and risk.
This is why you must be cautious so that the foolish surgeon does not speak ill of you.
Take up your tools carefully, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best methods so that by God's grace you achieve success and are praised.
And leave behind terrifying illnesses of serious illness;
Remove your weapons from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Do not undertake the treatment of any serious illness unless you are called upon as a foolish physician.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and other medical treatments for acute diseases, and the chapters are arranged from head to toe.
And the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar matters.
And this chapter sets out the order of operations and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and related matters.
And it sets out the order from head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
Before we embark on this work, it is necessary for me to explain the qualities of remedies and their potential harm according to each complexion.
I say that the qualities of healing, and their hindrance, are a long speech and subtle science, and hidden secrets.
And many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed upon it.
And their words suffice for little to me, because I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery universally helps all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions: That is to say, a hot constitution without matter, and a dry constitution without matter.
In a hot and dry constitution with matter, some argued and said that cautery is of great help; And others said the opposite: That cautery is not beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness;
And he who says otherwise, claims that cautery provides great relief to hot and dry ailments that arise within the body of men. When you compare the body of a man to fire in terms of moisture and complexion, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it through experience.
But in any case, do not rely solely on the opinion of someone who has experienced it, but rather on that of an expert who understands through long practice the chapter on cauterization, and the variety of human constitutions, as well as their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and how they arise over time.
We need not fear for other constitutions, especially in the case of cold and moist ailments. And all the doctors assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
And know, my son, that fire together with cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and it does not come forth unless to the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member if left alone.
Burning remedies spread from one member to another, leading to diseases that require prompt treatment. And sometimes the patient may even die as a result.
The fires due to their height and the goodness of their substance do not harm, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in this art, and it is based on the truth of things.
And for this I excuse myself for the length of my words, as I do not wish to take away from you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of its work, how it begins to heal illnesses of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating. so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, choosing careful timing.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for the harmful things arising from below can be removed by the help of cauterization. and especially if the cauterization is necessary for pain, it must be done quickly to prevent further serious harm from coming to the limb.
and never think of doing it like foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no relapse; and they say it like this;
and they say it like this; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors causing the pain; it is more powerful than any other medicine due to its speed of action, and for the strength of its work and its mastery.
And it is remarkable that the disease may sometimes come according to the patient's complexion, the location of the disease and its strength;
and are gathered in it the excesses due to the consumption of meat and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this type of pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort in medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are valuable after medicinal treatments, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort in medicine because when we administer various treatment methods for any illness, and they prove ineffective, then we use cauterization, which works.
Thus it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterizations with a golden instrument are more beneficial than those of iron, and they attributed this to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not cause inflammation, but this is not always true as I have tested it myself and found that it occurs in some men.
And gold cauterizations are more beneficial than those of iron, just as they said. However, when you heat a golden instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its colour and it cools down quickly.
And if one heats it too much. They are done by fire. And thus there is enough hindrance.
Now I have ordered this chapter on the head to foot so that it might be easier for you to find your way through it.
This cauterization is effective for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two ways to perform it due to a disease called 'soda', and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, causing multiple symptoms like dreams, toothaches, sore throat, and especially all diseases stemming from cold such as paralysis, sodas, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, moisture, and habit of the patient can endure. And then make the patient's head sweat again.
And then have him sit with crossed arms between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulders.
Afterwards, place the root of your palm at the root of their nose between their two eyes. And where your two thumbs will come, bleed then heat the cautery called "olivare", of which this is the form: And place it on an ink-marked spot, then move your hand gently downward and inward in a twisting manner. Then lift your hand slightly, and reposition it if you see the bone moving even a little bit. And if you don't see it moving, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I've told you.
Afterward, take some softened silk and put it in a pile of soft cotton, then place this on the spot for three days.
Then apply moistened cotton mixed with butter over it. Leave it in place until the burning sensation has gone. After treating the wound with the remedy known as "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself. and for this reason, aid is provided.
And some said that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
And others say that one must leave the cautery on so long and press it with such force that it pierces the bone as wide as the "vertuil" that women put in their sleeves, because this allows the humours to escape more easily.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time. Afterwards, it should be treated and sutured.
And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all in every way, except for some people where there is a sense of fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave it.
for the bone is weakened by the constant movement of nature, as we witness in other limbs.
Even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first type of cauterization seems more effective and useful to me, I employ it together with these treatments for a cure.
When a patient experiences chronic head pain that persists for an extended period, they should use herbs and pills known as "cochie," along with purgatives, oils, and poultices. For if you perform the cautery as we have described before, and it is ineffective. Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and ensure it is not too cold. Then cauterize below the aforementioned cautery site slightly. Afterwards, cauterize each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform a cautery where it is called "the vessel". And there is a place for the application of cups. Adjust your hand so that you do not see down to the bone. The sick person feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about that later.
and it is fitting that the cauterizations of the horns are more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and this is the procedure:
For the head cautery When there is sudden pain in one part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the skull has been cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned for dividing diseases have been applied, yet none of these provide relief: then treat it with two types of cauterization, namely medical cautery and fire cautery.
Medical cauterization involves taking a piece of alum, removing the bark and cutting it into two pieces for the skull bones, then making an incision in the temple where the pain is located such that you can place the alum beneath the skin.
and when it is repaired, bind it tightly and hold it like this for twelve hours. then untie it and treat with strong garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days. then apply cotton soaked in butter until it forms a crust.
After the treatment, cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see fit to use some of the caustic medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on caustic medicines.
The iron cautery is performed in this manner. Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
It is called a "closure" because its head has the shape of a closed fist with one curve and in the middle it has a small prominence.
and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and turn it slightly to one side, so that half of the blade is scorched.
lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, which is outside, and let an abundance of blood flow.
Afterward, place cotton covered in linen on the wound, and leave it there for three days. then apply moist cotton with butter, and treat the wound until it is healed.
and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', cover its entire tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and iron are insufficient, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
and incise instead on the spot with a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, being careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone.
and be mindful of the jaw movement when one swallows, ensuring that it does not move or cause spasms in the patient, and guard against excessive blood loss from the artery if cut, which is a great fear especially for those who are unaware and uninitiated to such matters, like students without experience. And leave the work halfway done;
But I will tell you how to staunch the blood when an artery is severed, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you observe this, apply the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery. And these cauteries are better and more helpful than that one.
From the pain in the ears due to coldness.
When pain in the ear arises from coldness and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before but the pain persists, then heat this cautery tool called a "point", of which the shape is as follows:
After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both ears if pain is felt in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear once you have marked the point to cauterize. and make X points around each ear;
Afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
Of mouth torture
Wounds that must be treated with cauterization are only those caused by flux, as we mentioned in the classification of diseases.
And do not apply cauterization to similar conditions that arise from drying out or the breaking of nerves.
When you treat this type of wound that originates from the flow of humors and purgings of the head and gargles, and it doesn't improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations. One at the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and have them cauterized at the top of the ear slightly below the crown of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb. Leave the cautery in place until half of the heart is burnt.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
It is similar in appearance to the cutellaire we described earlier, but it is a little more delicate and the knife should be slightly larger.
After treatment, leave the wound as I have said before until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but the patient does not improve and has no fever, then make four cauterizations. Two above the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and another at the place called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
And it is treated as we have said previously.
Of lethargy.
For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that purify the brain.
After having raised the head of the patient fully, place on their occiput the mustard plaster which is described in the treatise on plasters.
and this is the method of the cautery: If you do it as I have said.
If he is treated thus, it is good. And if he is not, perform three cauterizations on his head down to the neck, leaving a two-finger width space between each.
Treat it as you would the others, and if you feel it necessary, and the patient can endure it, perform one cautery in the middle. and if necessary, put two others above the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
and let the cauterization be called 'olivare', as I have said before.
The head must be cleansed of hairs and other things, as we have said before;
after washing the patient's head, then cauterize them on the head and on each horn, behind it, and three times along the spine of the neck;
and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then do four cauterizations along the spine of the back. And leave it until the part of the heart closest to the wound is burned, then lift your hand. After the treatment is complete, wait until it is fully healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil," as we previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; and it is necessary to first temper the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient is an adult and can take medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, perform a gargle and chew softening the brain often with good meat.
After that, split the head in half lengthwise, and perform a cautery as we have said before on each side of the skull, and also over the brain. And if the patient is strong and suffering, perform a cautery as I have described for those with paralysis and body weakness, on their spine from neck to lower back, and use olive oil in the manner that I explained before.
If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cauterization according to this method:
When due to melancholy, excesses or corrupt humidities and thick phlegm are present, then cauterize with multiple cauteries as we have mentioned for one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses decline towards it and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned previously in this division.
After rising, lift the patient's head; Afterwards, make a linen pad well-made, like a circle, and place it in the middle of the head;
And have the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported on all sides;
After presenting the linen pad, you must melt some old sheep's butter; Heat it over gentle fire so that the skin tolerates its application; Then empty out the circle from within the head, and leave it to cool down;
And do this for the patient once every week with some other good treatment until they are healed.
If you wish to cauterize, do so by making multiple dots along the entire length of the cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally;
And then place wet cotton on top, soaked in butter and goose fat.
the awe of eyes When the awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the classification, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in the bath multiple times while fasting.
Afterwards, instruct him to lie down and apply a cautery on the head, and perform two cauterizations above each of the two temples if the descent of the fluid is towards both eyes together, or one if it is directed at one eye.
Cover the entire cautery area with gauze over all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temples.
Be wary of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a cloth as tightly as you can.
And I will instruct you on extracting arteries and performing incisions, the caution on how to staunch them.
and sometimes a cautery or excision is made below the two bones at the back.
and it is seen that this is of cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then apply the cautery I mentioned at the beginning to the eye area. A cautery on the head, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or excisions below the two bones. And if more is needed, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and they do not improve, then give them three nights of drinking cow's urine. After the king's head, cauterize the middle of the olive-shaped cautery site. And place two 'clavilis' cauteries above the wrists, slightly below the hairline.
Beware of the artery so as not to cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'. Of which this is the form:
And if you wish, place two additional cauteries on the wrists as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not leave your hand there except for as long as one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
On the hair that pricks the eye There are times when the eyelashes turn inward, prick the eye, and cause irritation. For this, cauterization is performed in two ways: That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and become even, then place the patient in your care. After, lord, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
Then put moist cotton in egg white and parsley mush on the eye, then heat the following cautery which is of this form:
After cauterize on the drawn figure often and again until the heart is burnt in that place;
And the sign of success in this work is that you will see the paper retract and hairs raised to the edge of the eye;
Then lift your hand away, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scald is gone; After treatment, allow the wound to heal completely.
And if after this the hairs appear, and the skin is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same spot, just as you did initially.
If the hairs fall out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, is even, and no longer pricks the eye.
Medical cauterizations that burn are when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one ounce, and grind them together well. et press it with a cloth so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some eyes on the paper; and if the illness is only in one eye, you must operate on that one, but if it is in both eyes as well... and place under the eye cotton moistened with egg white.
and let the patient's head be on your healthy side and place your index finger pointing at the medicine, then press the pouch and mix it every time the patient feels a sensation of heat from the medicine, for they will also feel a burning sensation.
When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your hand. And when the sensation of heat passes, lift up the cloth and see if it is also raised like a leaf would be lifted by fire or an incision. And if it is so, then it is good.
If not, apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has been applied, until your work is even, and your eyes are focused.
Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is appeased, afterward treat the place with an ointment called "diaphenes," and others, until it is healed.
And if you must be mindful of your work, take great care that none of the medicine gets into your eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs prick in the eye, repeat the medicine on this softened spot from the paper itself, just as you did before. Afterward treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And you should know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this, be your constraints.
And let not the correct path be denied to him who studies this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cautery.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must apply cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap. Hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist its neck.
Afterwards, place moistened cotton below an egg or in parsley juice over the eye.
Afterwards, heat the cautery which is such:
and it is shaved at the head like the shape of a vaulted roof, along with where the cauterization is to be done;
if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also look like a tent;
but nevertheless, this one who is shaved is better for your work.
After that, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, then dry it. and if it is closed, operate on it, and draw out the poison forcefully.
after that, place the hot cautery on it properly, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not falter. and place the cautery into the grease of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the bone with the cautery, it would be beneficial. If not, restart the cautery again, once more if needed, and leave it for three days;
After, place wet cotton soaked in butter on top, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat it according to what comes in this chapter.
There is also a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Understand the fistula, and split the site open; Afterwards, place into the fissure one subtle camel's hair of which it is made: Et they make it to the quantity of one third of a plank. Et hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye.
And one must put on the patient's eye moist cotton with egg white or honey.
The lead fills the place of the fistula, and the wound heals miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good. If not, you must administer a perforation with a knife, and return the fistula to the body of the knife according to what is necessary in its proper place.
cracks in lips Many times cracks occur on lips, which are called "scabs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And put it into the crevices until it reaches the bottom.
Afterwards clean the area of wax so that it is healthy.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or tooth roots, it causes decay and swelling, becomes inflamed, and develops into a fistula. And treat it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not heal. Then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After the hole or opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and passes through it.
Do this once or twice, then treat it as we have described in the treatment section until it is healed.
and if they are cured thus, it is good; and if not, one must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the patient's head on your thigh. after, heat the cautery as follows: place a cane over the tooth.
and put the hot cautery inside it until your hand is warm enough that the patient feels heat reaching the tooth's root.
After lifting your hand, resume the cautery according to your will.
After that, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it there for an hour; rinse thoroughly.
In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
of pain in the teeth
When toothache comes from coldness, whether it be cold or hot, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterization is necessary in two ways: Cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take cow's butter and put it in the end of an iron or bronze spoon; After that, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a probe, then moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down.
And so it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you want to wet wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
The cauterization by fire is such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come about, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very day or the next morning.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then let the cold (or ice) come after.
and here is the shape of the cautery:
And make the cautery for the jaw, as you wish, according to what power (or ability) you have;
and here is the shape of the cane:
Des scrophules When scrofula is caused by cold and moist humours, and it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then heat the pointed cautery which follows after in this shape, and have two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side of the cautery;
and apply a hot cauterizing agent to the abscess once or twice as needed until it reaches the base of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cauterizing agent according to its size, leaving it for three days; and place moist cotton soaked in butter over the burn until it is healed;
afterward, treat the area with ointments and dressings until it is fully healed.
When moisture accumulates in the body's channels, especially when it originates from a cold constitution, the patient must first be emptied through dissolvant medications;
afterward, apply a cauterizing agent to the root of the throat, being careful not to reach the throat and only burning a small portion of the heart.
After making another cauterization at the junction of the neck and spine, perform the cauterization called 'clavicle', as described previously.
And treat the area just like we said before until it is healed.
Whenever any lung disease is caused by cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old illness, then perform two cauterizations on the corresponding meridians. And another cauterization in the middle of the chest between two breasts;
And these cauterizations should be called 'clavicle' according to the previously mentioned shape or method.
And if you see fit, perform cautery by pricking with the entire point which is called "punctum," as described before in ear disease.
and let the pricking be down to XXX or around it.
After treating the site according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cautery marks in this shape:
And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
Of the shoulder dislocation.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, remind the patient of his back and side. after that, lift up the heart which is within the tickler with two of your left hand's fingers;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has two iron handles as described before:
and cauterise the heart until it is perforated to its side, and you will get a figure of four cauteries.
and for this reason cautery is performed with the three-iron cautery, hence the form of cauterization has six cauteries.
and the nerve follows the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the three-iron cautery:
And sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Then apply the cautery, pound bell peppers with salt; Afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well-settled.
And if it is dislocated again soon after, then this indicates that there are underlying problems; thus perform a cautery on the thick part above the clavicle, or many cauterizations when needed.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient healed.
When in the stomach coldness and too much moisture come such that it is extracted from its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies for him despite usual treatments providing no benefit, then the patient should be reminded to lie on their back with legs and arms stretched out. In this procedure, make three cauterizations underneath the armpit with as much space as two fingers, to each clavicle cautery, and two cauterizations outside on both sides so that the shape of the cauterization is a triangle, and leave such distance between them that they do not join together when the flesh rots.
and let the cauterization be so thorough that it purifies both parts of the heart; and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form:
and for him who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach there. Puncturing according to the quantity you desire to insert; then cauterize with all the 'point' cautery.
After the treatment of the wound we had previously, let it heal.
When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and due to excessive wind, such that it is removed from its natural state by superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said previously about divisions, but it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded of their illness and its severity. and for a third-degree cautery, the signs are as follows: this form and this image with these quantities on the liver, under the hypochondrium where the man's ribs come together.
and leave space between each cautery equal to the width of your thumb. and let the length of each cautery match that of the body part being treated, not pressing too hard with your whole hand throughout the entire procedure.
and burn only half of the heart-shaped cautery, keeping the patient upright on their feet throughout the procedure.
and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms;
and if your intention is to cauterize these cautery wounds with the surgical knife, provided that you are skilled and wise in this art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, as you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it reach the mouth, for the heart is very delicate in that area, and you would dry it out to see it.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe.
And if it is in the membrane, they feel excruciating pain.
And so when this treatment is required, the patient must be reminded of it on their head.
Then cut away the flesh where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray; this is its form: Cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and go as far as the saphenous vein, so that all flesh is destroyed.
After the treatment according to the type of cloth used until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate for anyone but those who have studied medicine extensively to use this cautery treatment, by whose hands these ailments were cured at times.
Then he can operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
The cautery of hard wax
The ancients said that one should make many cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: Take one long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fingers; Oil the root and place it in the fire, then cauterize with one cautery between the forearm and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part that is below the beard;
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, inclining slightly backwards; and one cautery between the breasts, and another on the stomach, and two between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not squeeze your hand, but apply pressure gently as if scenting.
And some ancient sources say that no man should use fire cautery like a barber's tool, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess; and if there is pain outside, as we have said in the case of liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse.
When you treat the illness of a mouse according to what we have said in the section on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cautery which are all beneficial.
Of which one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line following the length of the arm, according to the shape of the liver abscess cautery that we mentioned earlier;
And do not rush your hand with every cautery, let the patient rest often on their back.
And another method of cautery is to heat the cauterizing iron with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
Lift the heart which is on the right side of the chest, where the patient's wound faces left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its length along the body, and the cautery should be made according to the width of the body.
After inserting the two heated handles until they pierce through to the other side of the heart, then pull out the cautery iron forcefully, and thus there will be four of them.
And if you see fit, cauterize with a three-nered cautery.
After the treatment when it has removed putrefaction over a long time, and this is better than other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, except in the case of the method known as 'ascites'.
When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the lump, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one towards the breast. and let the cauterizations be close to the base of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus over a long time, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cauterization. and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be combined with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle, which we have shown before. And that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was previously mentioned here.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger. And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not enter too deeply, lest you burst the yellow water; let the cautery be according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the small toe. And let the long cauterizations be one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
And leave the caustic applications for a long time without treatment, until it heals.
After treating other ailments that we have mentioned.
When an abdominal ailment arises from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; And if you see the patient in great suffering and with strong constitution, then make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously regarding gastric cautery, using the circular cautery iron. And four small cauterizations around the navel with each one slightly larger than the previous one, and two on the hips.
And if you observe abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery above each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are present in the fundament, whether one or more, and they are ancient, consisting of large cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described above, but to no avail, then perform cauterizations. Above the spine of the back, where it is entirely outside [of its normal position], first perform one cautery and then another in a triangular pattern.
And if you believe their stomach is cooled and the meat not cooked, and one sees their face swell, then on the face perform a large cautery over the stomach as described before, another on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with each cautery being performed in turn. Leave the cautery open for an extended period of time. After treatment, let the wound heal completely.
When you treat a wound with a hot iron, heat up the cauterizing tool like a razor, and then place it fully ignited on top of the wounded area. And leave your hand there until the cauterizing tool reaches the edge of the wound, causing blood to flow out.
Do this twice, and if there is a lot of flesh, cauterize each part as we have said. After the treatment with beneficial ointments, let it heal until it is completely cured.
And if you use a larger cauterizing tool on the wound, it will provide greater relief.
When the patient cannot endure suturing nor incision, which we shall relate in its place, such a sickness comes that can only be healed through cauterization.
When any person develops a fistula and it is filled with pus and putrefied moisture, you should first try a subtle treatment, and make sure that you know all about the treatment's effect.
Afterwards, heat up the cauterizing tool resembling a razor, and push it into the fistula according to how much has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as needed until all corrupted flesh is burned away once or twice or three times depending on how severe the injury is.
And beware of burning the nerves which are sensitive, and of large veins.
If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and the intestine, avoid these places, and do not make incisions there as it is dangerous.
After treatment, examine the wound until it is healed, and if the wound has been dry for a long time, with all matter removed, then know that the wound is completely healed.
And if matter remains unremoved, understand that the wound is open, and bone at its base has decayed. And as for one of these which we will say in its place.
When pain from cold arises in the loins, and due to severe flatulence, and it does not affect a woman's disposition, then you must perform cauterisation on the loins, one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery as we previously mentioned;
and if we cauterise in the middle, there will be three cauterisations in a row, which will provide greater relief.
from the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then cauterise outside on the bladder, where the hairs of the forearm begin, both right and left, with each cauterisation as long as a thumb's width.
and make one cauterisation outside the back, or two if necessary.
And let the clavicle cauterization be done according to the form mentioned above.
When the wife is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and her flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed; and when they come, she experiences great pain: then it is necessary that we do three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said for bladder cauterization, and two on the outside of the back;
And let the clavicle cauterization be done, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, causing it to dislocate from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
And the location of the wound is found on the outside of the hip, so you must cauterize the patient over the box of the hip with a circular cautery, and bleed in front of the joint around the box as it turns, such that the bone is within the circle.
and let these cauteries be like those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three olive-sized cauteries, and let the cautery be as perfect as all hearts.
and treat until it is healed.
Of the pain in the hip When pain comes to the bone of the hip, which is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but it does not help, and the illness is chronic: Thus it is necessary for you to purge the patient of gross humours with fetid pills or other good similar pills. After performing the cautery;
And the manner of cauterisation is according to two methods: That is to say, caustic medicine together, and cautery by fire.
Cauterisation by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
You should perform the cautery on the hip's bone with three triangular cauteries according to this form, making sure it is deep and large, leaving a space equal to a thumb's width between each cautery, and ensuring that they are olive-shaped.
Sometimes a cauterization is performed in the middle of the hip, for which there are four methods according to this form:
And if you see fit, use the circular cautery, as we have previously mentioned, in the case of hip dislocation;
But make sure that the circles cover the entire hip, and all the flesh around the heart is burned.
And this is how it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach down to the thigh or leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient indicates that the pain is felt, and four cauterizations above the ankle, slightly more to the left side.
And let the cauterization be with a knife, burning through the thickness of the flesh.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to their toes or close to them, cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four points using the cautery called "point". And if necessary, do more of it.
And if the patient believes that the pain is below the knee and towards the thigh, use the knife-like or circular cautery on them, and be very careful with all your cauterizations so as not to leave it there long enough for you to burn their nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who were cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it for so long that the entire leg became swollen, as did the foot, and was perforated and completely ruined. After an abdominal operation from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, according to this method.
The wise ones said about the hip cauterization that it is like this: make a piece of iron, and at its head let it be as big as an inch-wide button or slightly less, and have it perforated from end to end with holes spaced out by an inch.
and they are hinged on two sides, and also like knots, and there is one iron loop well made;
and this is the shape:
and it is heated until it becomes completely red and emit sparks, and then place it on the sore hip joint, turning it onto the healthy side;
and cauterize once with one cautery application and leave it for three days; and then apply an ointment of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time; after the treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasim says we rarely use this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and if we did observe it more often.
and yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be tolerated by some patients, depending on where it is applied.
The cauterization of medicine that burns is such that you make an instrument with crossbars into which the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of brass or iron on one side, and on the other let there be two handles, and between each a space equal to the thickness of a thumb; and let them be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Afterwards place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly onto the box of the hip; After immersion between the two circles of hot water that has been heated by one fire pot, leave for an hour, and let the patient bear its heat and burning.
For it is found to have a bite like fire there also;
and when the bite is over, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of cool water, and leave it like this for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scald is removed. and let it rest for three days so it dries out;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or down to the leg, make for him an instrument that holds it fast according to what you have done at the hip equally;
and this is the method of the hot splint, and I have written it in the treatise on medical correction. Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, grind them together, then put in a new pot. where there is a small opening through which the point of a lancet can enter;
where there is a small opening through which the point of a lancet can enter; and place above this another vessel well-weighted, and put on an alkali and heat it with gentle steam until there are two inches of water above the powders when you have properly grasped it in your hand;
and leave it thus until water and moisture descends into the weighted vessel, then take all this water, and pour it onto heat and alkali as before.
And then there will be great pain, administered by many works of medicine and cauterizations of other members.
For it makes the same work like fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as theses and honey of anacardium and hot soap; all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was required, and that he was cured immediately upon completing this cure, and then he bathed as he instructs below.
And it says in this manner that you take some fresh and dry green litharge (lead oxide), and grind it very well with one pound of grease, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is located, and bind it there.
and leave it for three hours; by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.
Then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly moistened, and then let him into bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be cured.
And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization without prior bodily evacuation.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps greatly;
and the cautery should be done in such a way. Take linen and smear it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called 'foscile'.
After, take dry goat's dung and ignite it until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool, leaving it there until it is extinguished.
Repeat this process again, and do not cease until you feel it has reached the hip and the pain has ceased.
This method of cautery is called "goat's dung cautery".
Of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from any similar matter of cold spreading material; for none of these situations is cauterization beneficial except in the case that it arises from an influx of cold matter.
The patient should then be purged with foul-smelling pills or similar to empty their bowels, followed by three straight lines of ink on their back where the pain is felt, and in each line, apply five cauteries or more depending on the strength and endurance of the patient.
And perform the cauterization according to the method called "pricking.
And if you see fit, make three or four clavicle cauterizations in the middle of the bone following this method:
Often this illness afflicts young children, and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they lift their arms, and fear. And you find at the last vertebra of the spine, an appearance different from those above it.
When you see this one and wish to treat it, cauterize it with the full-circle cautery in this manner. Ensure that the cautery touches each part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish to treat it, cauterize around the vertebra with two or three lines of pricking points, and let these be close together.
Afterwards treat the area until it is dry according to what we have said, and ensure you do not apply cautery over any swelling that is on a nerve.
From the pain of joints
When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "gout," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured with medicine, it must be treated with cautery in this way:
Make a row of cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to treat the front of the foot, make a cauterization on what they call the "point. If the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make three or four cauterizations on each knee, in all places, with every cauterization olive-shaped.
And if you need more, make even more, but do not hold your hand too close other than so that the heart of the cauterization iron is hot.
And if the pain extends down to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of punctures around the wrist.
And if there is no remaining pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and also upon the hair of the hand.
And if the pains reach the arms or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care to the patient and have them take medicine.
For if you provide good care and remove phlegm, the patient will recover with God's help.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs, if it is recent, then when you see it being cured, ensure he does not eat that day. And have him use things to loosen the belly, so that the feces descend from his stomach.
Afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the testicles are retracted, then pull them with your fingers, and cut above the rupture over the bone of the pubic region, and continue cutting in a sign similar to half a circle across his body.
Then heat the cautery which takes this form:
So long as they are white and shed no scent. Then reposition the balls to their place; And the minister should hold his hand so that it does not return backwards;
And spread the patient's legs well, place a cushion and a rolled cloth underneath them, and another on their lower back to hold the hands;
Then place the cautery on the sign with all your might, and hold it straight while holding it until you reach the bone; if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you get to the bone; And be careful that the eye does not jump when you do the cautery; Que tu non li brusques. Et qu'en cela, le patient ne meurt pas, ni n'ait d'autres maux.
Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Il convient que les cautres pour enfants soient subtils selon leur taille, et pour les grands de mme en proportion.
Aprs trois jours, traite l'endroit du cautre au beurre jusqu' ce que la brlure disparaisse.
Aprs les soins initiaux, applique d'autres onguents jusqu' ce que la plaie gurisse, et le patient doit rester alit quarante jours jusqu' ce que la blessure soit compltement cicatrise.
Il convient que son alimentation soit satisfaisante et prolonge afin qu'il puisse sortir de son lit sans trop s'affaiblir lorsqu'il sera prt  aller dans une autre chambre.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days.
And he should have good rest, not overexert himself, avoid excessive drinking or eating, and refrain from shouting loudly.
When he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
And I will now say the treatment for amputation within its chapter.
When sores appear in other body parts and are known to be infected, if they do not grow larger, apply a caustic [substance] as a cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the heart be burnt. After the treatment, proceed with care as we have mentioned before.
and some of the ancients have said it should be cauterized with the three-angled cautery according to this form:
But first mark the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, then hold your hand in the middle to secure the iron tool throughout its use.
But the first set of cauterizations should be lighter and less severe.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, strength, and location of torsion, as well as the intensity of the pain.
if it is burned by the first cautery, that's good;
and if it does not bleed from the first one, start another cautery on top of that one, for such a custom is that it should change to the member that is nearest, which means you must perform cauteries until the patient bleeds.
The months are aided sometimes by cauterization with great relief, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see it being cauterized, pay attention if the patient is at an early stage of illness, and if they are cured according to what we have said in the division, and there is no descent or remaining [symptoms], but you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the entire body, then do five cauteries on their head. I place one [hand] under my head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of my hair. And two above the two temples, and one behind on the nape.
And leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches down to the bone, and [leave it] so that scabs form such that vapors from thick fluids can escape.
And cauterize [the wound] on the muscle according to its depth.
And if the injury is spread across multiple places. And if it clearly becomes worse, then you must treat [the injury] with these cauterizations that we have mentioned for the head, and one cautery at the nape of the neck, two cauteries on the spine in the back, six cauteries on the spinal column, one large one on the lower back and another beside it, and two on each shoulder. et II sur les ctes, et II sur les tendons du pied, et I sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains;
et prends garde aux nerfs qui sont au-dessus du talon en marchant, pour ne pas les brler ;
et une fois fais un cautre sur l'os du poignet, et un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saches qu'autant tu en fais de cautres, autant tu apportes de l'aide, et il y a un bienfait ;
Et saches que les malades ne ressentent pas la douleur du cautre comme un corps sain la sentirait, car leur corps est dj corrompu ;
And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find appropriate for each type of iron tool.
After the operation, dress the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then make cauterizations on the limb according to its size.
and let the cauterization be slightly deeper into the thickness of the heart. then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes a cauterization on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, in this way removing the swelling.
but in any case, do not attempt this if you are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of nerves that move the body.
When the illness known as 'albaras' has subsided, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a perfect cautery, according to the depth of the heart's species, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
Then treat it with a cure made of flour from vetch and lentils, with rosehip oil and plantain leaves, along with partridge blood and pigeon blood, each in equal parts; Mix everything together well, bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
The treatment of cancer by cauterization.
When cancer appears at its beginning, and you want to stop it from spreading, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the cancerous area.
Additionally, the wise ones say that one should also apply cautery to the center of the cancerous growth;
and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once before;
and a more effective approach is to cauterize around it with the circular cautery, as we have mentioned extensively on cauterization techniques.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and their death is delayed either due to the excess waste it produces or due to the patient's condition when they are decrepit (meaning very old) with little blood, or because of the season; and you want to hasten their death: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, being careful not to overheat. After leaving it like this. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through at all the cauterization points, heat the cauterization tool that is shaped like this:
Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterization tool has pierced the heart, and let the cauterization be such that the patient feels it externally in a way that slows the course of the rot.
After the treatment, wait until it is perfectly healed.
There is another kind of illness called "corrodens", which is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this illness in a place that can endure the fire cautery, then heat up both small and large cauterizing claws according to what is suitable for the area where the disease is located;
After that, cauterize thoroughly from all sides until you eradicate all the decay, leaving no trace of it behind, so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized areas a soft paste made with oil until the scalds from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Afterwards treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
And if you see no healthy scab forming after three days, it is good;
And if not, restart the cauterization on whatever remains in the corrupted areas.
And this illness was sometimes treated with wet compresses instead of fire cauterization;
But nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment of a fever in this section. Take it when you need it.
of the swellings that come to the feet Often it happens that on the feet, due to some external injury, a disease arises which we call "claws", and this is a faulty growth that wounds the foot.
And there are two ways of performing cautery for this disease. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is when you heat a red-hot iron like the feather of an owl, and it should be made of good iron with the right measurements so that it can grip the nail from all sides, and have fine edges.
After that, place it very hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches its base. Leave it like this for three days until it starts to discharge pus. Then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight; the nail will come out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by force in the body, and often occur on hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them. and it is done this way: Take a copper or iron rod, or a goose feather quill, and place it on the nail and wart, that is, for warts; Place the rod on it so that it touches all around, then add a drop of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand in such a way that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deep into the root.
and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for an hour. then leave them be, and they will uproot themselves at their roots entirely.
Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When some tremble with coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, you must make four cauterizations or four on their spine, one between each vertebra. and one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery.
let them tremble, and hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
At times when the body breaks out in baths or stinking pustules, this comes from gross corrupted matter.
at first, when they appear, one must cauterize each head of the pimple. A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, of which the tip is taken by fire, or with a long root of aristoloche, or with the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it prevents their growth from then on, but breaks the excess which causes them, and heals them.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
There are often great bleedings from the artery which is cut at the wound that appears on the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things. It is a very serious thing to stop (the bleeding).
And nonetheless, when this happens to someone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound's injury, and press firmly until the blood stops flowing beneath your finger, with no more drops emerging.
Then apply to the fire several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red.
Afterward, take either the large or small one depending on the wound and the location of the artery, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, keeping the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if sparks fly when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease doing one after another until the blood is staunched.
and make sure you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
and know that when blood escapes from the artery, it cannot be properly stanched especially if the artery is large, unless through one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extracting it if it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stanch blood. and bind it tightly so.
Whoever introduces bandaging with tight linen strips or applying hot compresses, or other similar methods, will not benefit much from it.
And if this happens to someone and they have no mirror or medicine available, one must put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stanched over the wound and over the vein. And do not move the arm, but often wet it with cold water, very cold so that the blood is frozen and thickened and reduced in volume.
And make incisions beforehand on those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all ailments requiring fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their effects, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I have placed this chapter about the head down to the feet; I will go through this same path in this chapter so that what is sought may be found more easily.
And so as I begin this work, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous one on cauterization, and thus it requires even greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; For there is doubt and fear, and death comes to many.
And I warn you not to attempt folly. For people come for treatment in many different ways. If such patients die quickly upon seeing their condition and the severity of their illness, they perish due to despair. And this we ought to fear.
Of these there are those who give you their meaning, and say: Wait, I am healed"; But the illness is deceitful.
It is not right to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place greater emphasis on your honour than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely regarding what you are sure of and can achieve.
And make use of prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients, for their salvation depends on it.
And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a memory of praise.
Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he will to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in a way that divides it into sections, according to how it is presented before the chapter on cauterization, which I explained to you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you need.
Know that this illness often comes to children during birth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not known.
And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone but children, and death came swiftly to all that I witnessed. And for this reason, it seems best to abandon the work of such treatments.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of water, and his head grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it.
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this fluid had gathered beneath the bone above the shoulder-blade, between the heart and the bone.
and the treatment is such if the moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscesses are small, that you should make a wide incision in the head.
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture drains out.
and observe here the shape of the spatula.
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the sutures of the head are open on all sides, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but it does not respond to you: So you must divide the head into three incisions, like this.
And after the incision extract all moisture quickly. Then bind the incisions with cloth strips and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days.
Then untie the bindings, treat the wound with tenting and ointments, keep the head bound evenly, and feed the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess seems largest, and where fluid has gathered.
because sometimes it appears there first. sometimes at the back. Some times to the right side; and some times to the left side.
Cut therefore the place where the abscess appears, and drain the pus, and make an incision according to your ability;
and take care not to cut the artery; and if the vein starts to bleed, so that the patient dies due to loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatment is ineffective, then the final remedy is cauterization along with the cutting of two arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you cut the veins, that the patient should turn his head backwards; Afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then stretch the patient's neck back with all your strength. Then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of both are after the ears, and they are almost closed.
Then mark the eyes of anchovy, then cut both with a sharp spatulate knife in two parts, so that the incision reaches down to the bone, and it should be done across the width of the head.
And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting as deep as necessary across it.
And when the vein is cut open, blood spouts upwards continuously outwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and cut until reaching the bone.
And the amount of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
Look at the wound next. If it remains over the bone without a splint, cut to prevent hot abscesses from forming; open up the wound and bind it closed, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine When ancient migraine comes with acute catarrh due to moisture of tears and warmth in the temples, along with old and persistent madness and similar things, and it is treated with various medical cures but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of arrow extraction is as follows: have the patient grasp their own hair at the temples and feel for the artery that pulses there, as it is quite prominent due to its beating, although in some men who are very cold this may not be apparent;
If it is retracted, have the patient constrict their neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a coarse cloth and bathe it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. then take the spatula which is shaped like this: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and carefully remove the membranes that are beneath on each side.
and if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the lancet, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out completely everywhere.
and draw out blood from six cupfuls down to three.
and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that nothing may come before the healing of the wound and blood may flow freely.
Then remove the excess flesh that is between the two ligaments at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-like tool until the bone is exposed so that the head is cut.
It is a delicate operation if the patient has no fever and has a warm constitution. For cauterization helps to dry up moisture. It is especially useful for dealing with moisture.
When extracting arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages over it;
And when one removes the bandages, ensure that they are covered with dry medicinal substances that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed.
And if you see blood flowing from the artery as you work, hasten to cut with cautery, or apply to the place of injury vitriol and hold it in your hand until the bleeding ceases. And if you don't have that available, place your hand over the wound until the blood is coagulated, and pour cold water onto the area until the bleeding stops, holding it firmly as required.
There should be a thumb's width between the two knives, and once you have joined together the two ends, place the heated iron on top until it reaches the bone, then cut the wound into two parts. and they are separated between the two joints for it is not fully healed from this cauterization.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
What is easier and lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the wound with this sharp cautery cut into two parts, but ensure that the cuts are deep enough to retain their heat for longer. For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
tears When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on top of the head, and no treatment with medicine helps, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel itching or tingling on their forehead; and if their skin is tense and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are burned and peeled from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "contusive cure," and you must make the patient with this disease grow hair on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced on the forehead along its length.
And the ancients called it "contusive cure," and you must make the patient with this disease grow hair on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced on the forehead along its length. and let one of the incisions be just like that two fingers across your forehead downwards to the nose, and others from these two to the ribs above the nipples, and take care not to cut into any arteries which are on either side above the nipples.
keep your hand away from the extension of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers in width across.
have ready a piece of sponge with plenty of fine linen to wipe away the blood, then insert the sharp-pointed probe which is divided into two parts; this is its shape:
from the first incision over the temple down to the second incision. scrape out all the brain which lies between these two incisions down to the bone itself; do likewise from the middle incision down to the other second one and then withdraw this probe. If you insert into the first incision the instrument called 'scalpel', which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, this is its form:
And place the cutting edge towards the flesh near the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears of the heart, and then make another similar incision up to the other side.
then extract the blood evenly, and press the area for the extracted blood.
after that, place in each incision a tent made of old cotton, and put on moist bandages with wine, oil, and egg white, taking care not to let any abscesses develop.
on the third day, remove the binding, and apply a great deal of warm water, then treat it with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
When someone is afflicted with acute catarrh repeatedly, and you see their eyes turned and small, weakening the sight, and the eyelids burnt; the hairs fall out, and in the head they produce sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then you should know that these symptoms and this catarrh come from many blocked passages, and the best treatment is as follows:
And so instruct the patient to clear their forehead, then make a wide incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear. Begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let it reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that control chewing;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen cloth there; Then place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil above it, and beware of hot abscesses.
Once it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote flesh growth.
In this way: Take two parts wheat flower, and four parts colophony, and make an ointment. Apply it to these wounds to promote flesh growth everywhere.
Of the stuffing of ears
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four things: Or grains, or insects, or rock from underground or similar thing like iron; Where seed, such as beans, peas, and chickpeas; Or things flowing like water and fluids and similar things.
When a stone or other object that does not fit or grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, drip some purple oil or olive oil into it, then proceed with the extraction; Make him sneeze with powder, and plug his nostrils as the sneeze comes on, and put woollen cloths around his ears; And stretch out the ear upwards.
Often it happens that there is bleeding during this treatment;
And if there is no bleeding, proceed with the extraction using fine pincers, which are shaped like this:
If she can endure pincers, it is good;
if not, then administer the gentle onion knife for removal;
and if she cannot bear this, then make a brass tube and insert the head of the tube into the ear canal with force, blocking what surrounds the tube with soft wax so that no air can enter alongside it. then treat her forcefully, for it often becomes necessary as we have said.
and if she does not heal with such methods, then take bird lime and put an instrument that serves this purpose inside it, wrapping some cotton around. Then press the wound on the stone or whatever it is, and draw hard.
And if it cannot be done with all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear rather than an abscess before heat and spasm come.
the method of the incision is that you first empty the patient's head of blood, and extract according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and cut a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends. and let the incision be like a moon, so that you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth.
And treat it until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess that has formed and it swells, administer the procedure for its removal.
And if it cannot be extracted, use the spatula, very thin according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not attempt this if you think the abscess is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many incisions.
Then extract it with fine pincers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
Therefore, in the case of water falling into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing as a remedy, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them lie on that same ear where the water is. If this should work, it is good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire. and place the patient with a hole in his ear, and let it protrude from one of his feet on the other side, and pierce another stone above the stone that is in the ear. and do not stop making stones from stone until the water comes out completely, and thus let it come out completely.
and if you see this, take a reed and push one end into the ear, and ignite the other end with fire until the tip of the reed burns.
then remake another with other reeds until the water comes out completely, as we have said about stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it has a small body like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section on division.
but if she is of great body such that one can feel her, so arrange to extract pincers; and it is the lightest thing that can be removed from within the ear.
In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations and its treatment does not help, then one must look at the ear in the sun: if no worms appear, so catch them with fine pincers, and if none show up, take a cane shaped like this one:
And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the finest head into the ear according to the severity of the patient's suffering, then suck hard on all parts of the cane; Fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff cotton around the stem as I have said for stones.
and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer the distillations that ancient doctors have tested for worm occlusion, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which the form is as you see here: And be it of silver or copper, narrow below to the small openings, and overhang above for distillation;
and to compress the distillation into the instrument of well-made copper for this purpose, and if you wish take the razor and envelope around the point with cotton accordingly; Then I pour your oil or your juice, and whatever medicine you desire in the cane, and let the cane be placed into the ear.
Then push in the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is completely drained from the ear. The patient should smell the oil within, and let it be that the distillation is slightly warm from the fire, unless you are to distill it into the ear. Be careful that it is not too cold, as the medicine would not be so effective.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born without openings in their ears.
And this same thing happens to men due to a wound or wax buildup within the ear, and these blockages sometimes become so deep in the ear that one cannot see them.
and sometimes there is a protrusion of the hole, and one can see it clearly.
Therefore, when it is not visible and there are several conditions for a rapid cure, you should place the patient's ear in the sun. and look inside. if you see the dark spot appear, operate with this small spatula as follows:
Make sure it is sharp and flat both in front and behind so as not to wound the ear;
if the dark spot is in the earwax or the body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and extract it gently until all the wax is removed.
And if the earwax is completely blocking the ear, take a thin and light scraper, heat it slightly over a flame, then insert it into the ear canal.
If you detect an impaction that causes the patient earache, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for as long as it takes until the wound is healed, on that day you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you treat the tent and remove another one moistened in a wax made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone. Then treat until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and small cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the flow of blood as described in the section on distillations.
This eyelid remedy that comes in paper when they are moist and dry out, you must extend with tweezers and small pincers, then scrape with a spatule made from its roots. Then place ground vitriol on it quickly.
And if it peels off, gently cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after incision is better.
and they often return when any remains of their root stays behind. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the hail Many times there come to the eyes certain things that appear like hail in form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "glaucoma," and it is an accumulation of moisture thick upon the paper above and below. The works are such as these:
The works are such as these: Take note if the glaucoma moves from one side to another, for this is a minor thing to know;
Make it therefore wide, then lightly scrape each side, take the pincers to it and scoop it out.
If you cannot remove it without piercing the paper slightly, this does not harm the patient much;
And if the wound is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
If the wound is small, apply no pressure or force, for ointments will restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
If the blood is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn it upside down and catch the blood with some absorbent paper. Press and squeeze gently from both sides.
And if the blood-soaked paper is far away due to an incision made, it does not matter.
Once the blood is extracted, rinse the eye with salty water and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until the patient is healed.
from the fat around the eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the paper-like membranes above [the eyes], and this happens more often in children than adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes. They experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
And so they lie on their faces afterward, sleeping above [the dislocation], and the paper-like membranes beneath their eyebrows become moistened by a flower's appearance or covering of exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the bone between them.
The procedure is carried out as follows: with the patient's head placed in your lap;
You then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like structure in the shape of a circle according to the amount needed to contain the exinach from each part, placing it over [the patient]; and press with your two hands from either side so that the extraneous matter is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatule a slit no wider than the wound made when opening a vein;
and make the skin perfect until you reach the extraneous matter; and in many cases, extraneous matter comes out of the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Extract it, therefore, all at once with a piece of lint cloth between your two hands outside the wound, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed.
And make sure you do not insert it into the incision, lest you reach the entire spinal cord up to the eye and injure it.
And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision gently until it becomes visible.
Then extract it as we have described, then wet some cloth in vinegar and water, and place it on the site, and bind with bandages.
And for such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Then treat [it] until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place of an abscess with heat, treat [it] with soothing emollients until it is healed.
Of the hairs on papules. When hairs grow on the eyelids contrary to nature and are not plucked out, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as habitual tearing and softening of the lids, ultimately leading to blindness.
and the treatment is performed according to four methods: by means of cauterization with fire, or by medicinal treatment depending on what has been presented in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either through incision and stitching, or by canes, as I shall explain.
You must place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their left eye toward your left hand;
if it turns [toward your hand], that is good; if not, insert a needle into the corner of it [the eye] along with some thread; and let this be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and pull the thread above all the eyelid, and turn it back [toward you];
Then make an incision under that part of the skin, beneath the hairs close by, cutting all the patella along its breadth, from the large hollow down to the small one.
Then extract the thread and place beneath the skin a small tent made of cotton and linen, then make an incision in the skin shaped like an anchor, just as the myrtle leaf is, but it ought to be proportionate according to how much you wish to raise the skin that has been divided all over.
And if the one who requires it needs to cut away a large quantity of skin according as the skin is softened;
Then make an incision along the entire patella following the two lines you have marked, beginning at the large hollow and going down to the small one. and be one of the incisions near natural hairs with a thickness of a root, then insert the uncinus into one of the two angles of the heart, and then strip all of it.
then join the two lips with a seam using a needle and any fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, remove excess threads above both eyebrows and any sticky substances if you wish to do this.
and if not, have no care for it, then leave the seam and threads for three or four days.
then treat the wound without a seam using drying and binding substances, for paper becomes loose during the healing of the wound and its reunion, but the seam is harmful (as the ancients said), and this work is free from fear. and if you do so in another way:
and if you do so in another way: and take a piece of paper that is shaped like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, three ounces separated according to the form that is here:
Then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the shape; and place another thread by the large border, and the second thread by the small one, and join between your two fingers the threads evenly;
then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have cut, as we have said, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed;
And if an abscess arises at your incision site, soothe it with cautery and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes the hair on the paper turns white:
Then it is necessary that you follow what we have said about incision;
But the suture on one side or the other is more artificial.
The treatment of ulcers follows this form: And it is that you turn the paper over and cut within according to what I have said, then make two ulcers per side, and also two subtle threads as long as the paper's width and the thickness of a spatula. et hold the two heads of two parts where you hold the tendons;
then bring together one and the other carefully on that which is above the cornea of the eye, and remove the two chains from the two parts thus formed; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin which has been stretched will die and turn black and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, cut it with some force, then treat until it is healed;
and once the wound has healed, if the cornea is raised, and hairs will no longer prick there;
and this is the form of the two chains which you will make according to this figure, and with these quantities in length and width:
The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert into it soft and subtle silk thread; Then bring together the heads and tie each one subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length.
Then place in the wound another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the threads together.
Then put the patient's head on your lap.
And let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is delicate and precise work, then insert the needle into the entire wound at the root of the adjacent hair, and pierce through to the other side until you extract it from above the natural hair.
Then extract the hair up to the shaft, and push it into the shaft if there is one or two or three or more.
Then extract your hand until the hairs come towards you fully into the paper with their natural hair.
And if the shaft is treated and the hair does not come towards you with it, then treat the shaft from below along all of the thread that you have arranged there, until the shaft comes forward through the hole above and you see it by eye.
Then treat the shaft and thread like this, close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over.
And if the hairs are small, accompany a long hair with natural horsehair, and raise it with that one or leave it alone until it is elongated, then pull it out.
Of the decay of the eye When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or inflammation comes into the eye, it has two manners.
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or from a surgeon's knife, or from cauterization, and through similar means.
And the way to treat it is to open that suture, and separate its lips, and place linen threads inside, and bind it until it is healed.
And you must not use anything that dries out or constricts in its treatment. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but I use softening substances, like fenugreek; and the decoction of water or wine and flax seed are cooked, with melted diaklon ointment in any oil, wrap it in a cloth, and treat accordingly.
And the key to your treatment is that you must be careful not to join it back together in its previous form;
And these treatments we have mentioned are not strong enough to prevent this disease from returning in its previous form.
This illness, which is dislocated and truly called 'axacrati', is natural and accidental.
The complications arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar procedures;
and the way of working is such that you take a needle with two threads on it, and insert it into the flesh, piercing from left armpit to right so that the thread comes out at both shoulders of the body;
then lift up all the flesh above the needle, and cut with a wide spatula. and if the shape of the paper returns according to what is needed, it is good;
if not, take a razor and place it in the gap, turn the paper, and make two cuts along its edge within the paper;
and let the edges of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made, and make these corners so that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter called 'Greek';
Then remove that flesh, according to the amount that its sides are extended below, from what follows the paper, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool.
Then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a rupture or suture or cauterization, you must make an incision directly below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is written above; Then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said;
Then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said; And one must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise surgeons devise instruments with all their power on how to restore the figure to its natural form;
And the patient themselves, according to what they need for treatment and tools, it is necessary to have several arrangements.
When this welding occurs in young men, so that the iris is welded to the white part of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary for you to insert the tip of a razor blade under the iris and lift it upwards.
And stretch it with pincers until you cut what is hard with the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting so that the patient can bear it and the sharp spatula does not hurt their eye.
And make your incision, from which you remove the assembly, lightly so that the iris returns to its natural shape.
And the whole assembly is healed, and sometimes they use salted water on the eye, and raise it with warm water, and with collars.
Then place between the eye and paper a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened in egg white. After three days, use collars and hot compresses until it is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: One is nervous and resembles hard skin, and the other is not nervous but looks like white frozen moisture, which cannot be pierced by iron or scraped off with pincers when touched.
And both these appearances begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all of the view, all of the light, and all of the eye's movement.
And the manner of incision is such that the patient must place their head on a sound pillow, then open their eyes for you. hold the paper to your hand, then curl your nail into tiny pincers, and stretch it above [the incision]. then take a needle, and put into it either horse hair or cow hair or ox hair and strong thread; and bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into your nail with the hair-side facing the underside of the nail. Pierce all the way through the nail with the needle, tie off the needle from one side of the nail to the other with thread, stretch it above [the incision], pluck out every hair on either side of the nail that might touch the eyelid or lash and the surrounding area, then cut away what remains at the root of the tear duct with a very sharp knife and small forceps. Leave the natural flesh around the tear duct intact so that bodily fluids may still flow as usual through the incision;
and sometimes they extend to the nail bed with just the file or needle as we have said. then scrape away all of the skin until you reach the patella, which is shaped like this:
And be careful not to touch or tear the fleshy membrane with the patella, and ensure that the cartilage is not pierced.
After the incision, apply a pinch of ground silk into the eye and make a collar from litharge. Leave it on until the next day. Then treat him for whatever he needs until he is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the file cannot enter, often this type of condition is treated with medicine.
and are born as I have described in the division, and if you see it cut, operate on the patient's eye, and take a light spatula with a sharp edge according to this form: And lift the eyelid gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason for this is urgent, then pour into the eye a collar made of litharge and red lead powder, both ground with salt, and pack the eye until the next day;
If nothing opposes you in the eye, like a warm abscess, then lance it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then resume the other procedure according to this same method until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid harms the eye severely, then suspend it with an unguis, and cut away a portion but not all, so that no corpus of tears comes out;
Then instill red collar ointment into the eye, which is made of litharge.
Some men's eyes are born with a red spot, which covers the pupil and extends onto the sclera, resembling a red rose petal.
And the work is that the patient should place their head on your hand, then you open the eyes and turn all of this flesh with suitable hooks and hold it firmly.
Then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting with a razor until you reach the end, being careful not to injure the eye in your work.
And let the incision be made with the spatula we mentioned when cutting the nail and using small forceps to remove it, as illustrated in this chapter.
When the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply ground linseed oil or distill red collarwort and similar corrosive medicines onto it. Place cotton wool mixed with egg white over the eye to ensure the hot abscess is secured.
If nothing remains, and hot blood rises to the surface, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing medications for hot abscesses.
Then return to your work once it is healed, and thus do likewise when flesh has adjusted in the eye through this process.
However, it is necessary that you alleviate the treatment for each weak eye through natural methods; and accidental injury with iron instruments;
nor should you insert your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb is tolerant to the operation.
Beneath the eyelids are red veins that cover the eye, obstructing its function and weakening vision over time.
It is necessary for you to first examine the eye in which the injury appears, whether it is sound or not and has no other disease except that of soundness. then treat it as follows:
instruct the patient to lay their head in your lap, and then bind those veins as much as is appropriate according to your knowledge; let the binding be twice as strong on these parts.
And let there be two ounces by degrees in I body according to this form:
then treat the areas around those veins with force, wiping away blood after an hour until you see a removal of the soundness from the eye.
And make sure you do not injure the eye with the points of spatules, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very diligent in your task so that you only cut those veins.
And when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collirio to corrupt that which remains of the humors.
And if you cannot collect all of these things at that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances to alleviate the pain, and leave it there for some days until the pain is soothed and you are certain of warm abscesses, then begin again according to this method until it is healed.
And this is the form of treatment:
The physician named it "arrissati" a fistula:
when you treat it with cauterization and medicine for a burning abscess as I have mentioned before, and it is not healed, if there is puss inside that you must cut above the abscess, where it should die, and remove all moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, take all the instruments that are shaped like this one;
and it is called an "aspre chief", and should be made of iron with a point at one end, and sharpened like a file as shown in the present illustration;
And place it on the location of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand a little until you feel that the decay has been removed;
and do this sometimes, then restore the place with drying medications.
if the place is welded together, and scar tissue forms there, and the body of the wound is joined, and remains so for forty days without reopening or becoming infected, and no ill accidents happen, then know that it has healed.
but if not, there is another procedure to draw the fistula back through the navel hole according to this method: and that you uncover the bone again with iron instruments and sharp medicines. When it is uncovered thus take one drill according to this form where the head of the iron has three angles, and the shaft tapers down to a point as you see here:
Then place it above the bone near the armpit, and move your hand away from their eye one inch. Then turn with all of the auger until it pierces the bone, feeling the patient as you do so because wind will go inside them if they keep their hand on their knee;
And then restore the place with dry medicine as I have taught you. And when the flesh rises and hardens the places, so does the matter come to the knee; It is something lighter for the patient.
When the eye opens fully without any disturbance to the kidney or weakening, then you must bind the patient.
Then cleanse it, then apply cupping without iron to suck, then put on the eye I a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and saraccolle. Then bind up the eye with plasters on bandages and cloth.
and the manner of the dressings is such that you take soft enough cloths, and fold each into four, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
then strain it above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without wounding;
then remove the cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the bandage loosens, you must tighten it greatly.
then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good.
if not; If it starts again, apply the poultice, the dressings, the bandage, and the cups until it is healed.
Of tearing of tough membrane When ruptures occur in the black membrane, it then opens up, and comes out like paper-thin pieces resembling grains of resin, and is terrible to behold;
then if you see it cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part until reaching the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the arm; and make it pierce through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position;
then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the membrane around it, securing it tightly, then remove the needle and apply wet linen moistened with egg white;
And let it remain until the son of a dog whelps with its litter, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is covered with an egg on all sides by a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye gives great appearance of trouble, pierce it with a subtle spatule that comes out through the eye, and remove the white moisture, lowering the eye immediately;
Then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called 'alcunnati' is nothing but the bowels that are assembled in the eye, appearing as descending water, but it is not water.
and the way of appearance for this work is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between your two hands, and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes; then be careful, and do not lower or cover the light, and let the patient see things as they usually would;
and if it does not descend downwards, know that it is acute, and if the bending movement is not equipped as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and make an incision on the corneal tissue with one stroke along the line of the conjunctiva to the corneal tissue and the cornea until the bow is exposed.
and when it has come out, instill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
Eye waters We have seen the likenesses of waters in their divisions, and what is required to pierce them; so act according to what is healthy.
You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light so that the sun does not shine in their eye, and bind their healthy eye tightly shut.
Then place the paper from your left hand to their eye if it is their left eye that is affected, or from your right hand if it is their right eye.
Then take into your right hand, if the eye is left-sided, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right-sided;
Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea in alignment with the thickness of a line on that white part of the eye towards the lower tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand so it pierces into the white of the eye, feeling as if "almagda" comes to an empty space.
And it is necessary that the path of "almagda" be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part. and this is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the cornea, and you may put the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then express it underneath one voice after another.
If the swelling subsides now, the patient sees it before them and the instrument in their eye.
after put it back in place gently, and if the water rises again through the second path, apply force with the instrument until it is fixed and no longer moves upwards, then slowly extract the almogda by turning your hand to and fro;
then put some salt gem water into it again, and remove this from the eye inside. Then apply to the eye dressings or moist wool in rose oil and egg white, binding it with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg white on top.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some men with very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
and then pierce the conjunctiva alone, do not go too deep but make it subtle, and then insert the almogda as we have said;
And upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed where they may lie on their back in a dark place;
Be free from all movement, eat light foods, do not move your head either to the right or left, and remain bound according to their condition for three days;
Then unbind them in the same dark room, test their vision, and make them look at certain things. Afterwards, rebind them until the seventh day;
And you must not do this during or after the incision of the wound right now, for it is necessary to keep them calm due to the quick rising of fluid.
If an abscess becomes hot, you must open it before seven days have passed, and treat it with a remedy for abscesses.
And when it has calmed down, you must open the eyelid and apply a small bandage to cover it for one day, and remain in that dark room afterward.
Then go out of the house often and often, and convert into those cases.
And you should know that no disciple should interfere in these matters. And there came to us someone from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make pierced amulets for which water is extracted, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them will see them;
and they are properly made of brass: And the top part of this should also be made from the same subtle material, while the bottom end is three-sided in shape.
Sometimes there arise joined together various cars, of which some appear as scorpions with many feet;
And if there are such ones with chariot embellished by swift colours, and if it has soft body of good colour. In this one then of these chariots which is soft, and not embellished, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In this one then of these chariots which is soft, and not embellished, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and apply the unguent to those parts, and treat them forcibly. hold what you can support with the fine-pointed spatula from one side, so that you know this flesh is entirely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing is left. and if it overwhelms you without warning, with an abscess so fierce, then cauterize it as is necessary.
and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is extinguished and all flesh is removed, then apply very fresh and sharp wine. If it does not work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healed.
And if the moisture does not perforate as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, to which the instruments do not reach for cutting.
Then you must insert a piece of flax thread slightly thicker than usual, knotted by hand, with about one finger's width between each knot. Have the patient grasp the end of the thread in their fist and pull it with all their might until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth.
Children at school often do this, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to try it.
Then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull each after the other being careful not to damage the cord.
Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the child, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and return it to the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have completely eroded all that remains of the flesh;
Then place in the nose a plug of flax for some days until it is healed, and if necessary, use drying medications.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, for which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
And it is made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube, and it leads in the same way.
and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to purge the head;
and have one handle at the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
From the flesh above the nose.
Many times there arises in the head of the nose an illness which is called 'telul', and it grows and becomes large afterwards, to such a degree that it is an ugly sight to behold;
and for this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all flesh, then place a hot cautery or burning medicine on it.
and if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take note if it is hard, of dark colour, and lacks feeling.
do not touch it with iron, for it is an aggravated abscess, because when you cut it once, great harm comes to the patient.
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in colour, and you see that it can be completely cut away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting substances.
Know that when bone-joint treatments come to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
It is necessary then, when this happens to anyone, to consider if the wound is fresh with all its blood. And then align the two lips [of the wound] for suturing, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips [of the wound] are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you excise all parts of their core until they bleed, then bring together the two lips for suturing, and compress them, apply a powder composed of dragon's blood and powdered incense. Place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive poultice on top of the powders and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The way of sewing (a wound) is such that you bring together the edges. or with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly (wound). or by thread, as I have made you aware.
From abscesses of the lips
Within the lips, abscesses form by hand, resembling small grains or bumps of various sizes.
Then it is necessary to turn back the lips of the wound, incise each boil or bump, grasp them with forceps and squeeze out their contents.
Next apply ground glass or fine powder after the incision to stop any bleeding that may occur.
And then leave it easily, and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.
Often there appears on the gums hardened matter that the ancients call "albulus";
So it is necessary to hold it with tongs, cut it at its root, and let the bowel or blood flow out.
Then put on the area ground vitriol or other restraining and drying powders.
And if that matter returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it. If it does not return after the cautery.
Sometimes hard and rough shells are gathered in the head of teeth within the mouth between gums, which is unsightly. And sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and green until decay reaches the gums, making them foul-smelling.
You should make the patient sit between your hands with their head in yours and extract the teeth or shells that appear until there is nothing left. And thus do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned.
And if you remove that which is at the root cause, it is good. If not, start again from the beginning on the second day and the third, until you have everything back in place;
And know that teeth require various shapes of tools to remove, depending on what the work requires, as the rasp used to clean outside the teeth has a different shape than those used between the teeth; And these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
When treating tooth pain, one should delay extraction for as long as possible, as it should be avoided if at all possible. As it is very valuable, one should only extract teeth when there is no other option.
Then when the patient is compelled to extract (the tooth), you must be certain about which tooth is causing pain. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, so they have the good tooth drawn. and yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, as the bad tooth remains, for we have already seen it in these people.
and when you are certain which tooth is causing pain, it is necessary to scrape all around the tooth with a spatula. Use force to protect the gums from all sides.
then loosen it with your fingers or the delicate pincers with gentle pricks and pricks until it is well loosened, then firmly close the pincers. and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, moving it around like you did previously.
And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, you must fill it with threads where the holes are; and if you carefully extract it with tongs, do not break when extracting it;
and one must work very diligently around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Be careful not to break it, leaving a piece behind, for then the patient will return with even greater pain from the root.
And beware not to act like the ignorant surgeon who, due to their haste and boldness, sometimes breaks something in the jaw, and fails to treat what we have explained.
but they cause severe illness through the hole due to the roots that remain or the jaw that is broken, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt;
and if there is bleeding from the tooth, which often happens, pack the place with powdered green vitriol.
and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you are drawing the tooth.
and these are their forms: And they should have large handles so that they do not bend when you extract it, and they should be well-made iron with teeth to hold [the tooth].
From the root of the teeth. When the root remains when drawing [the tooth], you must place moist cotton mixed with butter on the site for one or two days until the tissue softens, then insert the tongs which are called "algefri", making the mouth resemble a bird's beak.
and let them be made inside as well like a file, which is its form.
And if the roots do not want to come out with these pincers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place there an instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a saw, of this form:
and let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps because of this, it is good.
if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument which has two edges, of which the form is thus: and other iron instruments which are placed in front of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, of which the form is thus:
and let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments. and also other instruments which are not listed here.
and skilled master physicians find their own instruments by themselves according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are so many illnesses for which the ancients did not teach an instrument for its diversity of use; if a bone is broken or any other bones could be, look for the appropriate instruments I told you about, and help with gestures, this is how they are formed:
And [the bandages] are thick and hold well to keep the bone in place so that it doesn't slip out but can be held and removed.
Then restore the place with medicine suitable for this purpose, and if there is any decay in the bone that is small, then use all these instruments:
When the tooth appears unlike natural teeth and its form is ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth was born after other teeth, and it isn't in the right place; such a tooth cannot be treated or filed.
Therefore remove it. And if it is hollow with the tooth still attached, take this instrument that has the form of a small sharp beak and is made of iron.
And strike it several times with a hammer for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move other teeth. If it is apparent that it can be filed down, use this tool shaped like the one described here to file it:
And it is like a file from which needles are made;
And with the file we polish teeth gently from time to time, so that they do not move until they heal.
Then the whole surface in the end to all raspers, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, one must file its roughness until it is even so that it does not wound the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the front teeth are loose due to impact or a fall, and the patient cannot bite down on them without them falling out, and you have treated them with constrictive medicines, but it is not effective;
They must be secured with gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the ends of the thread over the misplaced tooth or teeth so that you can pull it gently until it aligns with a healthy tooth on the other side. then begin the process of covering it again up to the part where you started, and extract your hand gently and carefully so that nothing moves.
and let the thread be tied at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then cut the ends of the thread with some small scissors, and gather them together, then place it back between the healthy teeth so that it does not hurt the tongue.
and then leave it tight as much as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread;
if it stays put and serves thus for its entire time, and this is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two misaligned ones, as you can see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is placed back in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said;
and do not let anyone who is not skilled and careful get involved, and sometimes a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is placed in the spot where there is a missing one, and it is held as we have said, and it stays put and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament comes from below the tongue naturally, which is how one is born. or by an accidental wound that has healed over;
and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, lifting the tongue;
then cut the nerve of the tongue, so that it is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then insert a hook and cut widely into this ligament;
and be careful that the incision is not too deep, to avoid damaging the artery beneath;
and when you have done this, lift the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then place a linen cloth underneath the tongue.
and let the patient be bathed each night so that the wounds do not close up.
and if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol onto the wound; and if blood loss persists, cauterize with the light-colored cautery, which is beneficial in such cases; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
and if you see it become discolored or turn black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it declines towards blanching, and there is moisture present, throw an ointment on it, make a slit with a small spatula, and release it from one side to the other. And if the blood rushes to your work, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your task and treat everything thoroughly.
Then lift the place with ease and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
From abscesses of the throat Sometimes lumps arise in the throat called "godaths", properly known as the two tonsils. When you treat them as we have said before, and they are not healed, take heed:
If this abscess is hard with little sensation and a pale colour, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also due to the discharge of blood; But leave it until it is ripe, and then you will remove it, or it may break itself.
And if it is of white colour and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the abscess rests warm and is calm.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your lap, and open their mouth while you hold the instrument between your hands, pressing the tongue down so that it is out of the way.
and let it be of silver or fine brass like a knife;
can you press the tongue with all these instruments, and when you see an abscess take the hook and insert it into the almond, then pull hard upwards as much as you can;
and pull out any matter with it from the wound, then cover the instrument with a cloth which is the same shape and looks like tongs; and however the head is bent, and one side to another, and it is very sharp, and made of iron or steel;
And if you don't have this instrument ready, use the tongs instead, which are shaped like this: And be sharpened on one side, and left blunt on the other side;
and when you have treated one almond, treat the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water mixed with honey, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with only water, or with boiled pomegranate rind, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it is healed;
and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just as you would the two tonsils equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, namely a small one;
and had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like that for one or two days.
The abscess had risen so much that we had to insert two tubes through the two nostrils.
I quickly rushed forward, and stuck an ounce-weighted arrow into one [of the stones], then drew it out, and a large portion of bowel came with it.
then I inserted [an arrow] again on the other side of the nose, then opened his mouth for him and pressed on his tongue.
after that I stuck the arrow-weighted [tool] into his abscesses, and cut a part of it away, but only a little blood flowed out. And so were the windpipes of her throat removed, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time.
And the abscess would return, filling the place I had emptied until it became very large again.
Then I instructed her and cauterized within the throat. It remained without growing further.
And I left these areas, relying on God for what happened next.
Of the eye
When the kingdom descends into the grave, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is below [the eye] and large and round, it is called a "bag".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the surrounding abscesses are calmed, and it is delicate, then you must cut it.
and this one which is round, gathered [together], and not long; and it is bloody or of false colour or black, then you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, of its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned before. Then insert the lancet into the cavity, draw it downwards and cut with the first of the two instruments that I mentioned for incising the testicles.
And you must not cut any flesh beyond what is superfluous outside the natural limits
For if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech
And after the incision, follow what we have said about incising the testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then it is necessary to use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is hot, very sharp, and penetrating. And the patient should place their head in your lap, then press their tongue with an instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, moisten it with hot water, neither too thick nor too thin. and apply this completion of the instrument to it; thus is its form:
And place on the head some hair whereon one places the medicine, just like with the hairs of a spoon, and place this instrument over all the medicine onto the eye.
and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine within it, lest it descend into the throat, damaging him.
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it darken and the stinging of the medicine subsides.
and if you can see again, take some cotton and roll it over an instrument, then dip the cotton in the medicine and place the instrument with all the cotton on top of the eyelid until the cotton adheres to the eye.
And do this often, so that the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the medical cautery, then restart it, and after the cauterization wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the affected area.
And be rinsed with cold water, or cured with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than the incision, not the cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take chamomile and hyssop and oregano and rue and marigold and similar herbs, mix all or some of them into a pot, add vinegar, and boil.
and the pot is well glued with strong clay, and inside the pot place one instrument shaped like this: and it is made of silver or brass, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises up to the eye through the nose, until the eye is withered.
after you repeat this often, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, as many things can happen. and do not attempt this unless on the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a nose and insert within the head a fragment of egg shell, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot. For egg white does not let vapors harm the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with health.
Often there is something stuck in the throat, like a bone or fish spine, or some other object.
So you must therefore extract whatever is visible, pressing the tongue against the front of the mouth with an instrument so that you can see and move the object.
And for that which is not visible and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is fully digested. Hopefully, this will cause the object to be expelled through vomiting.
Or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread crumb, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread. Et tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it. And when it reaches its place, it will untie itself, and then you will pull out the thread.
And if it does not come out by what we have said, then take a plumb instrument of this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and keep the head raised upwards. And take care not to touch the epiglottis, for if you do, he will choke and push the bone inward.
And it is better that the patient pushes in the instrument, so he knows where things are. If the swelling goes down, or it is drawn out by force with all instruments equally, until it is fully extracted.
Of the blood of the throat.
No remedy in medicine is without side effects, just as I mentioned earlier regarding the treatment with medications. And when the remedy does not work, then look into the patient's throat in sunlight and press their tongue with an instrument as I have instructed you.
And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate pincers suitable for the task.
And if this does not work, take a hair plait and insert it into the patient's throat; then attach the end of the hair to a heated iron, and do this frequently. And if the patient is afflicted by water every day.
Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in so they swallow, and move their hand frequently. And as soon as the remedy feels the water, remove it.
And if it does not fall out as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida using an instrument as I mentioned in the procedure for fumigating the eye.
Do this many times, for it will fall without injury.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into this opening.
Then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient place the end of the tube in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but instead goes right up to the tonsils.
And now the tonsil will fall out, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times over again.
And let the patient suffer thirst, eating salty things and similar items, but not drinking water.
And then she would need to go through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to remove the leech is like curved pliers so that they can be inserted into the throat. and it resembles the beak of a stork, with the roughness of a file, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
Many kinds of abscesses there are, as the following passages in this book about one and another suggest, they vary in their perforations and incisions.
and it is in two ways, one of which is similar in its appearance, and what holds moisture.
And the second way is for their locations where they are in the body.
Because abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that appear in joints, each requiring its own judgment when treating them.
And if abscesses must not be pierced until the bowels are dead according to their completion.
And if these ones must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until the surrounding area is rotten, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint have been corrupted, which causes contractions in that limb.
Where the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, then it will harm the main member.
When it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies.
And it is not necessary to pierce ripe abscesses without completed digestion unless the one near the foundation which would rot completely and lengthen within and a fistula will form. And cannot heal within a long period of time.
And it is necessary that you know the stage of the abscess's perforation which is ripe according to its development, and this occurs when the pain subsides, the fever breaks, swelling diminishes, redness fades, softening and pointing occurs at the apex of the abscess, and other such signs appear;
and you must allow the abscess to develop where it has opened up, or is most prone to open, and where pus appears.
whether the abscess is located in a fleshy part of the body or on the hands and feet, at joints, nerves, arteries, or any place equally accessible where there are no folds. In those that bend, according to this member.
And when an abscess is in the fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed with complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, then the body of the poison from him would be elongated, and it is full of much filth. and by chance harden the lips and its deepest part.
And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
And you must treat small abscesses with small punctures. in large abscesses, make large punctures, and many incisions according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
and if at such an abscess where it is necessary to cut out its heart, and excise. when it has become like leather, and is dead, then you must do the same as with bubbles:
And there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others where you cut like the leaf of myrtle, as with abscesses in gangrene.
And there are some where you make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Those without a head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce fully through;
And when the abscess is large, and it has developed a thick core, and you pierce it, do not extract all of the core at once, but remove only part of it; Then pack the abscess with wool until the next day, then extract the remainder promptly; Do this many times from one end to another until the bowels are completely empty.
Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly people in poor health. For spirits sometimes convulse with bowel movement, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not perceive it.
Examine this chapter carefully with great caution, and once you have pierced the abscess, then dry the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small. And if it is a full-blown fistula, then apply tents of linen or old cotton. And if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a tent into each one so that they come up against one another.
And if you have cut into the abscess and removed a piece of skin, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then remove the binding, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it gently, dampen the cloths, and place them over the bleeding site repeatedly.
And if the discharge of blood persists, provide treatment and ointment, and the powders I mentioned in various places throughout this book, and if it is during winter, and the wound or abscess is very raw, then you must apply moistened tents and cloths with warm oil and wine.
And if it is in the summer, and the wound is fleshy, then you must apply cloths moistened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then unbind the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
For this one must universally understand in the treatment of abscesses:
Now I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Where small abscesses come from on the head and are like threads, just as the yolk of an egg is, and there are many similar cases.
There are some that are fatty and soft where there is also moisture like pus;
And if you find ones that are hard and stony when cut open, and there is no doubt if the arteries do not act contrary to this.
And the work of cutting into stones is such that you should test all instruments which are called an "entromissoire", from whence its form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they do so above the long bone.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape away any remaining skin containing this moisture, for it will return if you leave anything behind.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, dip it in water and salt, apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; And this will correct what remained from the night.
And you can repeat the process with cotton, as before, on the second day and again on the third, until you know that nothing remains from overnight.
Then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if abscess has become filled with pus, open it lengthwise in this manner: And I remove your fingers, and scrape away all skin, and pay close attention to draw out the fluid where it lies;
And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterward.
And also do this for the abscess if it is malignant, and about cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the incision on the malignant abscess and the moist area is lighter, for they contain little blood. And if there is no moisture in some of these abscesses or at the top where there is none for an old woman's head;
and found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, that could not be broken; and if one had made an incision there, it would have been just as painful as a stone.
In other abscesses coming to the head, especially those that come to a child's head and at the base of their ears, open them always as low down as possible so as to remove the pus.
and treat them as necessary.
Maintes fois viennent ces abcs dans le cou, et sous les aisselles, et dans la poitrine, et parfois ils apparaissent ailleurs sur le corps, et il y en a beaucoup, et ils sont interconnects les uns avec les autres.
And each scrofula is properly within its own area, just like the nodules and abscesses of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities between these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities between these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others which are malignant and do not want to obey the rules of health.
in those where you see good positioning to touch, and it resembles the color of the body, and it moves from each side without being exposed to the veins of the neck or the artery or the windpipe, and it is not deep;
you must cut it from above and peel off each part, extending the two lips of the wound with scissors if you need to, just as we have said for abscesses of the head;
And strike repeatedly with the spatula, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the spatula's edge not be sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not escape, and do not aim too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, apply crushed vitriol to the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind up the wound tightly. And let it be until the abscess is healed, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until it is complete.
Then look with your index finger to see if there are any small scrofulae remaining; remove them and clean them.
And if there is a large wound at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without causing harm.
Then clean the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, sewing them now since there is no extra space due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary for you to understand that it involves cutting the root of it and pulling out its hair, then sewing as we have said.
It is necessary for you to understand that it involves cutting the root of it and pulling out its hair, then sewing as we have said. For scrofulae that persist with superfluidity, make an incision where it seems to die out.
And pierce it in the same way as previously mentioned, below it, and introduce tenting with ointment and similar things so that it drains away what remains of the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment to promote flesh growth until it heals.
The ancients spoke of the operation on the throat; But I have never seen anyone in our land do it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be cleared. And if no help is given through this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by the abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or on the tonsils.
When the illness is in the channel of the passage, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four with a small transverse slit between two circles or according to the amount of the slit of the superficial cartilage, not in the cartilaginous part.
And these two are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat on all sides, then splits the heart until it reaches the windpipe; And purge the blood vessels, if you see anything, then cut the superficial cartilage as we have said;
And it is demonstrated by the obstruction of the windpipe that comes from its place which is broken, and by the failure of the voice.
and leave the wound open for a moment.
And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is suspected, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and stitch it all up without touching the cartilage.
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is entirely stuffed up and the patient is judged to be dying, when all hope of breath has been lost. Thereupon cauterize the epiglottis for patients who cannot breathe and are breathing through their wound, thus saving them from death.
and for this reason the ancients recommended leaving the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would command to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
And I was called to treat her, but found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found blood pouring from it, I knew she had not cut a vein or pierced her throat, and air was escaping through the injury.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
And all the damsel had was a hoarse voice, and she soon recovered fully.
Because of this, I say that one need not fear incisions to the epiglottis.
This abscess is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large abscess in the colour of jaundice, and it often occurs in women.
et it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
or natural has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles fat near us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it is not advisable to operate with fire except in the small one, and prove and search all the surroundings: if you find it as our natural fat, and cannot reach any vein, cauterize it as we cauterize the nose, and treat all its surface if there is no incision; And cauterize quickly, treating it as required until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe in detail;
And here it is appropriate for me to explain the distinction between our method and theirs.
I say that theirs is one of heat and fever until the boils pass, and the pus is complete; And then the fever and heat subside.
Our method has neither heat nor fever nor pain, but involves a swelling which is its own sack and takes the colour of the body, starting like a scab and growing larger;
And they are of two types, either dry or moist, with much variation in color as I have mentioned earlier.
When you come to our treatment, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
The method of inquiring about the abscess is to take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the instrument, taking care not to pull it out abruptly.
If the discharging moisture is running short, whatever its color may be, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
And if after removing the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross-like manner, take the pincers and lightly strip away the skin on each side, and remove the scurf where it lies until you draw out healthy tissue with the nut.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it piece by piece until nothing remains.
For if anything is left behind, the wound will return many times.
And if even a little remains and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, bind up the wound, and apply warm abscess-soothing things, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with something that encourages flesh to grow.
And if the striking vein is contrary to you or otherwise troublesome, then hasten and apply crushed vitriol, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound festers, and halting the boiling of blood. Then return to cut off what has remained of the night.
Look here at the shapes of the insertion instruments, and they are of three types: Large and medium and small;
And there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three types: Large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses and fistulas;
And they are like the needles with which we sew up wounds, and they are of brass, or iron, or silver, but those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are especially useful for probing dark-coloured fistulas;
And they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the "oncines" (a term for an unknown object) are very similar, as you see here:
And if there be "oncines" which have two curvatures of three kinds also;
And if there be "oncines" which have three curvatures, and they are also of three kinds;
And if there be "oncines" which have two curvatures, and those with one curvature only, and they are of three kinds;
And all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these have what one does with them are sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, which peels off the veins because it doesn't cut into the vein or nerve.
And these introducer are the levers that respond in many ways so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses.
And they are of three kinds: Large, small, and medium, as you see it.
And one should not use them except in fleshy places such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the bark of fig trees, according to this form, with which one stops the blood. and it is sometimes placed where healing occurs through the closing of veins and arteries, and other times according to this larger form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble the breasts of women;
And they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure them, one must proceed according to this form along the following lines: b. up to g.. Then scrape away the fat, fill the wound with flesh-healing medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the breast hangs down, having become soft due to its size like in women, open it into two parts above with two similar incisions. where one end is attached to the other at the very end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g. then scrape the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about sutures and powders, and provide whatever is necessary for healing until it is cured.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not complete due to the patient's reluctance to rest or blood loss, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment. leave it until the remaining flesh and fat contract, then treat it until it is fully healed.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and if there is one containing moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the entire mass within the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofula slits; and if the wound contains mass, apply cauterization as mentioned earlier.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed together, there often arise abscesses, and likewise when the vein becomes swollen and infected.
and if you recognize it as such, when the abscess is long in appearance due to an artery injury... ...and when you feel it with your hands, there is a tightness or constriction.
...if the swelling is on the vein, you will see raised red spots appear.
...it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the axillae and shoulders or on the neck in many places, and is very large. It is necessary, therefore, to avoid the treatment of iron, and for those who are at the head, it should also be avoided. In the case of swelling caused by an arterial rupture through the skin along its length,
Then operate on the hip with scissors, carefully separating the artery from its membrane until it is fully exposed;
Then push a needle from one side through to the other and secure the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you for extracting the two arteries located at the temples;
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a probe until the blood there is released and the abscess is drained;
Then apply the treatment that stimulates healing, until the binding falls off. Then treat those with swelling next to it, until they are healed.
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess and all its skin, then push the needle underneath the place that you are holding in your hand, make it pierce through, and have a double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side. Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a bandage from one side of two parts to the other shoulder.
And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, push another needle through all of the thread underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tighten both threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess until all surplus matter comes out of it, then excise any redundant heart tissue and leave that which is attached.
Then apply moistened bandages with wine and oil, then treat it with tenting and ointments until it is healed.
Likewise abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses form on nerves when they are injured or through excessive hard work, and similar things.
And this occurs more often in the shoulders and hands, where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, its colour like that of the body, and it causes pain in various states.
And when it is tightly constricted, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a perfect part of the body but beneath the heart.
And it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, downward nor upward; and that which is in the joints should not be cut with an iron instrument. Perchance there would be constriction. And that which is at the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula.
And that which is at the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with some tongs and cut its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with the hook and peel its skin, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it heals.
Occasionally there is an eruption on bellies and nowhere else like pimples, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and large heads.
And there are some small and very large ones;
And I saw a man who had two on his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had fine roots, and were light green split open, and moisture came out of them immediately.
I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six pounds, and the work in this incision is such that you consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the substance is white and moist with a delicate root; If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be in your presence.
If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be in your presence. For when cutting it often causes too much blood to flow, and if the blood defeats you, then hurry up and cauterize.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind it to the wrist as we have said, leaving it for two days.
then restrain them, and do not cease tightening the linen thread until it reaches the wrist, and each time by its motion.
and if the roots are thick, there is fear of cutting them especially in the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tendon which is of a light colour and poor texture like milk.
For this is an abscess aggravated, and I will come to the treatment of cancer thereafter.
when it breaks open at once. If the appearance of swelling arises from a cauterization for a wound or incision on an abscess, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels are involved, as occurs in other injuries, due to blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what has been mentioned before, or because of windiness
And if it is due to the rupture of an abscess and discharge from the bowel, then the colour of the abscess resembles that of flesh, and it presents as a mild condition without pain, appearing with various discharges. And if it is due to an outbreak of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it will retract, but come back, or possibly it would be tightened, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath after strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it presents as a minor issue, which becomes evident when you press it with your hand but does not require restriction.
And if it is due to blood, it presents with these signs: large, hard abscesses, and it manifests in a particular quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work [treatment] consists of determining whether it appears related to arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work [treatment] consists of determining whether it appears related to arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness. You should leave the treatment alone. For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
And if it appears related to the intestines or stomach, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie completely straight, then bleed them around the navel entirely. Then have them lie frequently between your hands, then go around the marked place with all your fingers, then extend half of the abscess above to just before the big toe. Then bind it around with a strong thread or a sturdy silk cord firmly, and let the knot be on top.
Then operate on half of the abscess extended along the tendon, insert your index finger, and search for the intestine. If you find it trapped by the tendon, untie it and push the intestine outside of the belly.
And if you find the mouth, grab it with tweezers and cut off any excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two lengths of thread, and thread the two needles through what you have pierced.
Then draw the abscess four fingers-breadth above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, leave the place until it rots, and cut away the dead flesh as needed. Where you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Where you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and remove the abscess as we have said. And drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as required, and weld the place.
From chancre We have spoken about the similarities of cancer in the division, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one should avoid iron-based treatments;
And we say that cancer engrained in the breast and requires great caution when treating it. The ancients said that when cancers are found where they can be scraped off like cancer of the mammary glands or on the thighs, and similar areas, one must remove all of them at their onset.
no one has ever healed from it before me.
And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the patient once with black bile;
then make him bleed if there is evident congestion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
then remove your tumors or cancerous growths, shave his head completely, and take it away entirely without leaving anything behind.
allow the blood to flow freely and ensure you have thoroughly cleaned the place with your hand or an object, if the direction of blood flow opposes that of incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
From dropsy We have mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the collection of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done with medication, and those that are treated with iron:
And one should not use iron in these two resemblances: That is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are mortal affairs;
Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medication, and the treatment is not effective, consider if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and stomach disorders, and similar conditions. If you touch iron, for there is doubt.
And if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he has no other illness but solely dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must operate like this: Lift the patient directly above your hands, and have an assistant press on the belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the abdomen; then take the sharp-pointed spatula in this manner: And divide [it] into two parts. With the pointed end, yet it must not be so sharp that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and might cause injury.
Then examine whether the dropsy is caused by fluid around the intestines. So you must cut above the bump three fingers directly above the wrist. and if the dropsy is caused by liver disease, let your incision be to the left of the bump three fingers.
and if it is due to wetness, let the incision be on the right side, and it is not suitable for the patient to lie over the wound so that excess fluid does not run into that weak spot.
Then pierce through the skin with an instrument, push it in, and lift your hand up along the spatium bile between the skin and the fascia just like when you are skinning something to the depth of a fingernail or so.
Next, pierce the fascia until you reach an empty space; this is where water gathers. Then draw it out forcefully and insert this instrument into that spot, which should be shaped like this: And it is similar to a slender silver tube, and made of light brass or copper, with a small hole at the bottom part. and on one side three holes; and two on the other side, and one more.
and the head is carved like a feather, which is similar to how scribes cut their quill pens.
at its top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it now lowers onto the tool.
empty it half or a third of the way because if you empty any more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to loss of spirit from the blood let out, or they faint, or they near death.
but empty it according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the patient's constitution signifies about his virtue, and his pulses.
then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the orifice that I mentioned, when you pierce it in this manner;
then use the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffer thus, and draw out a small quantity of water;
do this each day, and take care not to draw out too much water at once but only a little bit of it.
and if you are in doubt about the patient, and leave too much water inside them, it will overheat their burial shroud or hot sand, and through excessive sweating or bathing and under the sun, and prohibit from drinking; And treat with drying medicines until healed, then cauterize over the stomach and on the liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in their penis, or the opening is very small, or it is not in its proper place.
It must be pierced as soon as possible with a very thin spatula, following this form:
Then apply a small, fine tube to the bladder opening, and bind it, keeping it in place for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
And perhaps this is not necessary, for the urine that comes out will not leave the tube closed.
If the orifice is small then this (i.e., the lead plug) has been medicated as we have said; it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are harmed, as none are born with a tube at the tip of their penis, which is why they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upwards. And they cannot conceive because the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a severe illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, then stretch out the head with a rod and the leg as well, like the length of a feather, so that the hole opens in the middle, just as it should be.
And take care to prevent the loss of blood which often happens, and if it occurs, stop it with something that stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Pimples on the penis This inflammation often occurs in the leg, and it appears as an ugly sore.
And there are both malignant and non-malignant ones.
You must take them with a thin lancet, cut and clean them all, then apply moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment. Then treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
And if the cancer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, you must treat it with cautery.
When you have cut it, and if the inflammation is on top of the shaft, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the inflammation that is inside. And when it is sealed, treat it from the outside.
For when you treat them together, the head of the shaft is not secure and may be pierced, causing blackening and decay in the head of the shaft and glans.
You must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate bark and figwort, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Cauterization assists the two positions together: That is to say, in draining blood and corruption;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a plumb-line into the penis and urinate the patient out.
And when the skin is stuck to the head of the penis which happens in those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then you must therefore remove the skin with a sharp instrument, so that the tie is loosened and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides.
and if this is an important thing to discuss, then you must flay it with a spatula at any pock on the head of the penis and the skin.
then carefully separate it between two [fingers], and put one thin damp linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry again.
circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds; nevertheless when we do this work of our own will, and especially with children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it was not used in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and elders who performed circumcisions around one day, with forceps, and with all [their] instruments.
If the heart were pierced by two wounds, and perhaps one of them is closed while the other remains open. Now it must be cauterized again, and the pain doubles, and during treatment the point of the member is not securely held;
And during the treatment of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes and ruins the operation, and often they need no further treatment, and I say so.
Of the cleaning that is done with threads, I have found goodness in this experiment, for the threads cut as cleanly above as below.
For when you press your hand with equal force on all sides, you cut cleanly straight through it; But let the string be tightly wound around the skin;
And let the manner of this first treatment be such that you make the child believe, if he is alert, that you are not going to force him to anything more than bind the string around his penis, and then you can have him sit in all the ways you wish;
Then make him stand between your hands straight, and shield the instruments from his view by covering them with your hands or placing them below your feet.
Then press your hand against the penis and blow into its core, drawing it upwards until the head of the penis is encased within you. Clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then bind its base with a thick thread, and secure this beneath another bond.
Clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then bind its base with a thick thread, and secure this beneath another bond. Hold it at two points by the second and third fingers, and grasp between the two bonds, then lift the core upwards gently and draw out the head of the penis. Allow blood to flow freely from it, for this is its medicine. and apply powder on top and over the powder a cloth glued with a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rosemary oil, leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the force for the cleansing is as follows:
the two blades should be turned and sharpened, and the blades should also be as long as the handles evenly:
the mistake of the cleansing is when the heart within escapes through the incision;
therefore you must extend it to your nail, otherwise the flesh will become abscessed;
And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if it exceeds three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is soothed, and gently peel off the skin.
then cut it as much as you can manage, and be careful not to damage the part of the rod, this will cause no harm.
Treat the place of fresh wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it is cut from the heart too much, and goes above it, it will cause no harm.
treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
treatment of urine retention
The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or flesh born anew, or similar things as we have mentioned in the classification.
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is caused by stones in the bladder or its neck, then it is necessary for the patient to lean forward on their knees. And his feet should be placed on his back, stretching out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient's arm as much as you can. And thus the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above it, which then releases the urine.
and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called 'syringe', of which this is the form:
and it should be made of fine, light silver, like the feathers of a bird; and it should have a handle one palm long, and be delicate at the top.
The method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a small bag made from wool or cotton, then push the other end of the thread into the syringe.
cut away any excess wool and push it all the way up to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg white, and have the patient sit on a seat. Oil their bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil and warm water;
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel its passage until the action is complete, but this method isn't ideal as the instrument guiding it into place is bent.
Then stretch the thread through all the wool, back and forth, and the urine will follow along the wool, then remove it quickly, and make the urine flow.
Repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient's discomfort.
When scalds or blood enter the bladder, and putrefaction gathers there, if you wish to distill water and medicine into it, use an instrument called a "clepsydra," which is shaped like this:
It is closed, and has three openings. II on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
and the white hairs by which the doctor cuts may be such that they stop well the vein without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and sew when necessary;
and when you see your medicines fall into the bladder, place the head of the vessel in the moisture, and draw out what is inside while draining it;
you will draw out the moisture with the vessel, and then sew up strongly the opening within; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the way of the subtle enema by which we enema the bladder;
And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher up.
it drops to the side where the ligament falls;
then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for enemas, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thick thread, and heat the pot containing this moisture over the fire;
then insert the head of the syringe into the urethra, then squeeze your hand over the bladder with all its moisture gently until you feel that this moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment paper, make it into a circle and pierce it roundly all around. Then push the thread strongly into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would a thimble, and put inside whatever you want of oil, moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already spoken of the types of stones in the division, and their extraction along with medical treatments;
And I have explained the distinction between gallstones caused by bile, and all their symptoms, and in which stones one must operate with cutting; And for bladder stones, and those in the urethra;
And I shall tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety;
and it appears rough, and the patient feels grit in his penis, and he urinates many times, and then becomes blocked; and often these cause the foundations to fail;
and the healing is light for children up to four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are young adults, for those between youth and old age;
And the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders the removal of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up, and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it may come out on its own.
Have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully relaxed and extended downwards.
Then search for it and feel inside (the bladder).
If you feel the stone in your grasp, then hurry now to cut into the stone (to extract it).
And if it does not fall out upon touching, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or with your middle finger if they are a young adult. and push it into its base, seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, apply pressure at the neck of the bladder;
then press down with your finger, and push it outward from where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand, and tell them to stretch the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the cut will be made;
then insert the spatoula, cutting with it, which is shaped like this: And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the perineum;
and be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be nearby at the foundation, and let the handle [of the tool] go across so that it is wide from above and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
perhaps if the press hits your fingers which are at the foundation it might be without work [i.e., useless];
and know that there is such stone which has angles and margins [i.e., sides]: it should be ground to come out [i.e, removed].
and if there is some which is below, similar to an acorn, round, with only a small outlet.
To that one then which has angles and margins [sides], make the handle larger.
and if she does not jump [out], then you must extract it with pliers which are like a file on the head, to squeeze and extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you push underneath [the instrument] an agile tool curved towards the head;
and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, then enlarge the hole with a lancet, and if blood flows [from it], extract it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, push the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull hard, and the smaller ones after that if there are many.
And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: where he dies, or the urine flows back through the opening where the bone cannot fuse;
but still, try to extract it by pulling or chiseling with pincers until you remove it in fragments;
and once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, compress it, and apply a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil, rosewater, and cold water to soothe the hot abscess; then have the patient rest on his collarbone, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses develop in the wound with corrosion and blood clots in the bladder, retaining urine that is released together with it: Push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder and cause infection.
Then cleanse the wound with warm water and salt, and treat it in every way you know until it is healed.
And ensure that during every treatment you bind his thighs together, applying the remedies directly to the affected area.
And if the stone is small, situated in the urethra, impeding urination, insert it there and lodge it within. Should the treatment I describe fail to work, providing grounds for cutting it out entirely, you may do so multiple times according to this procedure. I have already proven this thus.
If you forge an iron tool according to this form, let it have three sharp edges like a spike:
Take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
Then push the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; Turn the probe with your hand within the stone gently, until you can pierce through it from one side to another;
Urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis. If it breaks immediately, and comes out with urine, then the patient is cured;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then slit the penis at the level of the stone between both threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood from the wound; And treat them until they are healed.
From a woman's stone.
Soon it happens that stones form in women, and if it occurs sometimes, then the treatment is severe, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
The second reason is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to examine herself internally, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is skilled enough in this surgical art.
And the fourth reason is that the stones of women are deeper than those of men, which requires a more profound incision, and there is great fear. If necessity arises for this, then you must take an experienced midwife, and at once find her if she exists nearby, and if not found, do not seek out a chaste subtle midwife;
and present her with a wise midwife for female diseases, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the examination of stones; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to insert your finger into her anus and retrieve the stone;
and if she finds it, make her push the stone out from under your finger, and instruct her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, then reach and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must gently guide the stone from the bladder's entrance to under it, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the anus where it is felt, and feel for the stone in that part. and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first. then insert the tube into the incision; if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can be extracted, and know that there are many types of stones:
to wit, small and large ones, rough and soft, long and round ones, and those that have veins.
If you know the symptoms, then you will understand the outcome.
And if you feel faint from the blood loss, quickly apply crushed vitriol to it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about for extracting stones from men so they can help with your work.
And if you faint from blood loss, and it's an artery that is cut, put the powder on the wound along with tent and banneret extract, and do not start again on this one, leave the stone alone and don't touch it, for fear of causing death to the patient. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed down, and healing takes place, return to your work until the kidney stone comes out.
Ramus aqueous is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white of egg which lies below the heart of calves and contained within the egg.
And is called "albumen", and at times it properly lies in the membrane of the egg, which makes one think that there are two eggs. and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white part we have mentioned.
but that does not happen if you apply poultices. And the generation of this ramus is due to weakness that comes from cows, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from blows to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours: where it is discoloured towards yellow, or it is red-less, or black, or white and watery, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to recognise this condition, for if it is on the white part we mentioned, then the abscess is round like an egg, and does not open up the testicles, because they are covered in moisture all around them.
And if it is wet within its own covering, the abscess forms with part of the egg (pus), and thus one thinks that this is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the buttocks and the white part (flesh), one senses it well.
therefore when you want to ascertain the colour of the moisture (pus), test it at every part within, from which its shape is described above. According to what follows this test, judge by what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron (surgery), one must ensure the patient is healthy enough according to their strength and the fullness of their body.
place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put much cloth underneath.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right side, then extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart of the testicles;
Then take the small spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles from their base to the wrist, making your incision straight as you separate the scrotal skin until you reach the white membrane, then carefully peel back the skin according to your ability.
Then pierce the white membrane with a water-filled syringe through the wide opening, and extract all of the water, then put in your hooks, and stretch the membrane upwards.
And do not puncture the heart of the testicles, only the white membrane. Cope it all or by pieces especially its delicate side, for if you do not cut it properly and wisely, the water will return.
And if the egg should happen to be at your work, put it back in its place once you have completed the operation of the sieve.
Then join the two books of the heart of cows with a seam, then treat it like other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to bind the suspending vessels, taking care of the discharge of blood.
Then cut the cow with all its suspending parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the bone is broken into two parts together, know that these are two pieces. cut the other part just like you did with the first one evenly, then wipe off the blood, and place into the wound damp wool soaked in oil.
cut the other part just like you did with the first one evenly, then wipe off the blood, and place into the wound damp wool soaked in oil. and place over it other wool dampened in wine and oil, and put this on both sides, then cover with doubled linen cloths, and bind everything above with a bandage like so.
Then take two linen cloths, and fill them with wool batting made to look like this and join them by sewing at the waist of the breeches, and one piece should be placed under the buttocks down to the back, and the other over the arm pit.
And the other two straps on top of the two angles, and let all the restraints be assembled in the buckle of the belt.
And sometimes this caustic remedy is used instead of iron cutting tools, and you must take a fine lancet cautery, slice the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white tissue containing liquid is exposed.
Then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white tissue with curved tools, flaying it with this hot fine cautery.
And slice it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped out.
Be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle.
And know that this work is safer; and take care to avoid blood loss, and remember that surgical work is delicate;
and if anything opposes you, or an abscess appears, or bleeding occurs, or any other issue arises, then treat what is causing the opposition as per what has been previously stated.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this work due to its terribleness, then proceed with cauterization as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the water has drained away, make the patient sit on a raised seat. then pierce the abscess below in the part of the flesh that is widest, and make the incision as long as the body.
And let the holes be wide enough so that all the water may flow freely.
Then place cotton on the spot, bind it up, and let the remaining water drain out. Afterwards, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the water to escape through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or an instrument like that used to draw off water from dropsical patients, which is shaped as described before.
Widen the pouch of the wound and know that the water will return. It is assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, thus shall the patient pass his days.
Know that when cutting this branch, there is fear in many situations, which is why I think it's better to leave it be;
And I will tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially at the buttocks; And it happens frequently.
This is caused by excess acidity and bile that has spread to the buttocks or due to impact.
And its colour matches the colour of the body. It does not cause pain, but is instead a deep abscess.
And perhaps there is a large abscess that is frightening, stony, and dark in colour; sometimes it comes from an artery or vein swelling.
When it is from an artery, it is recognized by the warm abscess's condition when you press it with your fingers; And do not touch it.
One that comes from swelling of the vein is recognized by its condition on touch, and one can successfully cut it open in this manner as well as other cases. And one must remove the heart of the vein, then extend it upwards and cut away any white matter inside, freeing all parts of the egg from its contents.
If the egg is already hard with these newly born chicks, then you must therefore treat the egg, and remove its contents.
And if it is hollow in the shell or what is inside the vessels, you must deliver all that waste and roundly break the shell.
And if the birth of the flesh is behind, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
When your work is completed, fill the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane similar to that of the brain, with softening agents for the tendons, and the patient suffers greatly when moving.
And the treatment of this illness is equally as fearful as the one before, yet we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the tendon suspension below your two fingers, to all vessels near the wound, and hold them firmly, stretching them strongly.
Then cut across the vessels with a sharp spathumile knife, making it wide enough to uncover them, and then peel back the skin on either side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a doubled thread into it, and tie it to the first place where the bone has come out, then tie it again to the other end. Then cut them in half straight down the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound like others where sinew is involved, so that no vessel should bleed out one of the knobs.
For this does not cause harm, and if all the vessels become blocked, then it is necessary to drain the knobs for all the vessels. So that the wound does not lose its direction due to the incision of the vessels, they dry up and cannot be helped.
The events of this mishap are due to the rupture that occurs or the tearing open, or the expansion in the abdominal area near the groin, which is why the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from the tear or its extension, and these two types of injury happen for many reasons:
Or from impact, or jumping, or lifting heavy loads, and through similar actions;
And the signs when it's an expansion in the groin area are that there is a progressive onset over a long period and it does not come on suddenly. And abscesses are equal to the surface, for it accelerates the intestine's progress towards them.
And the signs are that when it is caused by a section of the cheekbone, it leads to sudden pain at first, and abscesses appear in various places under the skin close to the surface, which is due to the intestine protruding from behind the cheekbone.
And sometimes the muscles descend with the intestine, getting stuck there and causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments with fear, it is necessary to escape from them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to gather their intestines in their hand and put them back into the wound if they can. Then support his neck with your hands, lift up his thighs between your hands.
Then extend the heart above it, and remove all of the skin from the lower part of the belly to the thighs. Then push in the hooks of the pincers according to your need for opening the wound and arrange it so that the rectum can come out.
Then scrape off the white superficial skin that is beneath the leather of the calves until it is completely exposed on all sides.
Insert your index finger into what follows the calf, which is between the white superficial skin beneath the leather of the egg and the second layer of skin, taking care to avoid what comes after the egg and separating it from the second layer.
With your right hand, move within the heart of the calves and stretch the white superficial skin upwards with your left hand while lifting the egg to expose all sides of the second layer. Instruct your assistant to lift the egg upwards while releasing what is held back by the binding.
and seek with your hands if there is an intestinal hernia or white hard cicatrix, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
then take a needle with thick thread made of six strands, and push it through the back part of the cicatrix, which is behind the skin of the belly. after sizing it, cut the ends of the threads that appear, until there are four strands left. then join them one over the other in the form of a cross, and tie the cicatrix, which we said was beneath the skin of the belly, with a strong two-part knot. then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them in a double knot, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter there, lest an abscess form. and place the new rope according to the first long rope two lengths of that one, and after these two ropes leave a space below the heart of the animals as wide as a thumb. and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg provides;
then cut in the part below the skin of the animals until blood and bowel flow as we have said before.
then bring damp wool in oil and put it on the wound, then bring the rope we have mentioned before. And sometimes, the white surface is cauterized as we mentioned earlier, after incision, due to fear of blood loss. For this happens often, and leave the rope until it breaks by itself.
and if it takes time to fall off, irrigate with warm water, then put on what we have said before until it breaks.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
Of hernia cruris.
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron instruments.
And the ancients said that it is done like a vine branch which grows together with a willow tree, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them slightly below.
Then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who work on it, until the vessels fall out.
And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the neck, as we have said, and the wound opens up.
And none of the intestines fall into the cavity, but if they do, it is an emergency, and repair them every hour.
and yet if it stays too long at this point, the wound or fistula grows so that the intestines descend;
and this happens due to the extension of the fistula which is in the anus, as we have said, for it is extended, then it softens and swells the joint and opens.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient often lies on their back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture swollen from side to side according to the size of three fingers;
and then extract the fistula which is underneath the skin that covers it, then take a red-hot iron and place it on the exposed area of the fistula;
et press it at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two visible places on the skin above the head of the vein, and cut one after another.
then extract the head of the vein, and do not cut the skin nor stretch out the egg or any other thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal rupture. then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the boys' hair, clean it up and treat the wound until it is healed.
The knife is forced in without breaking the surface, and cauterization is better suited here for healing.
of softening the skin of the calves
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in some men because the flesh within is softened, and it can be seen.
And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient be made to lie on their back, and cut the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then assemble the two lips at one seam, and if you see it first soften the excess of leather with three seams or four firmly.
Then trim between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, then remove the thread.
Chastisement.
Know that amputations are forbidden in our law, and so I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
and they are only necessary for two types [of injuries]:
one is when the physician knows how to respond when asked, and he knows the treatment;
the other is because we often need to amputate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
I say therefore that punishments are done according to two manners: or by attraction, or by incision.
In this manner that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the tendons are softened and relaxed; then take them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Of the punishment of castration: You should hold the animal and press on the skin of the tendons with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each testicle with one stroke once you have properly skinned them;
and leave a small wound and subtle ointment that is on the vessels.
and this method of castration is better than that which is done by traction because in traction some part of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to still have lust.
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Ce sont des animaux qui ont les deux coions et les deux oefs, ou qui portent de chescuns une partie; et par le droit de nature est que li males n'aient pas les vases de la femele en eu cors, ne les females les vases de li males.
Hermaphrodite occurs in two ways among humans: one is that between the two testicles there appears a natural structure like that of a woman's, with hair, and sometimes it secretes urine.
And another type occurs in women, situated on the forearm like a rod and two knobs.
And the treatment for men and women is that you separate all joined parts, and treat them like other wounds.
In the second manner, for men whose urine spurts through their scrotum, there is no treatment.
A tumor is flesh attached to the natural body part, making it too ugly to look at. And some women have them as large as a hand; this is the treatment.
You must hold the excess of the tumor in your hand or with pincers, and cut it lightly.
And do not go too deep, lest the blood flow out, then treat other treatments until it is healed.
And for another flesh that arises at the mouth of the anus, and swells up, and perhaps bursts open, and it looks like a cow's udder, thus the ancients called it "cow disease". You must cut it off, as we have said for a growth caused by itching, and treat it until it is clean.
Erratic it is when the woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that has arisen there;
and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that has arisen there; whether it is through a wound inflicted by sharp or subtle instrument, and it is done perfectly in the center, on the side, below, or wherever it may be;
and they prevent conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers to bear;
and one's knowledge of such is through observation of the womb.
If the obstructions appear nearby, then they will reach your fingers or rod [instrument].
If it is an instrument that is subtle, and it is close to the two cubits, then hasten and round it thus:
Put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread.
Then stretch the two lips wide apart until the soft tissue is exposed and over the gums.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, having the woman lie at home each day so that it cannot heal.
And if the tissue is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
If the gums are of new flesh, suspend them with thread and cover it.
And have on hand hemostatic medicines in case of bleeding, such as dragons' blood, incense, mixed with egg white.
Then apply a wide copper rod so that the wound cannot heal.
And thus let it remain for a long time, and bring him a dry linen tent.
Then be cured with other treatments until you are healed.
And when a new flesh grows in the wound, it should be cut according to this method, unless there are embedded abscesses. For an embedded abscess in the wound, one must not attempt to cut it open.
Of haemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumors.
And I have previously mentioned in the classification their similarities and signs; here I will describe those that can be cured.
I say that haemorrhoids and thick growths, when they are completely inside the anus, and cannot be felt, should not be treated with a cauterising iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the swamp, where one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the tumor with tongs and cut it at its root, then apply powder made of blood-coagulating medicine such as dragon's blood and frankincense, along with similar substances.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
And if there is discharge of blood, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel with galls and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment to apply on her back.
And if it stops, that is good. If not, have her air out cupping glasses on her back and breasts without causing injury.
Then take linen, dampen it in juice of plantain or hawthorn with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
And when the abscess heals, treat the site of injury until it is completely healed.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles an acrid head, it must be cut like the thelul as I said. and then treat until it is healed.
There are many types of abscess that can occur in the marrow, such as cancer, stone abscess, herpes, tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and several other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
I should therefore say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes on the nose, which is not one of the abscesses that require bowels;
and if you want to know about the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is acute when it first appears, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red as you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is eased;
and then have the patient sit on a seat, and place two small stools for them to lean back against, supporting their back and bringing their feet together below the leg;
let their thighs be extended, and place their arms underneath their knees, binding them well with a good bandage;
then turn them onto their right side, and bring the instrument for opening the marrow to it, of which afterwards comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument to bear, you first insert a rod to gauge the depth of the marrow, so that what enters the patient from the instrument does not go too deep and harm them; and if the instrument is larger, it should be covered with layers of cloth to protect [the wound] from its harm.
he must place the end of the instrument on top and hold the instrument steady.
and when the abscess opens, it must be lanced with a soft hand, either with the lancet or the spatula.
and when the boil is empty, you must place in the wound moistened bandages soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
place the bandage outside of the wound over the depth of the abscess, and on top of the abscess and around the wrist place clean moist woolen cloth soaked in water or steeped in mallows.
Then the cure after two days of treatment coming to this, until it is healed;
and sometimes we lift the swelling and wound with a cleansing enema of water and honey, and then with water or cooked roots of iris and long aristoloche; then return to the treatment.
And if the wound is swollen with pus, you must avoid treating it with hot iron; instead, treat it as we have described in the section on [wound treatment].
Of childbirth. It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural process of childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman hastening downwards, and wishing to smell it.
then the child is eager to come out. thus you know that these births follow the natural pattern, and the child comes out headfirst, and the midwife assists him.
and when you see these signs, gently apply pressure to their abdomen so that the child comes out soon.
because when they descend onto the head, the midwife should assist them, and the husband should be prepared for any excesses through proper care.
and one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes out onto the feet, and emerges either from the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes out of the abdomen, often turned accidentally towards the neck, and in other bad positions.
So it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how she must assist.
If the child is born on its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle or be held by other women.
And prepare her some oil of almonds or fenugreek that is cooked, then put between her fingers the small spatula which has this form: And split open the perineum, and scrape away at her fingernail until the moisture that collects there flows out.
And press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema of fenugreek mixed with sesame oil to the woman.
Then make her inhale snuffs of ground cumin, and hold your hand over her mouth and nose for an hour. Draw out the child now.
And if both hands stick out [are dislocated], you must reset them gently back and forth. and if they cannot be put back in [their socket], place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high. then raise the chair from the ground, holding the woman so she does not fall when it is lifted;
and if the hands cannot be put back in [the socket], and the child is dead, then cut off the hands with a knife as described before, extract the child, and reset evenly.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child stands up on their feet, you must push them upwards. and then turn it over and over until it is even;
then take one leg and stretch it little by little.
If it reaches the thighs, instruct him to jump up until he sneezes violently. if jumping occurs, may God want it so.
And if it is not fever as we have said, then turn him on his side and side again until he is in his natural position. For then he will be lightly dislocated.
And if it does not work as we have done before, then take some mullein from the roof, and oil of cassia, and molten gum, and grind everything in a mortar. and put this ointment on the skin of the woman's body both inside and outside, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs.
and when it is moistened underneath, make him a collar of myrrh for it, and place it beneath, and leave it there for an hour. then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and take her gently by the stomach, for now the child jumps.
From the birth of the child upon their knees. When the child comes in this manner, have the midwife put her hands to it thus and thus. then let someone support her under the neck, and have her feet hanging down, and let her lie on the bed. and bend her hands like this and thus, then press her hands on the belly, and remove the pillows from beneath, until she is properly arranged below. And if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them vigorously, then massage his belly upward, finally place your hands on him. And hit the child repeatedly. Instruct the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
From the birth of the child, which comes from the wide part with one hand hanging. I must devise a means of bringing back the hand. If you cannot bring it back, have the woman get up and move around.
If she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed, and vigorously raise her legs.
Then bring the massage oil I have described.
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a seat, then help to return the hand. Then deliver the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold herself until the baby is out.
From the exit of the child onto its neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother. It's necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and deliver lightly.
And when it is equalized, put on the natural dressing of alum and oil as we said before, then instruct her to move gently back and forth.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat again, and instruct her to hold herself. And make them sneeze. in the same way for every midwife
in the same way for every midwife When it comes up in this way at every heartbeat, cut the flesh between your fingers with your nail, so that the moisture is drained.
and if the child has it on their face and neck, cut off the skin from their forehead so that it is not restrained, then kill the child.
then push the child inside so that you place it correctly, as it should be, and instruct the woman not to move.
Of the dislocation of the wrists Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four are born together; And this is not a strange thing, but it happens often. They have two strange things that do not allow them to live if they happen at the same time.
They have two strange things that do not allow them to live if they happen at the same time. I know that they multiply and are divided by the knife that separates them, which is related to anger.
And sometimes they occur naturally like any other thing under the sun, as we have said before.
And if they occur severely, then treat it as we have said before, and let the surgeon be skilled, and act quickly and lightly. And do so for his best chance of survival. Of many children
Some are formed in the womb at I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII months of age, and they may form fully as a child by the measurement of their glorious wisdom, and it is fitting that the nurse knows all this, for perhaps similar things will happen to them. Do as you ought.
Of the dead child.
When you treat the woman for a dead child in her belly, as I've said in the section on obstetrics, and it doesn't turn out well, and you are forced to use manual instruments. It is necessary that you know if the woman has no moral vices, and does not suffer any accidents or fear of death;
The woman should be positioned on her back with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;
And the minister gives her two portions, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot be treated for the child's descent.
Then rub the wife's mouth with moist oils along with a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint her palms with these oils and mixtures.
Then gently push her to one side, then move her to a place where she pushes the feet so that they are accessible for this, and take care if the child is equipped that it descends onto its head.
If the feet are stuck in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the chin or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, then either prick it or pinch it in the softer parts.
and he must hold the hook with his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and push all his hand lightly, and fix the hook in one of these places that we have said until it reaches the empty space.
then fix another hook opposite it, or the third if you need them, so that the extractions are equal.
and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other, to extract it, and let the hooks be serrated to hold it, just as this is the form:
And if any part remains, then anoint the wound with some of his fingers' oil and push those into that part, and pull out the other part.
And if any remains there, place this splint or higher, and do so until it comes out entirely forward.
And if one hand comes forward of the other, and he cannot reset it due to tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it fully extends. Then bind it at the wrist where the palm meets the heel or with a cord, and so you must do for the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck during delivery, or there is an acute presentation of the head, then you must insert your spatulate finger between your two fingers, split open the head, and extract the presenting part. Where you grind it with the instrument called "almidach," from which its shape is formed, using the instruments or chapters that follow this one.
And do likewise if the child has an unusually large head naturally;
Then pull out the bones with pliers, and if the head pops out and is caught by forceps, let it be split open until the moisture that accumulates there flows out.
And if it cannot come out, cut it up into pieces as much as you can manage.
And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is standing on its feet, then there is slight traction, and the guidance to the mouth of the womb is light.
And if it is tight in the belly or breast, you must extract it with cloth wrapped around the hand; and open the abdomen or chest, let the moisture which is there flow out;
and if the other limb is removed but the head remains, push your hand deep into the socket and pull it down to the mouth of the socket; then insert one or two fingers and draw it out forcefully;
and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to hot abscesses that have formed there, you should not try to force it open, but rather apply moist and greasy substances; and apply plasters to him, and wrap them with moist, softening, and soothing cloths.
And if the child is lying on their side, and you can make them lie flat, then apply what we have said for a live child;
if there is no other option, then pull it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
And once you have done this, apply what we have said for hot abscesses that appear in the buttocks;
and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses to restrain it, and provide further treatment.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead then another was born on top of it, and the other died too. After a long time, an abscess came on her neck, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to emit a foul smell.
I was called to treat him, and I thought long, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, followed by others after several days. I was greatly surprised, for the belly has no bones.
I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, extracting visible bones, until the woman was in a better condition; And the woman lived a long time like this, and there was still a little piece of bowels in its place.
And I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find an odd thing, know how to offer assistance.
Hereafter comes the form of the compress, for which you have the books;
And turn to II for II shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns should be more slender than the restrainer, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the mouth of the trunk should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood one finger, and in length a palm and a half. and between these two joints are two attachments of this same piece of wood, which are fixed to each other and about half a palm or slightly more in length.
and these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open it when you turn both horns.
Another form, more refined and lighter in its resemblance to this one, can be made from ebony or boxwood, like the shape of pliers. and it has two attachments at each end, you see, one palm in length, with two sides of equal width.
and when you see that the socket needs to be opened with all of these instruments, have the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs open wide. Then insert both attachments into the socket, keeping the head of the instrument below between her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you did with equal pliers, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the wound, so that it yields what it wants.
These instruments are all well-equipped, and their appearances are diverse; And when you see them prepared, the work is more urgent, and it is of greater benefit to men for their well-being.
If you do not despair of the instrument at your disposal, as their need is inexcusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, while holding your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she can do this, it is beneficial.
If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, then add herbs that can open the pores of the skin such as sage, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia bark, and marjoram. All these herbs or some of them must be boiled in water inside the pot on the fire.
Then put a funnel or opening from the pot into one nostril of the patient's nose and hold it so that the vapours enter inside.
Then make them sneeze as we have said before. If the secondary injury occurs.
If it remains after this treatment and does not work, tell the nurse to wet her left hand in sesame oil or mule fat ointment then rub it inside. Finally look for a midwife. and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightaway, so that the patient is not troubled during extraction;
but you must move it gently right and left, and then pull. then it will come out and become dislodged.
And if the patient's mouth is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of coughing and herbal fumigation;
and if none of what we have said works, take care not to be reckless when pulling.
but you must tie what is at the patient's mouth to the woman's thigh, then give her an enema of tetrapharmakon. If it festers and returns, it will come again.
However, when it festers and causes foul odour in the stomach and head, it injures the patient. Therefore, one must apply suitable fumigations accordingly:
None of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to stop her flowering and menses is as follows:
It is like seeing the reflection of a dog, with a subtle head in nature, and wide eyes over the fire.
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the moth until it is wasted, then begin another.
Many children are born without their anus being pierced, but instead it is blocked by some subtle membrane. Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce this membrane with his finger, and not with a sharp spatula, taking care that the incision does not touch any other part.
Then apply soft wool moistened in wine and oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a piece of lead wire into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wishes to go outdoors.
And sometimes this blockage occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess. It is necessary to cut open this sudden blockage. Thus it should be treated, as we have said about the anus of a pig.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en lespaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;
And when this ancient dislocation occurs, it creates, and even more so in a moist environment, white or subtle boils, and sometimes these are fistulas that have burst.
And they are recognized by those who have experienced it or witnessed it through defecation or flatulence when the patient excretes, and sometimes a worm may jump out.
And if the fistulas penetrate all the way to the bladder, and even halfway up the penis; and reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the bone of the knee.
And thus one recognizes a bursting fistula in the anus, and one that is not bursting. and it is that you insert your index finger or thumb, and insert a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, insert a slender tent made of lead or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of matter or wind coming from the opening as we have mentioned: know that it has not perforated. then hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine duct, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the tent has come through to that place. If there is no distortion and the source of pain is obvious, it is best to go directly to surgery, and ointment provides no immediate cure.
And in the case of persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than operation, and it is the foolish vanity of doctors that interferes.
In those cases where it is not persistent and not an old injury either, there is hope of healing with iron [instruments], as I have experienced, and the patient lies prone on their back between your hands.
Lift the legs up to the hips, and incline the hips towards the stomach. Then insert an iron probe, or bronze if there is distortion, until you find the location of the fistula.
If the patient feels it around their anus, you should insert your index finger there, feeling if it has pierced the tendon.
And when you feel it between your finger and the skin or flesh, then know that it has pierced through. Do not strain yourself if you cannot heal it.
It is said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely.
The aid one provides is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned earlier. And insert it all heated into the fistula until it reaches towards the anus. And do this twice or three times until you know that these chards are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
Then treat the wet tents with butter until that chard falls off, then cure it with ointment, sealing and binding.
If he is thus cured, it is good.
If this cannot be healed in any other way;
And if the wound is internal, and does not pierce all the way to the bone that lies at its base, and between your finger and the wound there is thick chard or scab, and you see an opening in this that leads to the heart of the injury; Cut at the beginning of the fistula, pushing back to before the wound, then cauterize afterwards until you reach the head of the wound. And the swelling will be relieved, and it shall fall.
Then mend those faulty sores that seem like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the blood defeats you and escapes between your finger and the work, cauterize it with fire or astringent medication.
For the fire cautery combines two things: That is to say, the burning of these adjoining sores, and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture;
Then treat moist swellings with butter or ground substances until the skin turns pale, and remove burnt sores from the pale flesh.
Then treat open wounds with hardening ointments for hard tissue, and use dry medications.
For when it is restored, it is cured and does not return.
And if the fistula extends to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus, and inquire there.
If you feel the tumor and find that it has reached the skin or subcutaneous tissue, or is close to breaking through, but there are no signs of certainty or hope except for a path seen through one of these three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut deep into it, or if you can create a new wound and treat it like the initial one.
and do not go too deep as to cut the tissue that holds the base, and cause evacuation from there unwillingly. then treat it as we have said before.
then treat it as we have said before. if by chance it is discharging, then remove the covering and clean after cutting near the base, either through incision or another sharp instrument. Then challenge this evil fault which is in the wound, as much as you can; Then study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula outside of the foundation;
Then study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula outside of the foundation; If it were a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: And it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is beside the foundation near the skin above, take a perforated tent with a pointed end in this shape: And here you insert the wire bent at right angles in such a way that it enters through one hole and exits from another; then you advance the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches its end.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then withdraw the thread from that perforation, just as you would insert your finger into the foundation;
and pull the head of the thread through, joining the two heads together, holding one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not loosen it at any time, until the thread touches these parts which are between them, and they fall away.
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not rupture, make it perforate by all means possible unless it is too deeply embedded. For it is not suitable to operate on the wound if it is too deeply embedded and then treat it as we have said until it heals.
The shape of the spatula with spines that we use to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting. and not sharp on the other side for this reason that you do not cut what must not be cut; as you can see here.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways. Where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and around them is blood, and there may be one or more, and they protrude from the fundament and at the head of the fundament.
But those that protrude have little moisture, and around them is either a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the colour of the body.
And the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the toilet, until the fundament is outside and the son appears. If you hurry, grab it with tongs or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its root.
and if its hooks cannot hold due to moisture, it grabs [the wound] with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. it extracts them with your two hands, then cuts and applies some hot powders in place of cautery. or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, or treat with other methods until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then administer a harsh enema to cleanse what is in the fundament so that it can be expelled fully. when the patient feels better, and if the thread is drawn out of the fundament without resistance, then the treatment is light.
when the patient feels better, and if the thread is drawn out of the fundament without resistance, then the treatment is light. And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with pincers, then clip and clean them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron. It is fitting that you arrange the suture in this manner:
It is fitting that you arrange the suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, and then draw the thread through, make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, so that it is wide.
Tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread and remove the needle, do this for all of them except leave one open to allow excess blood to flow.
Then place on the base a moistened cloth with rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
Leave it on until it softens, and once it has softened, treat it with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
To dry up the phlegm or feces from the bowels Often there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to the constraint of nature and when the illness is old or medicine has no effect. Make sure to scrape the bark off with a spatule or your fingernail so that it does not stay wet. Then treat it until it is healed as it should be.
And if it cannot heal, start the scraping again more vigorously than before until it bleeds and is scraped raw. Then treat until it is healed.
cooling down Ants are a small fault in the appearance of the body, and they go very deep inside.
And sometimes the cold finds them, one feels them trembling like death, they are found all over the body and most of all in the hands.
The treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or the strong wing of a vulture and place this quill on the trembling spot until the purple circle around it disappears. Then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cover all around the trembling spot and put it deep inside, uprooting the tremor from its roots.
And if you wish, make one from a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be hollow below and solid above: Do not pierce [it], to keep it attached to the finger, and press it.
And if you see that, cauterize the swelling, just as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes we use silver, quicksilver, or melted and hammered bronze for a clyster.
And sometimes we use these instruments in small and large sizes according to what they are designed for. Those which are fitted for the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain are small.
Those which are fitted for the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain are small. The shape of the clyster large or small is broad above where the bellies are tied thus:
And if there is an issue with the intestines being tied up, as you see, and the intestine has been pierced...
and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other.
and let the belly or place where you put the medicines be made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes, and leave an inch between each hole, then push into these holes a strong thread of twisted flax in the shape of an X or tie them together, and assemble the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer as an enema;
and this is its form like a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it; Then the minister should squeeze the patient's two hands together until it is completely visible, then withdraw the clyster, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medic wants him/her to go out, hold them as much as possible. And if he/she sleeps one night on it, this is greater help.
And if you enema him with a stomach illness of obstruction, and the medicine wants to exit prematurely, then restart it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids or abscesses are in the anus, let the clyster be as gentle as for a child.
And this is the shape of the gentle clyster with which leather should be withdrawn:
We have already spoken about treating wounds in this chapter.
For we shall tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where the wounds are located, as well as what caused them.
Things by which wounds are made are through striking with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or from a lance, stick, arrow, or similar objects.
Or they are made according to the locations of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, foot, stomach, liver, and similar parts.
And we shall tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds since memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, take heed if it's from striking with a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect of an impending abscess. If you must do so, then bleed from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and make sure to bleed on the opposite side of the injured part.
And let the patient rid themselves of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
And if they do not wish to be bled, let their meat intake be reduced, and they should neither drink wine nor eat flesh.
And place on the wound cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine, if hot abscesses form there.
And if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound powder which I shall name shortly, should it be fresh with all its blood and not moved by air.
And if the wound has moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then bring them together with stitching, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, regarding the stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, deep, and holds only by a little bit of skin, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medication and restore hard flesh in place of leather, instruct the patient to eat coarse meats like beef and pork, as well as chicken and similar foods.
And if you find the leather is corrupted but it does not reach to the bone, cut out all of the corruption and throw it away, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding and cannot be stopped with medicine, tie off the artery and if you find it has slipped, bind it with a thread. And if this does not benefit him, then cauterize him.
And if these wounds are small and simple, so is the treatment light. And you must put this powder on it as soon as the rust has been removed.
And the way of making the powder is as follows: Take one part incense; Dragon's blood, two parts; Galangal root, three parts, and finely powder it, then apply to the wound, pressing firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, leaving it unbound, if it does not swell. for one must remove the medicine only when it is healed.
And sometimes only the alum is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the cold has moved from the wound.
And if the burn has killed the wound, especially deep ones, do not put any of this powder on it;
but apply some soothing ointments, or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows freely. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with delicate pincers.
And I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
Of the neck wound.
If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a head wound; however, if the windpipe or artery in the neck is severed...
If it is the nose, there is no other remedy except to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for this harms the nose and makes it retreat. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the nature of the nose is cold, and its proximity extends to the brain, which is the most vital organ.
But let the medicine be soothing, as warm water washed in soft oil, and mixed with cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other stones of salt according to this method, and moist salves.
And if the wound is large, cut it and bind with bandages, then let it heal until it is completely closed.
And if the wounds are deep and have fur and pus in them, pierce it or make an incision below this point.
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then open it up, and suture it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spinal cord in the throat is cut, or the heart and vessels are damaged, take care that flesh does not go into it. Cut the heart's conduit upon the neck of the throat, but do not damage the throat itself when you reset it according to its natural shape. then hold it carefully in place for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has penetrated to the bone, examine it closely. and if there are fragments of bone in it, then remove them forcefully where you can, and for those you cannot retrieve, leave them to fester until the wound suppurates. Alleviate the pain and ease the discharge from the sore.
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have explained in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether air escapes from the wound when the patient walks around. Know then that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood intact, do not apply the powder immediately nor bind it to prevent the blood from flowing out freely, as it returns to the heart, and this can kill the patient. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four days or longer. there will not be any spasm, nor evil heart tremors or shortness of breath and when you see the good condition of the bones, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it with tents and other remedies until it is completely cured.
and if it cannot heal, and there is some work done on it again, then you should know that there is a fistula there.
then treat it as one ought to. And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, whether it be on the chest or back, treat what is in front first. If it is large, stitch it.
And if it is small, use powder. If the wound is deep and has pierced the bone, splitting into pieces, clean the wound thoroughly, and realign the broken bones if they are displaced. And if the bones are not displaced, leave the wound to fester so that it drains itself.
And for other wounds on different body parts, the treatment is as we have stated before.
Abdominal hernia.
Ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
Of a large wound sometimes the intestines or their nerves will protrude, which allows for air entry.
And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because you must be extra careful to push the intestines back in without tearing them.
Because the intestines swell and become sensitive to cold, they are harder to push back in without damaging them further; thus, it is better to treat the smaller wound first so that you can carefully guide the intestine back into place before treating the other injuries.
Know that there are four types of abdominal ruptures:
The two common ruptures occur in the abdominal wall suture, and the sutures of other wounds on the body are the same as for other injuries.
and yet they are more suitable with the stitching of the abdomen; I will speak about each one individually and clarify them.
I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is necessary to put it back in, this can be done through one of two methods. either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in warm water only, which you have boiled in hot water with vinegar and spice, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is reduced.
And sometimes this constraining wine is made sour to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water or other infusions and let the mallows be cooked because this alleviates the entry of too much.
and if nothing enters it, then make an opening in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is to ensure that we do not cut unless there is great need for it.
and these are the instruments used to make an incision:
when it cuts inside in an arc shape and not outwards, observe here its form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have fallen out, you must replace them back inside according to their natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
When the wound is wide, and it is located below the belly, you must lay the patient on their back, with their legs elevated above their head. And if the wound is below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, if the rupture in the abdomen occurs in one of its two halves, position them so that the injured part is higher than the other.
Thus, it is necessary to manage as I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, use the equipment provided to you, then take it in your hands and apply a gentle substance that covers the entire rupture with your palm, bringing together its lips.
et cest la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi despaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; and pierce the two sides of the leather with the two sides of the syphon, which is beneath the leather inside, so that you make it pierced from this part, and gather the two heads of the siphon together in four parts.
then draw out a double thread around the needle in two parts, then gather together the two sides of the wound appropriately, and then leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread with a knot as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to continue in this way according to your need of needles until the entire wound is closed.
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well. For this reason they must be moderate;
and it is not suitable to push the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals;
then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when they move, and place tents or small cloths over the needle heads to keep them in place, leaving them there until the wound is healed;
and this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
The second type of suture is common, and it involves bringing together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with an needle or thick moderate thread.
and when you have pierced these four heads together, return the needle to the part where you started, in the manner one sews cloth.
and leave some space between each suture as thick as two fingers.
these sutures are useful for the man; I sewed a wound on someone's stomach, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm, with the intestines protruding two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days; I treated him and he was cured.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And apply old cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and wash it with water and honey until it is healed.
One shall say two proper ways of stitching/suturing:
Take the needle, and insert it from outside to inside part.
Once it has pierced through the skin from right to right, leave the head of the siphon or incision where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side from inside to outside.
And the understanding of this suture is that you should sew it just like furriers make furs, leaving one side of the siphon untied and taking it up on the other, until the whole suture is complete.
The second method of suturing, as Galen accurately describes it, is done in this way: One joins the two parts together naturally and aligns one end of the wound with the other, like so...
Insert a needle at the wound's edge nearest to the navel, piercing just that spot, and leave both ends of the wound untouched. Then turn the needle around and pierce through from outside to inside, passing it between both ends of the wound.
Next, pierce both ends from outside to inside in two other places of the wound that are on the opposite side.
And this is Galen's second method for suturing, which is also the most common one.
Galiens said these words, and some bear witness, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in a manner like those who sew leather straps;
and understand that when the rupture is within the belly, the suture is more grievous than other places on the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than moved by the burning [coals], then return the intestine and the cut.
Then put on top of it some powder made from burnt animal fat, and if the burn has moved away from the ointment, then apply a different ointment that is ready to hand until the wound heals. And tie it up with thread, and seal it with hot wax. Then treat the wound like any other until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, then apply old cotton wool as soon as it begins to heal, and move it around twice a day until the wound is healed.
For you will need no other medicine in many treatments where the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound will poison vital body parts, then it is necessary to soak a light linen cloth in tepid oil or rosehip oil and place it around the affected area and under the armpit.
and if he feels pain or swelling in his bowels, which often happens, then administer a clyster of tepid black wine, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine.
pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The intestines, which are called "jeun," cannot heal when injured due to the layout of their veins and the delicate nature of the entire body, as well as its proximity to nerves.
and if the belly bursts from the wound, put it back in place just like with the intestine while it is still fresh.
and if it is old and has turned worms or black, you must bind the place that has turned black so no blood flows from there, for there are veins and arteries.
then cut what is between the binding and hang both heads from the lower part of the wound until outside to ease extraction when the belly falls, and the wound opens.
From a broken jaw.
When the intestines are round and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, for I saw a man pierced in the belly by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which issued waste matter and flatulence.
I treated it according to my ability, and I did not cease from cauterizing until he was healed, and the flesh had fused together.
And when I saw it fused, I suspected that the patient might have pain in his belly; and he had no discomfort there, but remained in good health, eating and drinking;
and certain experts say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this way: take large pieces of meat, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the meat has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it tightens its mouth on top.
then cut the head of the meat and keep it so that it cannot be untied, then place another piece of meat afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered. cut the wound.
These meats heal in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and if one wants to sew the intestine with a fine thread which can be cut from the intestine of an animal, it should be done this way.
Take the end of this thread of intestine, which should be very clean, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together, then insert the thread into the needle, and pass it through the intestine, and draw it back up through the rupture.
And this manner of sewing together is not false but according to the way of trust and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the delicate intestines, there is no remedy nor cure but skill and expertise.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is complete and turns inward.
A fistula is truly an erroneous hard white knotting, where there is no pain felt, and it also looks like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes clear bowels, and other times dense. sometimes little, and other times enough.
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and lacks flesh, this is only due to one of nine reasons: that is to say, due to the scarcity of blood or flesh; or because of its wickedness; or due to the hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much bowel; Where the flesh is swollen, and the substance is of poor quality; where the medicine is not effective in treatment; where due to this, the corruption is like a form of pestilence; where due to the properties of the region, digestion is slow, health restoration is delayed, and it is swollen by nature; where there are wounds or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Now you must let me inform you of the treatment for a fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body; For there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the hip, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it reaches such that comes to the main member, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only hard work and ignorance involved;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have faith in its treatment, and you know how to identify it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, insert it;
and if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle thread of flax, because the flaxen thread bends to follow the twists and turns.
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot locate it precisely with threads, then cleanse and irrigate it through one of the apertures, for moisture travels from one aperture to another, cleaning and purging.
then examine it carefully to the best of your ability, determine if there are any bones or nerves present, and check if it is completely healed over, ask the patient about any pain they feel when you apply pressure with your hand, as well as its location.
and once you have accurately located its position, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the areas I mentioned earlier, treat it according to what I said, and remove any pus or corrupted flesh that may be inside.
and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is indeed deep in the right spot, you must remove it perfectly as much as possible. Then insert moist bandages soaked in healing medicines and push them inside the fistula so that the medicine corrodes any remaining superfluous matter at its base
and then apply healing ointments that promote healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it does not heal with this treatment, cauterize as we have explained earlier; and should the bone be affected by the fistula, remove it.
Should neither vein nor nerve constrict your principal limb as we have said earlier;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, leave it until all corruption is removed, then treat secondary infections with ointments until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, and sinks back as before, know that you have not reached the bottom of it.
If you uncover it and dig until you reach the depth, remove all corruption, then replace it in its place.
And if it is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach it. If there is another tool left by nature.
and if there is a small corrupted bone inside, and you can extract it with forceps, remove it using an appropriate instrument for this purpose; and if there are many bones, extract all of them, do not leave even one.
and if the moisture causes resistance, and there is no error or fear, cut through the moisture, flesh, and bone, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that encourages putrefaction to the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten all around the bones, then they will be easier to extract.
and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, wash away the putrefaction until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound.
and if a large part is corrupted, and it reaches down to the bone marrow; you must saw it and cut it all away until you reach the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to an internal issue, causing matter to gather and form an abscess, which swelled greatly but had no external cause for incision.
But the surgeons, in their foolishness, worked on it so much that they opened the abscess and removed a great deal of matter, which turned into a fistula, and many holes formed, all expelling foul-smelling moisture from the body.
and many doctors tried to cure him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the treatments he was undergoing, and what was passing through the large abscesses. and his body would turn red, with a yellowish complexion.
I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that each came toward the other from every part of the leg.
I hurried and cut into one of the abscesses until I exposed part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with decay reaching deep inside.
I removed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, hoping there was no further decay beyond what I extracted.
and I began to restore the wound with moistened medicines over a long time, but it could not heal.
and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the decay had spread into the bone and its marrow, and then I removed it, and tried to close the wound. but I could not do so before cutting around one palm's width of the bone, and its marrow was completely decayed, then I restored it with medicine. and it healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and my fear of his death. For the evacuation, he often bled excessively, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, hard tissue grew, which was well-formed, caused no harm whatsoever, and did not hinder him at all, either going or coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, one must treat it in this way: Take the ligament, and pull it to the head of the protruding bone, and instruct someone to lift it upwards. Attach another piece of linen thread that is thicker than the first ligament, and bind it over the flesh above the bone, stretch out the head, such that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to operate, so that the knife does not cut into the flesh.
Place hot iron or a board beneath the bone to press against the corrupted flesh in order to cut it away.
One must treat as much as one is able to see and feel the corruption, and then treat again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh.
Then place the hot iron underneath, and then cover it from one part to the other over the corruption, and let the poultice be as long as the length of the corruption with the iron, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and cover the bone on one side to the other.
And if the corruption is in the space between two joints, there is nothing else to cut out but this.
And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion and how it opens for you. and clean it in every way you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
know that there are many cutting instruments and threads to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this it is necessary to adapt each similar piece of work with its tool.
know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to your understanding of this art and the signs of different illnesses. therefore choose the tool you need according to what is required.
The joints can dislocate either internally or externally;
And when you have treated that inflammation with medicine through the treatment of wounds, and it does not improve, then you must cut off that limb up to the place where the corrosion begins so that the patient escapes death or the evil, which is greater, of losing a limb.
And the sign is that the limb turns black as if it has been burned by fire, and afterward it may turn purple, for this corrosion of a limb can spread from member to member and take over the whole body.
So do not delay in cutting it off, and if the corrosion is caused by the poison of certain venomous creatures such as the scorpion fish, snake, or similar, and it has started at the top of the arm, cut it there and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, treat the joint so that the decay does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, treat it with a knife;
and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there are no strong remedies except for those that match its power;
and do the same when decay appears in the foot: if it reaches the first joint, treat it after the other joint;
and if it appears in the foot, treat the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, treat at the knee joint;
And if it [the dislocation] comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
And the way to cut or sever the limb is that you bind it above and below, and have some ministers hold one binding down, and other ministers hold the other binding up, and you separate the flesh between the two bindings with a wide-bladed chisel, until the bone is exposed;
Then cut or sever it, and place a linen cloth on either side so that the wound does not touch healthy flesh, and prevent further injury and hot abscesses from forming in the patient.
And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the place immediately, or apply some clotting powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I shall tell you what happened to a man in his sleep:
He had a dark patch that resembled a burn from fire, and this corrosion started first in his big toe, spreading until it covered the entire foot.
When the man saw the corrosion, he immediately decided to amputate his foot, and was healed.
Long after, the corrosion returned to his finger on his hand, and he came to me. I applied resonant substances to it after cleansing his body, but the corruptions could not be stopped.
And he saw that I cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of curing the disease; And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of man was weak;
And he became desperate, returned to his land, took up an axe to cut off his hand, and was healed;
And I have not concealed it from you except so that one might do otherwise if need be.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh and remains so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus; Then it swells up and bursts open, ejecting the pus which leaves the place bare like a hollow vessel; and the skin above is as delicate as thin fabric, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve; such an illness is called a "shin," and it is not called a "fistula.
but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula";
and the skin is such that you must cut around this skin, especially when it is delicate, like a thin piece of fabric; and do not fear its corruption.
And if you are concerned that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it thus with a clyster:
Look if the breast is large, and the bowels emit a foul odour, then administer an Egyptian medicated enema made as follows: Take alum, oil, and litharge in equal parts, put them to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
Then take the amount you need of this medicine, mix it with water and honey, and administer an enema to the breast, holding the orifice closed. Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then extract it by smelling.
Repeat this procedure as many times as necessary until the breast is healed and the pus removed.
and sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take the ash from wood of vine, pour water over it, then let it drip through, and cleanse with it, as long as you know that the breast is well cleaned.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then cleanse them with water and honey where they have a little powdered litharge; or you cleanse them with honey and mixed wine, as the honey has properties to clean and wash, and the wine makes the blood rise.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well cleansed, then cleanse it with something that makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil and wine;
Where you can apply some medicine and ointments to it, of which I have already spoken about their properties in the chapter on ointments.
And if the hole in the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, then you should widen it a little with an iron instrument, and insert either a piece of Egyptian cloth or Basilicum ointment until it has been enlarged.
And if the wound is too wide, you should cut it and leave only a place where the clyster can enter; and if the hole that leaks is above, then cover it with something or put something in a lower position than it.
and if you cannot cut the vein as you wish, devise a way for the bowels to descend to their lowest point, because when the bowels are full, they prevent the entry of food; and if you cannot cut the vein as you wish, then devise it in such a manner... that the bowels gently move downwards, and do not leave any of the bowels there.
that the bowels gently move downwards, and do not leave any of the bowels there. and take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and stretch them over a linen cloth that covers the entire wound. then cut as deeply as necessary at the spot of the vein, making a hole wider than the first one, then spread soft ointment on another piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound to alleviate the bowels, and do not remove the large outer bandage for several days.
and he who is on the breast wound often removes it to remove the bowels, and examines that which flows from the bowels, whether it be poison or pus or something else, or if it is digestible or not.
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way that you see nature rising above the breast wound, then know that the breast already scars, and approach the recovery.
and then release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you free the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the dressing.
And if the subtle poison slowly diminishes over a long time, do not despair of recovery, for healing is near.
For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and those who do the opposite;
and if an indigest substance comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
and if the breast heals slowly and is remote, apply drying medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as definite ointment, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
take definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix in equal parts of old wine.
then melt it and apply it.
and this same treatment works better when thickened and cooked, if definite ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and sprinkle the powder over honey while it's still on the fire.
Then glue I a pad, and extend it over the breast, and sometimes administer a long astragalus root, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour made from vetch and centaury. and I use simple or compound medicines grind them, and make powder out of it, and put on the honey I mentioned before, then apply it.
and if the wound is elongated and does not heal with this treatment, know that the corruption has reached perfection, and it has penetrated into the bone or hard tissues. treat the wound as if it were a fistula, like we mentioned before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand, or the toenail, and sometimes appears in other places.
And when it becomes inflamed and is not treated promptly, an abscess develops, spreading pus that erodes the nail bed until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes even removing the entire nail.
It causes bone corrosion, leading to painful decay, the joint of the finger becomes wide and loose, and the flesh turns a bad colour.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is not beneficial, then you must cut away all that remains of the nail with an iron tool, then cauterise the wound afterwards. Cauterization is very effective treatment when the bone is healthy and the nail undamaged.
But if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick it, piercing and wounding it, you should place a probe underneath the nail at the point where it pierces the flesh, lift up the injured area of flesh gently, and remove any remaining tissue with sharp, corrosive medicines. Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it, and treat with force, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
And if you see the finger corrupted, cut it off just below the first knuckle as described earlier, then treat until it is healed.
And if it is pierced, and swells up, causing great pain, you must treat the wound first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp spoon-shaped tool, cutting across it, and be careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
Some men have very fleshy index fingers that may contain bone and sometimes even a nail; they can be born with growths at the root of their knuckles or anywhere on their fingers.
Those who are born on the right side of their head never move [their eyes], but those who are born at the junction of the eye may move it;
The stature of one who is fleshy is slight, in this way: Operate on him at the base of his spine with a wide spatule.
One who is born at the root of the jaw is difficult to cure: So you must operate with care.
For those born on the inside of the fingertip, you must first cut away the surrounding flesh down to the bone and then amputate the bone with a fine saw; treat the wound until it heals.
The injuries that cause two bones to come together can occur through birth, or by sudden wounding, burning from fire, or similar causes.
You should then operate on that suture so that the teeth are replaced according to their natural shapes; Then place between two tents or moistened cloth with rose oil, so they do not stick together. Or place between two soft planks until the colors are fused, as is necessary.
If a person has sutures in their palm, cut this suture as appropriate.
Veins are large open vessels filled with melancholy humours that arise in various parts of the body;
And they occur more frequently in the legs of those who walk on foot and work, carrying loads, more so than others.
You must therefore administer purging of bile to them at times, and then treat with basilicum.
The iron treatment is according to two methods: One is where they cauterize, draining the black blood; And the other method is that you lift the vein and draw all of its contents out.
The cutting [or surgery] goes as follows: Raise the first leg with very hot water until the large veins become thin and subtle. Then stretch out the patient's leg from above the thigh down to just below the knee joint.
Then cut the vein in an I-shape, or II-shape, or III-shape with a wide incision. Draw out and squeeze the dark blood into your hand, from one end to another until such time that sufficient blood has been evacuated according to the patient's needs.
And then bind it [the wound], and instruct the patient to abstain from meat for a while, eating black pudding instead.
And repeat the evacuation [of blood] and cauterization when the veins become full again, causing harm to the patient.
The healing of wounds follows this method: Trim the hair from the patient's leg if it is hairy, then place them in a bath, and bathe their leg with warm water until the skin turns red, and the veins swell.
And if you do not have access to a bath, heat it over the fire, and then rub directly onto the vein from below the knee down to the ankle.
Then work the skin with an unciner, and peel back the vein from either side until it is exposed where you can feel it.
And when the vein appears red and black, and as it enters the flesh, it looks like a white cord.
Then push the vein underneath until it is raised above the skin, and then draw it to the small knife, then cut it in another place further up by three fingers.
Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the small knife like you have done before, and draw it to another small knife, just as you did initially.
Then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift the skin and cut it with the toe of your foot, then draw and lift it until you reach the second small knife.
Then extract it from cut to cut until it is completely outside, then make the final cut.
And if you cannot draw and lift it out, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread through it, tie the ends together, insert it under the vein, turn your hand one way and other until it comes away. And make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull or lift it, which is harmful to the patient.
and when you have treated it entirely, place on the wound site damp wool soaked in wine and rose oil. treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it unevenly, but do not break it. and pull it as we mentioned before.
The shape of the iron with which one breaks the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not damage the vein.
and it is a large curved blade because if it were slender, it would rupture the vein but being thick as we have said and here is its form:
This vein is situated in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows and on land that has no moisture.
and at times it appears in other parts apart from the legs and this happens due to gangrene that develops under the skin just as serpents and worms develop inside the body, embedded between skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then its color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outwardly, just like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, you must wrap around it a piece of cloth that is 3.5 to 7 inches long, tie it and leave the cloth hanging from the leg, and every time it comes off, rewrap it with the cloth and retie it.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remaining hair around, and do not cut it at its root, so that it grows back completely. for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh, causing abscesses and rot in that place, resulting in a severe illness;
so that is why it must be treated quickly and completely, leaving nothing on the body;
and sometimes this wound can be as long as five palms or more, and a man came to me with a wound that was ten palms in length. When you cut it open, push one finger into the opening, and pierce it all the way through so everything comes out.
And empty the matter that is inside, and bring healing medicines to prevent rot one day, then treat it like abscesses.
And sometimes this wound is minor, especially when it appears at the ankle or foot joints where there is a lot of perforation and must be kept dry.
Treat it as we have said before.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh. This disease is called "ox disease" in our land because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from limb to limb until it tears the skin where it was and falls out.
and they are caused by a corruption of certain humours, just as maggots, worms, and intestinal parasites come into being in the belly.
and there is doubt about its nature, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye. and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, there is no way to prevent its spread except when it moves.
so it is necessary then that you bind the place above and below with a strong and tight bandage, then cut over it and drain it forcefully, and if the maggot has penetrated perfectly into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm it causes is when it runs into the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, firmly restrain your eyebrow underneath, then push up and pull it away.
and the patient should use cleansing body treatments with dissolving medicinal solutions to remove bad humours and rotten flesh.
From pain due to windiness. This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, it's a pain that comes to certain limbs and can move from limb to limb.
and I saw what I tell you. I was called to see an ill woman, who uncovered her arm for me revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and then soon after, you see it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it falls from above.
the pain departs from that place and lodges in the shoulder, then a little while later spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
then she told me that it would circle back around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed by how it moved from limb to limb because I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before. However, I had heard often that pain could move from one place to another, but I never believed it until I saw it in the woman.
And I thought that it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were exposed, and so this wind-like force appeared to be constrained.
And they do not follow this reasoning for those who are delicate, with moist bodies and open wounds.
When you treat this illness and the patient experiences such pain, if it presents as we have described, bind it above and below firmly, then cut into it until that windiness is forced back to its place. And cauterise the area.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it for what causes windiness, as bitter pills, and pills of serpent's flesh, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they pierce.
Their variations are such that some have large spikes, others small, some hairy, others smooth. And for those with two edges, and those with tongues, and for those which have parts.
and that which falls on any member does so in two ways: or it falls on principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls then on any place within these organs, and the sign of death that I will tell you about follows: you must take care with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many cases; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of a brain injury when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and lifts the covering membrane above the brain, is when there are scotomata (blind spots) and sudden pain in the eyes, and swelling and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and impaired reasoning, and vomiting bile; and perhaps it is without breath from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and white moisture oozes from the wound resembling pulsation, and there also comes out something like burnt flesh;
and if these signs appear to you, then attend to the cure, and extract the arrow if it is there.
The sign of an arrow when it hits the heart are: that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if lodged in a hard object, not empty. and perhaps the arrow moves with each pulse, and black blood flows out, bringing coldness and cold sweat, and syncope. you must then surely know that death is imminent.
And the sign that an arrowhead has not penetrated is if there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's colour changes, and they breathe heavily and seek cold air.
And if the arrow hits near the shoulder blade, it is close to the small ribs. it causes great pain and suffering and heavy sighing. and all the limbs of the shoulders become numb.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, perhaps something undigested may come out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls on the belly and no excrement comes out of the lower intestine, there is little hope for a cure or extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and flows out, and the patient feels intense pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, like the face, neck, throat, shoulder, arm, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, as well as similar limbs, are safe according to various positions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man, an arrow fell onto his arm at the root of the neck: I grasped it, and drew it out from beneath the ear's fatty tissue, and he was healed without complication.
And in another case, I extracted an arrow that had lodged in the eye's fatty tissue beneath the conjunctiva; the arrowhead was missing, and only its tip could be felt towards the shaft. The arrow was large, made entirely of light iron without barbs.
The game was healed, and no misfortune befell it.
And draw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I removed the barbs, and worked carefully until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And draw an arrow from the man, which was lodged in his thigh or belly, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days, there was no change in his condition; I cut around the arrow, engineered it, and drew it out, and he had no ill effects.
And if you see a man with an arrow having fallen to his back or side, and the wound is closed over.
and if the arrow remains inside him, and it does not alter his natural functions, nor does it cause any harm to any of his natural actions.
And if you see another man, with an arrow having fallen to his face, and the wound is closed over; and it remains there without causing him great pain;
and many similar things.
And draw an arrow from the king's face, which was stuck in his nose and was slightly leaning to the right side. And the arrow was completely buried.
I was called for treatment after it had been cut three days ago. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I probed it with great care, but did not feel anything. And he felt pain and pressure beneath his right ear.
I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow, so I applied an attractive and digestive poultice there to prevent the flesh from swelling. And the flesh around the arrow appeared swollen.
And the flesh around the arrow appeared swollen. I left the poultice there for two days, and this resolved the wound initially, but then the patient suffered long-term effects until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose.
And he told me this. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound by hand during daytime, while it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow move towards its place.
Then I adjusted the arrow's position in the wound using that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me.
And it took around four months for the tissues to heal completely. Then I widened the wound and inserted pliers into it, and moved them from side to side, but the arrow could not be extracted.
So I did not stop experimenting and devising different instrument techniques until one day I took the pliers, which were well-made according to what is described at the end of this chapter, and with them, I gripped the arrow and restored the wound.
And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I then restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you focus your attention on what I do not say, because a book cannot cover everything.
But wise masters build upon very little, and on what is presented to them they find new methods and new tools for the treatment of strange occurrences in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the members in which they are stuck for two reasons: Where by low place where they enter, or from another part;
And that which jumps from where it enters, is an arrow embedded in the flesh, and sometimes now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and ease its exit.
And also if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot be removed, leave it thus for a few days, and move it every day.
And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around with a fine awl until the flesh around is enlarged, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body so that it cannot be seen but we feel its presence then seek it all over. And if you feel it, draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
And if you cannot remove it due to the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, then make an incision so that the wound becomes larger;
And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is attached to it on both sides as much as possible, then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead until you can pull it out;
Do this carefully so that you do not break the arrowhead, as it would be more difficult to remove if broken.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissue is rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction will be easier. And if the loss of blood troubles you, perform as we have said regarding treatment in its chapter;
watch out for the incision of the nerve and the vein, and use a device as you can extract the arrow without danger, either soon or later, firmly or gently;
place the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help available, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
An arrow that comes from another place, or where nothing appears to come out of it, or the skin is swollen in that area if you can see or feel it obviously:
Cut above then, until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it: If you jump now.
And if it is retained within the bone, rotate your hand circularly until you enter into the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it there for now, then resume extraction until it has emerged;
and if the arrow is in there, push against the whole shaft;
and if it is broken off, and you wish to administer pushing, use a tapered instrument so that the point of the arrow enters the hollow of the instrument;
then push it in, and if the arrow is tapered, insert the instrument point first to aid extraction.
If the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all of the flesh around it if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls on the foot or thigh or stomach or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cut above it, then cut.
Be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and finally suture the wound if necessary. And treat [the wound] until it is clean.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form [shape]:
There are many ways to do this. Large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the driving instrument is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as here [the figure] shows its form.
There are thirty-one veins which we heal from, sixteen of them are in the head, to wit: Two veins that are located behind the ears, which are called "herbech". and the two arteries that are visible in the temples. and two veins that are located in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires". and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead. and the vein that is at the back of the nose. and the two goitres that are on the neck. and the two veins that are located above the upper lip of the mouth, which are called "augeherich". and two veins which are below the tongue.
The veins that are commonly treated are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which comes from the left side of the chest, and people call it "the head vein. and the median is called "fast," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, which people call the "heart vein. and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and people call it the "belly vein," and it lies above the muscle, and it is the one that is treated, as it appears clearly on the forearm.
The salve is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
In the leg and foot there are three veins: One is located on the underside of the arch of the left foot, and the second one is at the ankle joint on the right side. And the vein that is called "nerve", which is located at the ankle on the other side.
And in the other leg there are three veins underneath these ones.
The bleeding of the veins located behind the ears helps with chronic colds and headaches.
and the qualities of the bleeding, as I tell you, is that you lift the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a cloth, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head; feel them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there;
then take the lancet and push it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole length of the vein, cutting through both skin and vein with two fingers, and let out blood until you see fit;
Strain it and tie it tightly until it is clean.
And I have already spoken about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Bleeding the two arteries located in the temples is beneficial for treating chronic and severe migraine, persistent ophthalmia, and excessive tearing from the eyes.
The qualities of a good bleeder are as I have described: When the patient grasps their neck tightly, you will notice that both veins are clearly visible. And if you feel numbness below your finger, proceed with bleeding above it.
Raise the heart up to the vein above your index finger, insert the lancet below it, lift the vein upwards and scrape it, just as you did with the other two veins, then let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the patient, and place your finger on the wound for an hour, then apply cotton. And then form a bandage over it, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have previously discussed the cauterization process, as well as bloodletting and its extraction, which was mentioned at the beginning of this book.
The bloodletting from the vein on the forehead is just as effective as bleeding from the temporal artery for ailments of the face, such as old age symptoms, headaches, and redness.
Its quality is such that the patient twists their neck rigidly until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "the fossor," whose form is as follows:
And place the point over the vein, press it with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the quantity you desire. Then release the patient's collarbone, and bind the wound so that it is tight but not too constricted, leaving some room for air to pass through occasionally.
However, the bandage should not be too tight or sharp-edged. Bind it diagonally, for the bone is close to the surface, and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin or delicate.
The draining of the two veins located in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, itching within the eye, and conditions affecting the face.
And the quality of their healing is such that patients must strain their necks by twisting with a cord, as before.
Then treat the wound, and let the healing go through transversely, a little of the long side of the flame and a bit wider, for there is no flesh there. And if the flames are subtle, they may break by chance;
Then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, binding it well.
The healing of the vein in the nose is good for fever, and sudden headaches, and illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is chronic.
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient tightens their neck, then pull your nose to your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily there, and blood will now begin to flow.
do not go too deep, and allow the blood to flow according to your need, then bandage it for a night, as it heals rather quickly;
The vein of the two temples aids in narrowing the forehead, and at the beginning of mascle-making, and for many diseases, impetigo, corrosion, herpes, and erysipelas;
And the nature of the bleeding is such that the patient should strangle their neck between two points, as we have said.
And let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a seat. Then open the vein of the arm widely for a short length, then draw blood temperately as much as needed.
Then repeat the same process on the other arm, then untie the ligature, and hold all veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle. And leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed.
The bloodletting of the lips, The draining of veins above the lips aids in healing mouth sores, gum disease, cracked lips, and their surroundings.
And the nature of bloodletting is to have the patient sit in front of you, holding their neck as I've said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by having small black veins surrounding them.
Treat both of them, and if you do not recognize them, or are in doubt, treat the larger one on each side; also treat all of the two veins that are above and below, as it is the same procedure.
On bleeding below the tongue: The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue aids after the bleeding of the carotid artery, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the eye, and ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of the bleeder should be that the patient sits between your hands towards the sun, and they lift their tongue, and look beneath on each side for a black vein.
Heal both of them then, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that we commonly heal are healed according to two methods:
or by piercing with a very hot iron, or with an olive-oil based stylet so sharp it cuts like a knife, and this is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of St Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so broad as you see.
It is necessary to open the narrow veins that are full of clotted blood, and contain thick and cloudy blood; and this is the form of the olive-oil stylet:
and it is more pointed, slender, and for bleeding delicate veins or when there is delicate yellow blood.
The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in treating illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, chest, and belly.
And it is necessary for the healer to bleed carefully, taking care of the artery beneath. If he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be stopped, as I have said. And the flame should not be compressed but cut like a sinew.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, you must draw it out and change to another. Or if you want any vein from it, or you bleed in its place the vein between the arms. She clearly shows; And the cap on the wound heals slowly, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the wound, you must first extend the arm and feel the area until you find the pulse. Then mark the spot with a sign, bind the arm, and treat the slow-healing wound. Be careful not to cut the artery when you see the spot swollen, for that is indeed an artery. Avoid it then.
And if you see it rise up like a child's urine, and the blood is bright red and thin, know that it is arterial blood. Hurry then, and place your finger on it for a while, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. If his arm is immobilized, let it be so, and do not move the patient's arm.
And let him be afraid, and do not move it until he is healed.
And if the bleeding is not stopped and it overpowers you, and medical help is not present, then sever the artery if it is exposed, for this will stop the flow. And stop the bleeding.
Take a piece of fig bark, split it, and take one half, tying it securely until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop the bleeding.
And the stoppage of bleeding is not always helpful in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligaments.
The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said.
The surgeon must be careful not to cut too deeply below, as they may hit the nerve and cause it to swell, making treatment difficult, if not impossible.
and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some men due to its delicacy, you must treat it with a thin instrument. remove the nerve from your power (reach).
And if there is a wound between the two nerves, make it longer with a cut.
The treatment of the cephalic nerve provides relief, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
And it is necessary to treat by making an incision with the olive-shaped blade or the myrtle-shaped blade, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries underneath. However, one should seek the lightest spot, and if one errs the first time, do not be distressed, just begin again. And perhaps some men's joints swell when dislocated for the first time, but it causes no serious harm.
The quality of bleeding depends on your judgment.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is only undertaken to preserve health and avoid future illness.
And bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins, which are located on the arm. These are known as the cephalic, superficial, and basilic veins. You must bloodlet at the beginning of spring and autumn before eating when signs of fullness are apparent.
It is recommended to bloodlet either on the first or third day after two or three hours of the day.
The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no determined time, but when needed, it can be done at any hour or night, during all hours and at any time.
And it is not appropriate to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child except for the fourth month up until the seventh month. They ought not to bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in any case, they should first cleanse their intestines with a light enema if there is an excess of retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful and excessive waste from the intestines into the main organs.
One should not be bled if they are overly full of meat, drunk, until the effect passes, or suffering from dropsy.
and if one worsens after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent intercourse with women, laboring, staying awake, fasting, and any other cause that exhausts all strength or power whether due to weaponry or the body;
then purify the humours gently if the blood is thick through diet and beverages and with medicine if you have that power;
then enter the bath if nothing opposes it to purify the blood and heal yourself from the wound in the navel area as we have said;
and guard yourself that day against labor, fasting, lustful acts, and similar things;
and lie down and be joyful, have the one being healed raised higher than you, and rub their arm two or three times then tighten the bandage moderately because if it is too tight or slack blood cannot flow;
And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
Then moisten the incisions with a bit of old oil, then place your left index finger on that vein below the area where you want to incision, so the vein doesn't escape and miss when cut.
For there are veins that escape like ropes when cut, and others that are full of windiness, such that when the flame is applied, it retracts from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and so it is with these. And if one opens the vein, it may be too narrow a wound, therefore cauterizers must be aware of these things.
And if the wound bleeds for the first time, it is good. If not, try again slightly below that place or above it, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient becomes afraid, leave it for one or two days, do not bind their arm. Perhaps there will be hot abscesses coming on.
Do not go into the bath, then reopen the wound if it pleases them.
And if the opening is small, or blood flows out subtly and you doubt that it will not be enough for your purpose, then direct all the flame straight into that same opening.
and work quickly, rather than waiting for it to swell; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and put a little olive oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is helpful in this situation as oil is akin to grease.
and thus administer the olive oil ointment to each wound you treat in order to staunch the flow of blood.
and this same effect is created by triacle and bile when applied to the wound. so subtly does it separate the blood when it has grown too large.
And if it turns into a large abscess, which often happens, especially when bloodletting has not been done recently or the opening of the vein is small, then you should hurry and apply a moist sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the site, compressing it for an hour.
and afterwards you must do this after the blood has been let from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness appearing, then it does no harm. and if you see anything black or green appearing there, apply something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with galbanum juice, or something similar.
And often there is abscess and appearance of an aperture at the base of the skull:
Put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this is a bad sign. Avoid that you put pressure on any part of what we have mentioned, for perhaps it pierces the artery.
But apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the colour of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it exit until it becomes red. And if you see that it is large, leave it alone until it becomes thin. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for him who is full and strong, and requires bloodletting, that a wider wound be made for him, and the flames [of the cauterization] should be broad.
And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it is appropriate to bloodlet often and in small amounts, and one must bloodlet by making a cross-wise cut, not a straight one.
And this manner of bloodletting is safe from excessive loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is better than long or broad bloodletting.
And for him whose body is weak after bloodletting, it is appropriate to give him moist bread in the juice of pomegranates. If he is overheated, draw three or four times [worth of blood] from him; and if he is of a cold complexion, give him beforehand moist bread in muscatel syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory root, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during the treatment, after the loss of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks meat broth, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wishes to draw out the arm, and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength.
And for those who wish to draw out the arm after the first bleeding, and have a strong body, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And for those who wish to be bled elsewhere, they should be bled on the second or third day.
For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and causes fever. If it requires extracting a large quantity, and enlarging the opening until it yields with compression; Then you restore all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, lest death come in place of compression, and this happens many times when the healers are negligent.
And it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and extract blood a second time, while the opening is closed, for you to press heavily upon it. Unless it is crooked, have him extend the arm gently, as this would be harmful otherwise.
But leave it until it heals a second time; Where you pierce it with the tip of flame, until the blood that has frozen exits from the wound, and place upon it some lint soaked in water, pressing lightly.
And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it drain from the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein between the arm is drained in place of the vein of the head because it is composite.
And the method of the cautery is such that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the nails are red;
Then be bound lightly so that the vein appears clearly, then cauterize it now across its width, neither too broad nor too narrow.
And if the wound is large, cauterize it close to where the hand joins the arm, and if blood cannot escape, return the hand to hot water, allowing blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is summer, do not bathe the hand in warm water, as it should be done more often in winter than in summer.
And the bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, as it does not involve an artery or nerve.
The bleeding from the vein on the right side of the hand is beneficial for all liver ailments, and this is how it should be done:
Immerse the hand in warm water until the vein swells up so it becomes visible. And if the bleeding is transverse, and you cut it entirely from end to end, it will not cause any harm.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are underneath, completely bare of flesh; then immerse the hand in warm water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot escape.
Once you have extracted as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and lint to the vein in order to seal it; do this for every wound.
The bleeding of the left arm's veins is beneficial for all spleen diseases; do this in the same way as I told you to do on the right side.
The bleeding of the saphenous vein is valuable for all diseases below the body, such as illnesses of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments of the thighs and legs.
And the qualities of this medicine are such that the patient puts his foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it breaks up, then binds it above the ankle. And this vein is located at the ankle, and from there it ascends up the leg in many branches.
Treat therefore the largest branch, which is at the ankle, for it moves better.
And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves which are underneath, and treat it across just as when cutting.
And let the flame be gentle.
And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to the water and allow the vein to be thoroughly emptied.
And if it fails to cauterize the first time, repeat the process a second time slightly above, for the area is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and treat the other foot similarly.
The skin of the sciatic vein is at the back of the ankle, and its evacuation serves to relieve hip pain when caused by hot blood.
The quality of the cauterization is such that the patient should enter a bath and compress above the ankle for four days with twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open.
And if it does open, cauterize thoroughly in all possible ways, crossing the skin. And it is better to cut it, for the area is dry, and many men are sensitive there.
And it is better to cut it, for the area is dry, and many men are sensitive there. And if you do not find it [the bone], look for a line on the foot's back or toward the little toe and be careful of the nerves.
Remove the blood until you see it flowing out, then untie the ligature and apply cotton compresses to hold it in place. It is now healed.
Cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass.
And cupping is done according to two methods. Either by drawing blood or without making an incision.
And this method of dry cupping is also done according to two methods. Where there is complete fire, or without fire;
and venting, which is done by striking and extracting blood and is carried out in fourteen places of the body, some being entirely in the head. and others are in the neck. And two more at both sides of the neck. and the cupping glass below the chin. And the cupping glasses at both shoulders. and the cupping glass on the hips. And the cupping glasses at both arms. And the cupping glasses for both legs; And the cupping glasses for both ankles;
And the cupping does not draw any blood, only small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and it will not weaken you at all, as is done with vein-letting; And it must not be administered, nor with fire or hot iron, in any illness that arises from overindulgence, until the body is completely emptied.
And if by necessity of illness we must use cupping, or for habit, then administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and in between during each season;
For there are some who, when they need to have cupping performed, have such a heavy head;
and with such [people] who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness around the eyes;
and such [people] who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit up blood; and there are such [people] who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially during the middle of the month, we instruct them to cup themselves after three hours in the day.
The bleeding of the nostril helps with the cracking noise from the head... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body [humours];
and this venting is in place of the phlebotomy of the cerebral vein, and one must not allow those with a cold constitution to use it, or those who have catarrh, as it does them great harm;
and for this reason, the elderly must not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their head.
And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetting.
The venting in the neck is in place of the phlebotomy of the head and the basilica vein, and for this reason, it helps with narrowing of the chest, and fissures in the channel of the lung, and coughing, and fullness.
and it should be done gently, for if it is too tight, it may cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart problems.
The ventouses on the two collarbones are useful for headaches, eye inflammation, and migraines, as well as suffocation, tooth root pain, and it is located at the place of the basilic vein.
And you must instruct the patient to extend their hand for measurement, taking care not to cut the artery and avoid excessive bleeding.
The ventouses below the chin are useful for oral diseases, such as gum infections, and similar mouth ailments; And it is located at the place of the veins of the two lips.
The swellings of the shoulders are attributed to ailments caused by heat and fullness.
The ventouses on the elbows are just as effective as the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
And instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the flesh is bare of muscle, and beneath lie nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the anus and diseases below it. The cupping glass should be large and made of brass, as it needs to draw well; And perhaps, if it were too thin, it would break; And it makes large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal visibly, for they draw blood from all over the body and are beneficial for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and relieve inflammation;
And they are located at the two sophens (joints) and the two ankles, yet over time they weaken the body, and cause fainting in many conditions.
The way to apply the cup is as follows: first place it on an empty area, suck quickly, and then press down firmly. Move it evenly and do not stop until you see the skin turn red and swollen, revealing the redness of the blood beneath.
Then lance (make an incision), and replace the cups. Take care with different body compositions, for some have thick flesh, while others have delicate skin. It is necessary to wound only once, creating large openings and deep holes. And suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice. The first time to thin out the path of thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time.
And when we want to draw out thick and thin blood, we only stop once. And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart.
And if the blood is thick, strike it thoroughly, and finish by piercing the heart suddenly; it is necessary for those with thick skin and hard, narrow veins that you oil their cups with an aperitive and dissolutive substance. if it is made with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is for the eyes, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balsam-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
And if the patient has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it must be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry juice, or pumpkin water, or china root water, or something similar.
And for those with much moisture, it rises easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
And for those with excessive swelling, they should be raised using old wine, or juice of spinach, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or something similar.
and one should not bleed with cups either before or during the bath but an hour or two after it.
and they should not sleep after cupping; it is necessary that he sit up both when the cups are to be applied and while being cupped.
And beware if the one who is healing is choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed; he must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce in moderation, and similar items; and eat little meat, and pork from castrated animals, and moist meats.
and eat little meat, and pork from castrated animals, and moist meats. And for those with a cold constitution, take honey syrup, and medium-aged wine that is neither old nor new, eat little, few meats, small birds, and pigeons.
and on the day he cups himself, he must drink more than eat.
and it is fitting to give some men treacle or musk once before cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be refined, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
The cups that are placed without injury are those put over the liver, and over the breast, gout, abdomen, buttocks, kidneys, and hip, because these limbs cannot bear injury on their skin, and one should not force it except to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do on breasts when a child is nursing;
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cups on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the size of the limb;
and it removes pain when there is gravel or stone, as it extracts by its attractive virtue perhaps the gravel, or empties the stone from its place;
and so it does when applied over the liver and spleen in cases of retained flatulence, and these cups are administered empty to suck only. and sometimes they are administered with fire, and at other times filled with tepid water, as in cases of pleurisy, and the cup is filled in this manner with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And it has two thumbs in width and half a palm in depth, and on its side towards the middle there is a small hole, just enough to insert a needle, and it should be made of copper, soft so as not to injure the patient when applied to the limb.
and it has in the middle a bar of copper or iron across which to place a burning candle, and they come in various sizes, both large and small, according to the ailments and the constitution of those who use them.
For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people from those of fat ones.
And thus you must apply this cupping glass to the limb:
Take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass through the hole that is in the middle of the glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass and does not burn the patient;
Then place it on the limb, and keep your hands over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can release the vapour, and remove the cupping glass.
And take the linen again as before, and repeat this often if needed.
In the cupping glass used for treating pleurisy, there is no handle or opening and it is applied only when full of water, being placed solely on the affected limb.
and its shape is:
Suction cups are not applied except to limbs where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. and on the exposed flesh of the body, such as cheeks or eyelids, and similar places.
The quality of the suction cups is such that when you find those filled with clean water without sediment, take them.
and place them in lukewarm water for one night until they become soft, ensuring they have no contents in their stomachs. then proceed with bleeding by opening the vein and using cupping therapy, then massage the limb until it turns red, and apply the poultices.
and when they are full and fall off (the poultices), if it is where cupping can be applied, then apply the cupping therapy, for this helps greatly afterward.
If not, cleanse the area with oil, then water, very well, and afterward dry it.
and if the area bleeds too much after removing the poultices, dampen a linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
and if the blood is multiplied, apply crushed vitriol on warts or similar things, until it subsides.
where you place half of a peeled broad bean, leaving it until it dries up on the spot, so that now it will staunch.
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches do not want to attach themselves, rub the spot of fresh blood or prick it with a needle until some blood flows out and then put them on, as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
and when you see that they are defecating, apply a powder of fresh aloe and flax seed or ashes on them, so they will now detach.
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent;
And for this reason knowledge is strange to our land, as I have never found any good ones.
And I know nothing of it, except for the knowledge from ancient books where I have studied so much that I can treat this science through experience and by habit.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained herein and abridged it at the end, clearly showing the forms of instruments used as I did in these two chapters before this one.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains true to reality, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs in someone, you must hurry to bleed the patient from one side and another if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or old age. Ou si le temps n'est pas trs chaud, ou trop froid;
Et mange des choses froides, comme des salades, du fromage et du chevreuil, et ne bois pas de vin, ni ne mange aucune viande grasse, et ne t'emplisse pas trop de viandes qui remplissent les veines de sang, tant que tu n'as pas peur d'une infection chaude, ou d'un coulement de matire dans le membre;
Si revient le malade  son premier rgime qu'il avait suivi.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, one should nourish the patient with meats that produce thick nourishment and viscosity, such as wheat boiled in water, rice, testicles, feet, calf stomachs, eggs, fresh fish, red wine, and similar things. Because with too much nourishment, the bones grow quickly and the fracture is more likely to occur again.
Et sachez que les os briss des vieillards et des dcrpits ne peuvent pas tre rpars ni souds correctement selon leur nature  cause du desschement des membres, tout comme ceux qui sont trop tendres, tels que les os d'enfants en bas ge;
but have no care, reunite above the broken bone with thick tendons that bind and join the member together, so that it enforces as it was before; and do not at all leave him from his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with substantial meat, as we have said.
And know that dislocations are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways fractures can occur. As there is fracture that goes into splinters, and another in sharpening, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing.
As there is fracture that goes into splinters, and another in sharpening, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing. And if there is fracture with an open wound, or fracture with just a small crack.
And to each manner have its own tool, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place.
and the bone's breakage is known through this, that its place is twisted and clearly appears from outside, and it sounds hollow when pressed by hand.
and when there is no twisting nor hollow sound upon touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is certainly no breakage.
But it can indeed have tortuosity, or a crack, or a small fracture. You must not move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that follow here, then hold it firmly and carefully.
And know that the fracture that goes lengthwise, and its two parts are disjoined, it is now necessary to align them evenly, otherwise hot abscesses will arise.
and if hot abscesses come about, leave them for a day until the abscess is eased.
then align it equally to the muscles that you can feel lightly and gently, and know that its restoration is easier than for those with fragments.
then restrain it as must be done afterwards.
And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, then stretch it into two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or use one rope for a small limb, or two ropes for a larger member.
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you bring them together and reposition all the additions in their places as much as you can, and make sure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust the two ends of the bones well according to their best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if it heals well, do not restrain it too much or press upon it as some do who cause through their work hot abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, you must instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, or in turning over, or any other way. And ensure that the limb is secured so firmly that there is no sensation of pain. For when there is no pain felt, it is not yet ready, and one must place it in such a position that there is no pain felt.
And ensure that the limb is secured so firmly that there is no sensation of pain. For when there is no pain felt, it is not yet ready, and one must place it in such a position that there is no pain felt. And take care to ensure that it is correctly aligned so that no crookedness comes about once it is restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
For there are small limbs such as arms and fingers and similar ones. One must wrap them in soft, fine linen cloths. and those who are overweight, like thighs and legs:
you should wrap it with a wide and firm bandage, as the broad bands embrace the entire large limb, constricting it evenly from all sides so that there is no pressure.
then bind it with light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage, then go above the fracture and loosen it a bit so that the fracture can move away.
and loosen the bandage little by little until you ease much of the healthy part, then take another bandage and bind it again on top of the broken area.
Then return to the area below the break, and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first line above;
Then place between the limbs linen swabs or soft cloth, so that they are all even, then bind it all with bandages above, and then put on your well-made splints, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, apply something to soothe the heat of the abscess, and reduce the swelling, leaving it like this for a few days;
Then place your splints above, and let them be half the width of a flexible cane that has been cut open, or of the wood used to make shingles, or of palm ribs, and let them be shaped like this:
But it is necessary that the star which one places on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others.
and also as long as is appropriate for the limb, whether small or large. then bind on top of the stars just like you did with the first dressing, then tie above it a thread appropriately, as in the first dressing for the fracture. narrower on top, wider below
and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen in the work of some fools who make their dressings with twisted flax cords, this is a great mistake, because the dressing cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have more than two finger-widths between each star.
And if the patient is injured by the head of the shoulder after its restriction in their arm, place beneath it pads made of linen or woolen cloth so that they do not wound themselves.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its cure afterward.
And know that it is not necessary to reset all dislocated limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, one must not insert splints sooner than after 5 days or 7, or more according to your confidence in abscess occurring suddenly.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
And take some flour that is found on the mill walls, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of plastering to restore fracture in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting: Pren saupoudrez d'abrs et de ladanier, ajoutez l'inule et de l'asaftida; incorporez de la gomme arabique et du muguet, pour un total de 10 mesures. Mlangez de la myrrhe et de l'alos, pour un total de cinq mesures. Ajoutez huit mesures d'ail. Moudre le tout pour faire une poudre et mlanger avec un blanc d'uf. If the patient's constitution is warm, this plaster can be used as it has a good composition and helps to restore broken bones rapidly for many people.
Another type of plaster that is beneficial for sprains: Take mugwort and viscous mallow, take ten and three. Myrrh and aloe, take nine and three; Wild mint, take six and three; Armeniaca powder ten and three; grind it well and mix with water or egg white, then administer it.
Another plaster for joints and dislocated bones to relieve pain, ease swelling, reduce bone rubbing, and treat fractures. Take new wool, boil it in water and oil, then apply to the affected area.
These plasters do not restore the joint or bone to its place, but are good for cooling hot abscesses and properly easing the pain.
Another plaster for setting broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, earth pepper leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another type of poultice for bone fracture repair and to reduce swelling caused by abscesses. Take roots of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violet blossoms, flour of beans, one part each.
Grind them together, mix with wine; if the limb is hot, add moist coriander water or plain water and apply.
Another poultice method stronger than the first when an abscess has formed in limb repair. Take marshmallow roots, flax seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, valerian root, and violet and chamomile blossoms, one part each. Grind together and mix with salt water, fresh water or wine depending on the limb's heat and rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil, nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen suggests that one should apply dry things slightly warm to the broken limb in order to heal it, such as myrrh, aloe, incense and similar items, as we have mentioned before.
Another type of plaster useful for injuries and pain: Take mugwort and chopped human hair or bird feathers, viscous plant sap, and equal parts leather, grind them all together, make a plaster and let it set.
Then you let it loosen a little after, making sure the patient feels no pain nor has the bone moved out of place. If not loosened by hand outdoors. And if pain returns to the spot or itching, with rest or swelling, act fast and loosen it, removing the plaster at once.
Take light cloth, moist marine sponge, dip it in water and apply to the spot until itching stops and pain is soothed. Then leave the limb to rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it onto a nut until you are certain of an abscess heat.
It will rest the inflammation of the limb, and the pain shall be relieved, then resume the gentle binding, with a little plaster, but do not bind it so tightly as before. And gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has softened and turned red, causing pain and swelling which have all been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, restart it as equally as before.
And if there is no improvement in the limb as we have described, then do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days. And never release it for twenty days, as we have observed, until the broken part has healed, and approaches proper alignment.
Then hold him more firmly than before, and thicken his flesh, as I have said previously;
And if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach it; Bathe it therefore in warm water every time you reset it, and do this every third day, and ease the tension a little;
Through this treatment, nourishment is restored to the limb, and corrects the deformity caused by those foolish surgeons who set it crookedly:
It is evil, and such work is frightening, and I see no other way but to leave it be and treat it properly.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;
For it has breaks caused by sword impacts, and the shaft removes all the bone down to the marrow that lies beneath the bone, just as an axe or a pole does. And for this reason, this type of break is called "axe fracture.
Where the sword cuts through the bone without penetrating, and this type of break is called "absolute fracture.
And these two types of breaks cause large or small wounds.
And if there is an embedded impact, or splitting, like from a stone or spearhead, or falling on stones, or similar.
And if there is a penetrating fracture that reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that is as fine as a hair embedded in the bone, with a small fissure, this break is called "capillary fracture.
and if the wound is caused by a blow from a stone or by falling or similar, and it drives a fragment of bone into the cavity below, and the skin edges gape like those of a cauldrons when the tinsmith beats upon them. if it drives stone within.
And this occurs more often in those with moist bones underneath the skin, such as children's heads;
and it occurs in all these manners of fracture that small fragments become separated, like stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures through their displacement, and examination by touch, and through the corrupted flesh on top of them.
The appearance of the hair is understood by this: when you uncover the bone and rub it, the black fracture opens up.
In treating the fracture, take care of the patient's accidents and symptoms, and if you see no ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, dizziness, fainting, feverishness, eyes turning pale and reddening, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no dreadful accident and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, during winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue beneath the bone become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the affected part thus.
And you must take the patient's head and expose the bone in every way possible, revealing the wound as gently as you can, and if there is any bleeding from uncovering the bone or an abscess forms, then provide aid accordingly, for you should fill this place with cloth moistened in rose oil. Let it rest until the hot abscess is relieved, ensuring there is no more bleeding. Then begin removing it from the bone, this is done in two ways of work:
One way is to make an incision narrow in front, and this has the following form:
And then he makes another incision larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have several different kinds of knives, some narrow and others broad, they should be pointed, and made entirely of iron.
and work lightly so that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and solid, you must drill into it instead, rather than using knives and chisels, do not pierce through to the brain, there should be a rim or circle on top of the point, so that the tip does not pass beyond the skull.
and you will need several of these, so that each one fits into its place according to the type of bone, and you should have chisels for the entire skull.
And this is the form of the three types of arrowheads:
The way to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one arrowhead on top of the bone, and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced;
Then move the arrowhead elsewhere slightly afterwards, and do this all around, then use cutters to remove the space of bone between the perforations, doing so as finely and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone by hand or with any tools you have such as pincers or pliers;
And be careful not to touch the brain nor the soft parts.
When you have pierced the bone and extracted it, you must clean the cavity left by the bone with any other similar instrument like an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than any other incisor.
And if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of your instruments; Then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, it is more safe. Strike [the bone] hard, for this is his advice. You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lenticular chisel, which has such a form:
And do not cut it on one side only when the other is already acute to the bone.
Then strike gently with a small mallet above it so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be well aware of the membrane underneath.
If it is adhering to the bone, remove it gently, for one removes it easily without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut above, with small pieces remaining, you must smooth this roughness, and remove the splinters with a fine rasp, of which you should have various sizes, to accommodate each place appropriately, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is smooth.
In each of the other hair-trimming incisions or delicate breaks, you must adjust accordingly according to its direction.
And this is something not given in detail by him who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, dip it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of cloth doubled over twice or thrice, and dampen it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this as lightly as you can, so as not to harm the wound, then apply another bandage on top, but do not tighten it too much, only enough to hold the wound in place.
Leave it like this for one or two days, until the hot abscess is cooled, then untie it and apply medicated poultices such as lily root, oat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar remedies.
Make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, then treat with gentle medicated poultices without any harsh binding or pressure.
and make sure the wound is always clean, so as not to leave ointment there or allow pus to accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the brain membrane, it will flow out and cause great harm to the patient;
for when one applies corrosive substances onto it, they will corrode from above. Take heed therefore, if any mishap occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackening occurs solely due to the medicine that has been applied there, and this medicine has such a property, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix it into a paste, and apply this onto the wound. then treat it in the manner of treatments that is appropriate until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or just one, for there are two bones.
The upper one is cartilaginous and does not break but only bends or twists, then it heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril and place the broken piece evenly under your index finger, pushing from the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently, and wait for the patient not to feel pain from your treatment.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the bones cannot be brought back to their place, you must set it equal with the head of a nail slightly thicker.
And if the break is in two pieces, repeat this process, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess is calmed, then put a tent of fine linen cloth on the head of the nose if the fracture is in one place.
Where you apply another elsewhere if there is a fracture. And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
And some restorers say that one should wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day. I do not think it is good, but they must be moistened with a mixture of raw egg white and flour. Then leave the tent in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes goose quills are used in place of tents and a soft cloth is wrapped around them. If the fracture is held in place and the patient breathes into it, it helps the healing process. Frolick whatever you want.
And if abscesses form at the nose while you are working on it, apply some softened wax or cotton moistened with rose oil, or put a bit of quicklime there.
And if abscesses don't form there, apply a plaster from the outside, made of bran flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light cotton wool on top, but do not tie it too tightly.
If the bone fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut open the wound, treat the surrounding flesh by cleaning and suturing it, sealing and dressing it with plasters and ointments suitable for such an injury.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with tenting, and insert splints of plum wood until it heals.
When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside, not broken into two, nor bent inward, it can be identified gently.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth. And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger, and push the fracture gently from inside, shape it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is divided into two, you must administer an extension of both parts until it is aligned.
And if there are disturbances or ruptures of the teeth, secure them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a double bandage. Cover the bandage with a well-made large splint or an equal-sized piece of leather that is long and wide according to the jawbone's length, secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
And if you see that the alignment changes, dislocate it on the third day, then reset to what has changed. And apply a plaster on top, made with mill powder and an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the scabs.
And put a light woolen plaster on top, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed. Many times is healed in three weeks.
And if a warm abscess appears, apply what we have mentioned many times before.
And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, first ensure that no part of the bone has been removed. So subtly to remove the instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and no more remain, cleanse the wound if it is wide; apply appropriate dressings to generate flesh until it heals.
The forearm breaks multiple times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
Or it is broken and split into two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;
Or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the treatment is as follows when the fracture is without a wound: have two assistants so that one can hold the arm where it is broken. While the other extends the neck towards the affected part.
Then align the fracture with your two hands so that it fits together properly, without any displacement or unevenness.
And if you need more extension, place beneath the patient's shoulder a round pad of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity; extend the arm and lift it up, hold the pad firmly in your hand, so that you can align the break properly as required.
And if you cannot pull out the head of the broken limb from without because it has gone in perfectly, then have the patient lie prone on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder; have your assistants push down on the shoulder until the bone of the fractured area is raised.
Then direct the broken part towards your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must split it upwards.
and draw the pieces gently together, and if the bone cannot join despite all attempts at elevation, then cut it with one of your knives. but place beneath the arm this instrument to protect the skin.
and it resembles a spoon, it is not wood, and it should also be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and it has two edges, as you can see, and one edge should be wide, while the other is narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the opening is small or you suspect a deep-seated abscess, pack the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess appears, dampen a cloth with rose oil, egg white, and wine, then apply it.
The immobilization of the bone when there is no fracture or injury involves applying a poultice of mill powder and egg white onto the bone, followed by light dressings on top. Place a cushion underneath if needed to support it during this process. Then take a very wide bandage, one palm-width across, then place two layers of cloth over the wool and apply the plaster. Then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that one end of the bandage hangs free. Place the stick on the fracture, then wrap the bandage around the neck and under both armpits. And pull on each end of the bandage until you see that it holds the fracture in place and the stick doesn't move over the broken bone. Loosen the ties daily but retighten them if they become slack.
And make the patient lie on their back, placing a small pillow under their neck when they sleep to raise the shoulder upward. If it alleviates the fracture's pain by aligning the shoulder, bind their arm to their neck, and do not release them for twenty days unless an unfortunate accident occurs.
Then reapply the poultice if you see that it is necessary, restraining them and leaving them in this manner until they are restored.
And she will be healed within twenty-eight days at most, and in less time for some people.
For a broken shoulder.
Sometimes the shoulder dislocates or moves out of place at its joint, not from force but merely by being touched.
If you align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
Then place on it some flour from the mill with an egg white, and light pads, and put a double cloth over it. Then put on top a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint slips off anywhere around the shoulder, then use linen pads to secure it so that the splint sits evenly.
And then secure it firmly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding every day.
And every time he moves, hold it fast, and set the sternum straight if it has shifted from its place, and let the patient lie on their affected side.
And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number of days is complete, untie him, and be confident, for it is not a bone that can be easily dislocated.
And if a part of the bone juts forward and punctures beneath the heart, do so above it, remove it, and follow what we have said for treating abscess-causing fractures.
Of the fracture of the spine
The foot is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens. But it often breaks above (the ankle).
And when it is broken in the middle, it slants downwards and the patient feels great pain, lacks movement, and coughs; they may also vomit blood, and the broken ends of bone are clearly seen through the skin, which is easily felt.
And the restoration method is to have the patient lie often on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and bring the sides of the two collarbones together with your hands, and subtly adjust as needed in every way you can, until the bone's shape is correct.
Then place on plasters and swabs above a slender stalk of salt, or some other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move. Tie the bandage around in a circle at the back, and tighten it appropriately, then undo it every hour to check if it has softened, tightening it again if so.
If it needs to be unbound due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, remove the plaster, and address the issue with appropriate treatment methods.
Then reapply the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
Of rib fractures.
Know that rib fractures only occur in the back and on the chest side towards the spine, and also inside near the head, as they are brittle bones. And it is felt well when pressing on the affected area during examination of the ribs.
And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be. Then apply a plaster cast, and secure it with a splint if needed.
And if the rib fracture is pushed inward, the patient feels severe pain and a pricking sensation like pins and needles because the bone is piercing the tissue. They breathe rapidly and suffer from acute pain as well as violent coughing and vomiting of large quantities of blood; it is a serious illness which ancient physicians tried to treat with great effort.
And so there are some who say one must administer meats that swell the belly to push the rupture outwards.
We do not cause this [condition], if hot abscesses have not come there already. And if they have appeared, treat them with cauterization.
Some said to place cups over the affected area for suction which seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw out excesses from their place due to the condition of weakness.
And some of you say to cover the spot with wet wool in hot oil, and put tent-like wrappings between the ribs to make even the tension around [the wound], then treat it with treatment for pleurisy, meat broth, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location of the broken rib, and one must place beneath it a tool to protect the soft tissue.
one must then cut the bone and gently extract it, and thereafter sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an inflamed abscess forms, place damp linen cloths soaked in rose oil over the location.
And treat it while it is still soft at this time that suits the abscess, and let it lie constantly on its side where it must be until it is healed.
And also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if their hands become soft, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel no pain.
Know that it is deadly in many cases, but if they can change position and feel well when pressed or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient may be cured with proper treatment.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there are any accidents that occur when they are in hand, and on the back watch out for windiness and egestion without volition;
And when they lie softened on their belly, there should be egestion without volition. And when he is reminded of it on his back and he wants to mount [a horse], he cannot. He knows they are deadly: If you do not work on his treatment.
And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is less serious.
And the treatment is such that you reward him if there is hot abscess, apply rosin oil or fresh egg yolk until it subsides.
Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And let him not sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if any bone becomes dislocated, you must cut into the heart above it. Remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with ointment to promote healing until it is healed.
And if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "collarbone", place your left palm on it and push, aligning it with the other hand, then apply a poultice and a bandage over it, if necessary.
Then hold it firmly in place, and if there is a severed bone, do the same on top of it, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the broken hip bone
Sometimes the hip bone is broken, which results in only a slight decrease in function at the joint. And make it long, and bend toward the back, and pain comes to the patient at the site, with pricking, swelling where broken.
And hold your hand above it, so that you are over the break; and check which is the fracture and its form;
and if the break is only at the head, equalize this fracture so that it has its natural form.
And if the break is along its length, or it declines inwards, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can see to restore this break. And when you have made it even, place an ointment on top, then put a stick of wood or heartwood above it and secure the break so that it does not move.
And pad the place below the sides until the level is even. Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
And if hot abscesses develop, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are pacified, and apply what we have previously mentioned. then return to the restoration and hold it as required if there is no adverse event;
Of shoulder dislocation
The shoulder joints are located between the armpit and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, they must be restored using one of two methods:
one of which is to take a single piece of wood with an average thickness, in this shape:
Attach two ties to the two ends of it, lifting them upwards, and place the patient on a seat;
Then throw their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the elbow, and place in the middle a wooden bend, then lean on something heavy where the ministers stretch them down;
Then place the splint so it breaks equally at their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
The second method involves hoisting the patient onto their back and tying their hand to their neck; next command two assistants such that one holds what is above the fracture in both hands while the other supports below at every joint, stretching each part as far as they are able.
And if you see that the extraction is more powerful, then restrain the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective parts.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must place one strap under the armpit and another towards the cut, underneath the splint.
And if the break is towards the cut, you must place one strap lightly and gently so that the splint is aligned on the arm and over the shoulder.
Then set the fracture evenly, as it is required, and hold it steady, unless incisions from abscesses occur.
And if incisions from abscesses do occur, do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth with rose oil until the incisions have healed.
Then hold it tight again, and the way to do so is that you apply a poultice on the fracture, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand over the shoulder or armpit.
And place the cloth, and hold it tightly over the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two fingers of space between each one, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers beyond each side of the break.
Then pull up on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, with more force and less separation.
And if you see the placement of the splints and the constriction, as we have said when restoring a broken limb, and doubt the hot abscess, leave it bound until the seventh day, just as we've stated.
Then check it every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs where the splint is bound, nor any numbness in the limb due to excessive tightness. If addressed as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, you should not release the dislocation before three days or more have passed. The patient must sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
Place a cushion of equal wool under the affected shoulder. Check every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb's position does not change and its joints do not loosen.
If the injury heals through medical treatment, give them the food we mentioned before in such a way that their diet is very light at first. And when they start to recover, make their diet heavier.
It is customary for the shoulder and leg injuries to take forty days to heal completely. And then it must be loosened and treated with baths and ointment medicines to realign its place.
And if the dislocation is severe and difficult to move, it may take one day or two months to relieve it.
Of arm fracture:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "duo foscile", one of which is small and follows the wrist.
And the other is large, which is below towards the little finger.
Perhaps only the large bone breaks or maybe just the small one, but perhaps it's both together.
When the small bone is broken, its restoration is light and its healing swift.
And when the large bone is broken, its healing is difficult and more serious than if they were both broken together.
If it is only the small bone that is broken, one should extend it gently and set it evenly.
And if it is a large wound, you must compress it more firmly;
place them on a cushion, and hold the wrist of the hand higher than the others, with the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over themselves, and the cushion in front of them, elevated so that the patient may not suffer any exertion;
Then have your assistants extend their arms to the part below the patient's hand or wrist, while another assistant is above them on the other side.
Then place the mirror in front of them evenly so they see their best form.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, place each one back in its place and grasp the heart of any piece that cannot be restored to its original position; then cut it away as we have said before.
And if with the fracture causing injury, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take care of the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration hot abscesses appear, so prepare the bandage with a cerate made from rose oil and white wax, let it be neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the bandage on gently, so that the hot abscesses may be calmed.
Then remove the cerate, and apply an emplastrum made from mill powder with much egg white, then place the splints, making sure that the splint for the fracture is closer and a little wider than the others;
and know that there must be six splints on an arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two;
and hold it tightly above the fracture, less so elsewhere, and always more in the direction of the break, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are placed on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
and let the cloths that are placed on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. and let the thread with which it is held be made of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Reward the limb and ligament after a few days. And if any adverse event occurs in the limb, such as an itch that arises there, you must spray the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved.
and let the limb rest without restriction.
Then restart the tightening process, and if the ligament is softened and the bones are separated or similar, address it.
And if you observe that nourishment cannot reach the limb due to its tightness, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until circulation flows again; then tighten it.
And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release them until 20 days have passed.
Where you inquire around him, then paint his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and twisting, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps even twenty, depending on the combinations and complexities of qualities.
On the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather it is more often a dislocation.
And when the heel of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged, and sit upright directly in front of him evenly.
then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and have the assistants stretch out the fractured bones, and make them even with each other, so that they are well-aligned.
and apply the plaster and bandages, unless an abscess forms, then place a splint according to the extent of injury. And it shall be enveloped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the front of the sole [of the foot], make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to strap it tight against their broken sole. Then strap it with a long cloth, and let the heart-wood peg be as large as the sole of the hand, then tighten it accordingly.
And if the fracture is on the outside, you must put a pad above and another below the broken bone, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and secure the binding between the fingers.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the fingers, set it equal [straight], as is required. And strap it with the sole [of the foot], and if you wish to insert a small straight peg to lift the fracture, and do not move it.
and if the fracture is in other places, such as in the index finger or any of the others, make it equal and bind it with the healthy finger that comes next. or you bind them all together at the base, as it moves better, or place a stick above it, just like for an arrow.
and take care in the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and alleviate what comes from it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often fractured, and it is clearly seen when the leg turns forward or backward.
and its restoration is done by binding the two sides above and below the fracture. The patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches their rope to its equal part.
and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, one binding should be towards the armpit, and the other bindings below the fracture.
Also, if it is near the knee, then let the rope be placed below the knee, and the stretching be done downwards.
Then the surgeon should place the bone evenly with both hands, aligning it to its natural shape, and then apply a plaster cast, binding it up if an abscess forms.
If there is a warm abscess present, leave it to heal before returning to your work and treatment. The binding is done in this way:
It is necessary that you wrap over the fracture with I hard bandage doubled in II or III, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and thread I long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, around the knee below, and bring the end of the string above;
Then turn the bandage over the leg and up the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind tightly in the form of III twists or IIII over the fracture; And as you go further above the fracture, bind it less tightly;
Then attend to the two knots of thread that you have passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three stitches above them, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach near the foot.
Hold it tight so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this until neither an abscess nor swelling or any other similar issue appears. And if it does appear, then untie it and address the issue that has arisen as we have said many times before;
And if there are splinters of bone stuck in the wound then it must be irrigated with water if one is able to do so; And if this cannot be done then you must open the wound further to extract them with forceps; And treat him as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken so that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm;
However, when such restoration is performed, the patient does not suffer.
And know that the thigh is restored in twenty days, or perhaps a little less or more, depending on the diversity of constitutions.
Know that in the knee alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is but a crack or hole, and this happens with any wound, both wounded and unwounded, and one feels good about it.
And the restoration is such that one places what is rounded in its place with both hands until they are joined as well as can be done.
Then apply the plaster and insert a round pin if needed, securing it properly. Then follow all the procedures we have outlined for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions. If you apply to each injury what is appropriate for it, until it heals.
On the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "shin," and the other is called "tibia.
And they have similar fractures as those that occur in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the treatments are all there too. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
And if the delicate bone is broken, return to the previous step.
And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it shows well. And it turns downwards.
Therefore, provide extension, make them equal, and tie the splints equally.
But nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many fragments, the stretching should be reduced and made lighter. And ease it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood and wrap them around the leg on either side, making sure they are as long as the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap two linen bandages around them and tie one in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left. In this way it is well-supported.
And have them put a splint along the length of the leg, made of wood or other material, to protect against any movement. It should be applied directly above where there is an open wound due to fracture.
and move each leg daily to check for abscess or other complications; if he treats it until it is healed.
Of broken bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot, there can be breaks and bruises, and sometimes only a sprain in various conditions.
And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, let the patient put his injured foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, then place your foot on top of theirs, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their original positions;
Then apply the plaster and pack it with dressings, place under the belly of the foot a small wooden board with two curved ends, then strap it to the foot carefully, then wrap it with bandages and other materials you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken finger in alignment with its length, and let it be slightly wider. Place underneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it appropriately;
And if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth. Straiten the board underneath their foot; And let it be stretched over the head of the board outside their stomach so that it holds them well.
And make sure you do not forget the other things I mentioned for treating breaks, just as we have said before; And heal every injury as it is required.
Of the fracture of the wrist bone
When the bones of a woman's back are broken, make her sit spread out, then lean her towards the back part and support her from behind;
Then fill the patient's hollow back with cotton, and put in as much as it holds;
Then stand the woman up, lift her back bit by bit, and as the cotton rises, until it reaches the opening of her back passage, and the bones return to their place;
And when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she is done, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so; si sera restoree li brisure, and if you see it, take a sheep's bladder, tie a cane to the opening, and insert all of the bladder into the body. then blow hard into the cane, so that the bladder becomes completely inflated inside. the body will realign the broken bones.
then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days until the wound heals.
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have described for the hip bone.
these fractures near the wrist are not hidden from those who study them diligently and read my book.
For the breaking [of bones] indicates to many its correct method of restoration: Understand it then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert it into the penis; Then wrap it in cloth around, and leave it for three days so that it may heal swiftly.
Of breaks that have wounds.
It is necessary for one who has a break with wounds, especially if it's large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, to be healed swiftly, as the healings we have discussed attest to.
And if the wound heals, apply vitriol to staunch it, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless a hot abscess comes about.
If a hot abscess does occur, leave the restoration for nine days until the abscess is alleviated, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, as you would bring about an ill outcome.
And if the broken bone is visible on an uncovered heart, you must set it gently with your hands in slight extension.
And if the extension is not equipped to align with your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight tines and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this it is necessary that the surgeon apply pressure three or four times according to what is needed in each treatment of a broken bone.
and round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb you are working on, and pointed at the front, and thick from the middle onwards, like this;
It is called 'palainche', which means the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it in one go until it returns to its place, ensuring they are aligned with each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone properly, then you must cut away the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
And if you cannot reposition the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool such as an incision knife or a saw to your ability;
then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si make sure it is back in its place, then wet a cloth with black styptic wine, and properly so if it is on the face. and do not put any ointment or other oily substance on the wound as it will cause sores and decay;
then apply splints once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not constricted with the break.
and many times have these foolish doctors done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases. and the constriction should be looser and softer than with other breaks.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear bad consequences may arise, as we have mentioned, and you find pain in that place, it should not be treated with stars. But instead of using stars, wrap around it sturdy linen cloths, and tie them in place.
And when you see swelling after one or two days at the wound, remove what you have placed on it entirely, and apply healing ointment such as Tetraconion and similar ones.
You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
And ensure that the limb is bandaged in such a way that the swelling runs down slightly.
And if after many days it still does not heal but swells again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all these dislocated pieces causing pain.
And if a fistula forms there, or any other kind of corruption occurs, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter previously mentioned.
And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, like the thighbone or humerus, and other such large bones, do not pull it out, for death often results, but leave it until it rots.
Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it may fall off by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to do so.
And if you cannot, leave it be.
We often come after the health of the fracture, especially when it is close to the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the shape of the limb. and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if it is fresh for us: if the administrator of medicines gives you astringents, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, or substances like sarco collum, galbanum, and similar others, then ensure you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or egg white or isinglass; and apply them to the wound with pads, pressing it firmly, and do not remove it by hand for a day;
and apply them to the wound with pads, pressing it firmly, and do not remove it by hand for a day; Then dislocate it again, and begin another one, until the knots are removed.
where you strain it over a well-formed plank of wood; Because the properties of wood are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
And if the knot has already turned hard like a stone, and it must be removed, then cut away the surface layer, and expose the excess. where you return it to a rasp until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
From the member which is weak after recovery.
When the broken bone is healed, but the limb remains weak and delicate, this occurs for many reasons: for which one is due to it being tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because they have little blood in their body, thus being weak.
And the treatment is that you should make the patient eat, and soften their body until blood is multiplied within them; and administer baths to them, giving joy and leisure;
Then place lead on the limb, so that the lead draws out the great suppuration, and often irrigate it with warm water until the suppuration flows into the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
Of a twisted limb after injury When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is visibly broken, and its form is ugly, it still does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these procedures are to be blamed for bringing great harm, even death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k'il soient arosez d'aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;
and to this wound make a softening plaster, like well-made dyaquilon ointment, and take the mucus of the mallow plant, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and spread the mixture as an external application.
or you take fat figs, grind them with coltsfoot leaves, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And sometimes the nodule is removed by continually and extensively rubbing with moist hands. And provide gentle movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tendon is hardened and knotted like stone, and it must be removed with an iron instrument, then one should cut as far down as the bone using a small delicate incision. and apply sutures and take care in its treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one must promptly reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the wound swells, and sometimes it may be painfully reset into place;
For this reason, it must not be moved when it is swollen. Often brings back swelling and other pains;
However, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess is healed;
Then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member so that it returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
Sometimes both jaws become dislocated and the double dislocation occurs in two ways: in which they are slightly out of place and softened somewhat; Where they are completely dislocated and hang downward, and saliva dribbles from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and his tongue becomes tangled in speech.
When a dislocation is minor, it can often return through various adjustments.
And if it is complete and fully dislocated, then you must reduce it quickly, without delay.
and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes their finger from one of his hands into the root of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other finger from both hands should be outside, to keep it even.
and instruct the patient to relax his jaws, and move them in all directions. The practitioner then places it evenly until it returns to its proper place.
And if resetting it is difficult, especially if it involves the two mandibles together, soak them in warm water and oil until they can be reset gently;
Do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
And when they are evenly reset and the patient's mouth is closed without swelling, apply wet dressings made of soft cloth in a ointment of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
Let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulders resting between two pillows so that they cannot move them to the right or left, and let them not exert themselves by chewing, but take light food until the pain is gone, and the mandibles are healed.
And then have him chew what he wishes lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well-numbed and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their original position within an hour and do not return to their proper place, fever and constant pain will result; possibly leading to diarrhea, or perhaps vomiting clear bile.
And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
The fork cannot be dislocated from the inside of its shaft or below, and is sometimes dislocated outwards, which one can easily tell.
And its restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and extends their arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then apply the plaster and bind it with bandages, holding it firmly.
and the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then apply the plaster and bandage, hold it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
and likewise is the head of the shoulder reset when it is dislodged from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only according to three ways:
one is that it dislocates at the back part underneath; and the second (dislocation) is to the area of the back. and sometimes dislocated above this part, which rarely happens;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh, for to them it jumps painfully.
for those who have sufficient flesh, it jumps slightly and returns slightly.
And occasionally happens to some men a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And thus is recognized dislocation when it occurs downward toward the armpit, and creates a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find an obvious disparity between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and underneath the armpit on the other side, the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye socket. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose or move any part of it.
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you can clearly see it from the side.
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent or the patient is young.
And the manner is that the attendants lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the armpit, and raise the joint forcefully upwards to its proper place; and the attendants lift the hand, extend it upwards, then place it underneath; there will be dislocation.
And if it does not come out as we have said with bare hands afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the attendants apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be applied;
then the patient is placed on their back, and a padded linen cushion, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the armpit. The heel of the patient's hand rests on top of the pillow, while we lift up the head of the shoulder gently, pulling the patient's arm;
and another minister holds the patient's head, so it does not move downwards. this shoulder returns immediately, and if you observe as it is reset in this manner:
and have another man present who is stronger than the patient; and he should stand upright by the patient's side, and push their shoulder underneath the patient's armpit, then lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in mid-air. another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
and it is also reset in another manner:
and one drives a long peg into the ground, so that the head is as high as the knee, and it should not be too thick nor too thin then it should be placed underneath the patient, but let them have soft blankets on top, and the patient should extend their body along the length of the pole;
then stretch out their arm from the other side, thus the joint will return to its place gradually;
and if it refuses to go back into place for all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a pole two arms-lengths long and four fingers wide with the head flattened so you can insert it perfectly underneath the shoulder blade according to this form:
Then place above the head of the patient a soft cloth, so that it does not wound the patient, then put it beneath the sick person's ass.
And extend their arms over the long side of the wooden frame, and tie the injured arm to the frame, and their hand to their head. Then place the other arm on a board that is wider than them and let it hang freely down from the board, leaving the body free to dangle on the other side: The joint has now recovered.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the bench an equal woolen pad, then apply a plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then strap it underneath the bench appropriately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, embrace the hand to their neck, and let the hands stay thus.
And they should eat little for the time being until the limb is comfortable again because it will heal faster this way;
Then they should eat more after five or seven days, and begin to move about. And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture that has entered it or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization to three openings, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all that and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the armpit, breasts, or behind, is caused by a push and stretching of hands, and another place is treated.
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing process, the limb develops cracks and moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until these cracks are alleviated and return to their original state.
Of shoulder dislocation:
Know that the dislocation of the neck is difficult to treat, and it often returns.
and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced because it can be clearly seen and felt. and dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the sick man's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm or reach his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it even if an abscess forms there, because if an abscess does form, it would be difficult to reduce.
and by chance, it cannot always be reset completely, especially when it is at the back. it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and in some cases, death may occur.
And when it is restored, once you have managed to reset it, extend their arm with your two hands; And his arms should be spread out, with the hands placed mirror-like according to the cut around, above and below, and press the knuckles together at his armpits or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it occurs when one doubles over their hand to their hand, and it strains the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
And since two people administering the extension hold the arm, and two people bend it so that it does not move during the extension.
Then turn the arm from each side and wrap it with a double-layered long and wide cloth.
And when the surgeon joins the knuckles of the hand, grease them with some oil to soften the joints, then press the knuckle firmly until it returns.
and when it is in place, apply a dry poultice with raw egg white on top, bind it tightly, and extend the arm to the patient's neck, leaving it there for several days before removing it.
and if the joint is firmly in place, release the bindings, and let it be.
and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then repeat the poultice and binding, leaving it so for several days until it is firmly set. then release it.
And if they feel soreness after the joint is reset and it moves again, then bathe and gently massage it, pressing until it is soothed. where you place on the joint a layer of fatty sheep's wool, then leave it there for one day and night, remove it, and have them take a bath. and when they sweat, rub the joint gently, then replace the wool, and go back into the bath. and do this twice or three times until it is healed.
and if you see pus, apply moist warm cow dung mixed with butter on top of it.
it will return to its proper position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is light and easy to reset compared to other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place immediately when dislocated, unless the area is swollen or an abscess forms there.
And the process of resetting it is that you place the patient's hand on a table, and your assistant extends their hand, aligning it with the patient's; then they place their palm over the affected joint, pushing until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is correctly aligned. Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table and let the assistants put their hand over the apparent joint.
If it returns to its place now, that is good. If this does not work, strain out the emollient plasters for hot abscesses, and leave it like this without starting again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back into place after some days, the joint remains dislocated.
and it does not harm the patient to leave his hand softened for as long as he cannot grasp anything at all: then know that either the nerve is severed or the artery.
if there is no other means but to grasp by cauterization nearby, perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned earlier, then strain it and leave for five days, then release the strain and leave as is.
And if they cannot move it properly, and there is any tear or injury, then apply a compress of warm water, and rub until it is healed.
On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand become dislocated on both sides, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly.
Then stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the direction in which it is disjoined.
Leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day.
And bind it at night as we have said, release it during the day, make it move, and rebind it at night.
Do this frequently until it is narrow, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, act in the same way that you have done before until it is healed.
And do likewise when it is dislocated in any other place.
Of dislocation of the spine from the back
When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly takes the patient.
And the signs are that vomiting occurs without volition, and it cannot be controlled; often some members are weakened: both thighs or both arms or one of them.
And often the spine twists into four parts;
That which is twisted behind is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that if the "gilbositez" comes from childhood, you should reverse it. If there is no cure nor full recovery.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment say there is not much benefit in all of it.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the hunchback condition that arises on one side, no physician is healthy.
And also the condition that arises evenly in two sides, and it cannot be cured except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face in an equal place, and have a strain under them so they do not hurt themselves.
Then fix one iron rod in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope across the shoulders of the patient, and another to their hips, knees, and ankles.
and each assistant knows their task, one to hold the head and the other the feet, with two hot irons in between.
and [make sure] they are firmly fixed, the hot irons as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine gently, until it returns to its place.
And if it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a board three feet long, and drive it underneath the wall, and let the patient be on their side, pressing the head of the board underneath the wall, then place the middle of the board over the spine. and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see this, make him turn to face the hand. And thrust two skewers into the head of the patient with one arm raised high and place two other skewers near the feet, leaving a span between each skewer above and below.
And make one hole in each skewer where the tourniquet runs through, ensuring the skewers are firmly planted into the ground so they do not move.
And place another skewer between the two skewers turning on an axle, with two small skewers of a span in length to turn the tourniquet.
Then bind the loop which is among the axles to the tourniquet near the head and the other loop toward the feet at the other tourniquet, so each assistant turns their own axle alongside the master, who evenly applies pressure as we have said.
And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of eggs, then the swabs, and then a rod made from a three-day-old tablet, that reaches to the place of curvature and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed.
and if anything comes up in the end of the healing process, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod that we mentioned before. and sometimes it is administered in one part of the spine, and sometimes there appears a hunch in the lower back region of the spine, which is thought to be dislocation. and this is the bone which appears, therefore one must not presume to act. would perhaps bring about death.
Know that only dislocations cause pain in the hip joints and shoulder joints, not like with other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, and in front and behind;
and more internally then, and sometimes dislocated both in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their diseased knee to the floor. And it is the place which is near swollen from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes naturally is as follows: these accidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs for someone who has this beforehand is that they stretch their leg well according to its length; However, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants them to walk, they cannot beforehand, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they defecate, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one who has dislocated behind them are such that they cannot straighten their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, with a softened groin, and the head of the femur is in place below the ribs.
The treatment of this similar type of dislocation is that you should reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, as there is no other treatment for it. And one must not have any presumption about it.
And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, hurry to turn the joint back, stretch it both inwardly and outwardly, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return by chance, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare a strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly with both hands or with a rope tied above the knee. Another assistant should stretch his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the armpits and then tightens an elastic bandage around the thigh. And another person holds the end of the rope.
They extend it upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground simultaneously, remaining suspended.
This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been corrected, as we have said, it is good.
If not, you must apply treatment in a similar manner.
When the dislocation is on the inside, you must lay the patient onto their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the part below the groin, stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the loins.
Then have other assistants take hold of his arms, embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it outward forcefully. It will return to its place immediately.
And this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage over the heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice more than the other.
Then hang it from an upright post so that it is suspended above the ground by two arms' lengths.
Then instruct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, embracing the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return swiftly.
And when the dislocation is external, let the patient lie down as we have said for one with curvature of the spine, and secure the bandage firmly around the affected leg and also the foot.
Then place two irons [heated in a fire], one on the head and another at the feet, then insert an iron between the thighs of the patient in the middle of the table. Surround it with wet cloths so that it does not burn the patient, then stretch each attendant towards him and let the surgeon align his hand to match [the alignment of] the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it on a flat surface, i.e., a table, and press it as we have described for the treatment of clubfoot, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to stretch out the sick leg as far as possible [to achieve a successful reduction of the joint], and according to what I have said [previously]; And let the surgeon position himself on top of the affected limb [to help reduce it], then press with one hand and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is external, you should not stretch the patient downwards nor lift them up from the ground. Instead, they should be positioned as if their hip joint was also externally dislocated, just as we have mentioned regarding the position for a double hip dislocation. Let them lie on their face, with the ropes extended as we have mentioned previously, and one must press on the joint using a board. This will be sufficient when the patient stretches out their legs, ensuring they remain level. Adjust the thighs and apply a plaster, securing it with a tight bandage so that the hip joint does not move. Allow them to rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and reapply the plaster on top of it.
And if you see that they are even, pinch them, as before, and leave it for three days.
Then untie it, and make him move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: That is to say, internally and externally, and behind;
And it does not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you ask the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, then know that they are dislocated.
And the restoration for all of these is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
Then take his knee on your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply. And have another minister stretch out his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he lightly shakes his leg against his thigh.
And apply the plaster over it, and have him lift his leg against his thigh, and keep them bound tightly together for three or four days, then release it.
And the patient must not exert himself by walking until his limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not broken, apply strong traction as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the heel,
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the part where it was dislocated.
The re-alignment is light, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it is only slightly moved.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and have an assistant hold them from behind by the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then do it twice with your left, and extend upwards while gently pushing the foot up.
And do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
If it stays in place, that's good.
But if not, start the process again as it will return.
and if it cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a pole into the earth between their thighs, tie the cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
then have the minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the leg to their hands or tie it with a cord around the foot so that they bind it above the ankle. then each minister should extend equally, and the pole should be close between the patient's thighs to hold them when they are being extended.
then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return swiftly.
And when it is ready, apply the plaster and bandages on top, applying firm pressure, tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves behind the ankle, ensuring the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, apply pressure again.
Then remove the bindings on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days. And if they walk before this period is over, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not happen again.
If pus forms in the abscess, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
twice When the shoulder is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without strain, which is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any knuckle of the foot or ankle, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or lie straight on a table, and place your foot on top of their affected joint, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position.
and when it is even, and nothing appears, place beneath the sole of the foot a two-foot plank, then strain it firmly, and leave for three days, then release it. and have them rest until they are healed.
For wounds and dislocations together, you must first prepare the cautery of fire and use coals or stones to burn them red-hot; then take wax, pitch, rosin, fat, and oil, mixing all five substances. Take two small pieces of cloth, rub them with hog lard, spread the mixture on one side, and place it where you see that there is a dislocation. Let him rest for some time until the swelling goes down; then take some fine linen, soak it in water, and bind around his limb from the head to the foot of the member. Leave it bound tightly and let him sit still like this until the wound heals completely, or nearly so, if necessary.
When a wound accompanies the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
do not be overly confident in your treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and careful, do not be bold.
and apply soothing, abscess-reducing poultices at the beginning, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery. and when you see hope, then relocate the limb now, even if the abscess there gets hot;
and when the limb is back in place, administer soothing things for the hot abscess, and treat the wound as it should be done, with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are separated, remove them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is according to your Creator's will, and for the safety of your soul and body.
