You, most dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its explanations and through its elucidations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is alien to all, so its knowledge has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in books from ancient times that have been passed down by hand. From this has come error and vanity, and intentions have become closed off, and knowledge is far away.
Now it seems to me that I must revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, explanation and abbreviation. And we will come together with the forms of the instruments for cauterization and other tools required for the work, along with their appropriate arrangement, explanation, and preparation as needed.
And for the reason that no good master of surgery is found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, arms, and their number, and movement, along with moving and resting veins, and where they emerge.
And thus Hippocrates says that the name with its meaning is very important, but it is through action that one achieves little. especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned earlier should beware lest they make mistakes and harm people.
Thus, I have often seen many who interfere with this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut her carotid artery. which caused so much blood to flow out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated the bladder stone of an elderly man, and the stone was large. he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke from our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound.
And the ignorant doctor holds the fracture in place on the wound with strong bandages, leaving no room for drainage, and leaves it like that until healing.
And he orders him not to release it.
And thus, the leg swells entirely, and so does the foot, resulting in its loss.
I was called to go see him, and I hurried to go release his leg. And when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
However, the corruption had already set into the limb, and I could not heal it.
And the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And then I saw another ulcer that burst and then inflamed due to the malignancy of its nature.
For a cancer, when it is purified of melancholic humour, one should not touch it with an iron tool unless it is in such a place that everything corrupted can be entirely removed.
And for this, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two categories: That is to say, works where there is danger in many situations;
And I shall demonstrate in each case of this book where there is fear and risk.
Which is why it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
Take up your tools wisely, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best methods so that by God's grace you may bring them to recovery and earn praise.
Let the dreadful diseases of severe injury pass.
Remove your armor from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Do not treat any illness poorly, or you will be called a foolish doctor.
I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and other medical treatments for acute illnesses, and the chapters are organized from head to toe.
And the forms of instruments, and the preparation for cauterization, as well as all that is necessary for the procedure.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar things.
And this chapter is organized by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
And it is organized by the head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
Let us recall the work; it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid, and its harm, is a long and subtle art and secret knowledge.
And many wise people have spoken of this and agreed upon it.
And their words suffice for me, for I fear length.
I say that cautery helps universally all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions: That is to say, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
In the combination of hot and dry constitution with matter, some argued and said that cautery is of great help; And others said the opposite: That cautery is not beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness;
And he who says otherwise claims that cauterization provides great relief for hot and dry illnesses arising within the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to these words. For I have found it through experience.
And in any case, let not those who have not experienced it intervene, but rather those who understand through long practice the chapter of cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, as well as the occurrences and time intervals.
Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the surgeons assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, my son, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not burn beyond the member which it heats, and harms no other part if properly used.
Burning medications pass from one member to another, leading to ailments that require swift treatment. And on occasion, the patient may even die.
The fires for their height and because of the goodness of their substance do not burn, if there is no excess to them.
And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is based on the truth of things.
and for this I excuse myself for the length of my words, because it does not please me that I take away from you the secret which is contained in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating. take it into your thoughts.
And know, my son, they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed and chose careful timing.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful things coming from below are driven away by cautery. And especially if the cauterization is necessary for severe pain, acting quickly to prevent a greater evil from befalling the limb.
And never think of it, dear son, as some foolish physicians do; For the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse; And they say thus:
And they say thus: But it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors causing pain; its value lies in the speed of its action, and the virtue of its work and command.
And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the patient's complexion, and the location of the illness and its strength;
and in him are gathered the excesses through eating flesh and similar things unless cauterization is administered where there is little excess and moisture as with tooth extractions for pain and other such things which do not cause a recurrence of the pain. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed so;
but they do not believe that cauterization is more effective than medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they are ineffective, then we apply cautery, and it works.
Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with golden instruments are more beneficial than those of iron, and this was not due to the quality of gold but rather because of its high value.
And they said that the skin of the cauterized area does not become discoloured, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it does happen in some men.
And gold cauterizations are better than those of iron, just as they said. However, when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its colour and it quickly cools down.
and if one heats it too much; They are burned by fire. And thus there is enough hindrance.
Here we have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the information is easier to find.
These cauterizations are beneficial for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types done due to a disease called "soda", and because of excess humors descending from the head to the eyes, ears, causing numerous dreams, toothaches, sore throats, and especially all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine three or four nights, according to what their condition, moisture and habit can bear. And then read again the patient's head.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours.
After that, place the root of your palm onto the root of his nose between his two eyes. And where your two thumbs meet, make an incision; then heat the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the form: And place it on the marked spot with ink, then move your hand up and down and squeeze firmly while rotating. Then lift your hand slightly, and feel the place again to see if you can detect the bone underneath even a little bit; And if you cannot see it, start the cauterization again until you can see the bone as I instructed;
Afterward take a piece of soft cloth, put some softened cotton inside it, place this on the spot and leave it there for three days.
Then put moist cotton mixed with butter on top of it; Leave this in place until the inflammation has subsided; After treating the wound with a preparation called 'Tetrafarmacón', until it is healed.
And the ancients say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself. and for this reason, aid is provided.
And they said one must leave the cautery in place until a part of the bone is burnt, and then remove that which has been burnt from the bone, and it shall be healed.
And others say that the cauterisation should be left on top, and pressed so hard that it penetrates to the bone, just like the 'vertoil' women put in their hair, for this helps the humours to flow out.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time. afterwards, it must be cleaned and sealed.
And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all in every way, except for some people who have a sense of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
because the head [of the shoulder] is weakened by continued natural movements, as we witness in other limbs;
and likewise when the head [of the shoulder] of the patient is weak by nature, and the first type of cauterization seems more beneficial and effective to me, that is what I use in my work for their well-being.
When any head [pain] becomes chronic and lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochies," as well as purgatives for the head, eye remedies, and poultices; And if you perform the cauterization as we have previously mentioned, and it is ineffective. Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and that it is not too cold. Then cauterize beneath the aforementioned cautery point slightly. Afterwards, cauterize each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have previously stated, and cauterize where it is called "temples". And it is there that one places cupping glasses. Adjust your hand so you do not see down to the bone. The sick person feels much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak of it later.
and the cauterizations of the horns should be more subtle than those for the middle part of the head, and this is the method:
For cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the illness spreads up to the eye, and the skull has been cleaned by purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned earlier for this condition have been done, but with no improvement: then treat it with two types of cauterization, namely the medical method and that using fire.
Medical cauterization is when you take a piece of elm wood, remove the bark and cut it into two pieces that fit together at the skull joints, then split open the temple where the pain occurs in such a way as to be able to place the elm beneath the skin.
and when it is answered, bind it well and hold it thus for twelve hours; then undo the binding and treat it with fresh garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a cotton cloth soaked in butter as often as necessary.
After the treatment, heal it until it is fully cured;
and if you see fit, apply some of the caustic medicines I have written about in the twelfth chapter on caustic medicines.
The iron cautery is performed according to this method. Heat the cautery, which has this shape.
It is called "close" for the reason that its head is shaped like a bell with one curve and has an appearance in the middle.
and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and slightly twist it, so that half of the tip of the needle is burnt;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood flows out.
Afterward, place cotton on a piece of cloth, and leave it on the spot for three days. then put moist cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", use its entire tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this old migraine.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the classification of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the aforementioned cauterizations with fire or iron are not sufficient for him, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
make a small cut with the knife over that place, making a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and press the knife so you do not sever an artery nor reach as far as the bone.
and be careful not to hit the jaw bone when you press it down, and let no air enter that would make him choke or bring spasms upon the patient, and protect against the dangerous evacuation of blood from an artery once severed, a cut which is feared especially by those unstudied and inexperienced; And leave the work halfway through.
But I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is severed, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it again in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you observe this, apply the cauterization we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery tool. And these cauterizations are better and more helpful than those.
From the pain in the ears due to cold.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before, but the pain persists, then heat this cauterization point called "poin", which takes the following form:
Point around the entire diseased ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear once you have marked the place of incision. And make X points around each ear;
Afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
For the torture of the mouth...
A wound that must be treated with cauterization is none other than those caused by flux, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
And do not apply cauterization to similar wounds that result from dryness and damage to nerves.
When you treat this type of wound that results from flux of pus and purging of the head and gargles, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: One is at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it above the ear's head slightly below the skull's horn, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb. Leave the cautery in place until half of the heart is burnt.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
It has the same shape as the tool we described before, but it is slightly finer and the knife should be a little thicker.
After treatment, leave the wound as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations. Two above the two corners of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessel," as we said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
And it is treated as we said before.
Of lethargy.
For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that cool the brain.
After treating all other parts of the patient's head, apply the mustard poultice to their occipital bone as described in the chapter on plasters.
And this is the manner of cauterization: If you do it as I have said.
If the wound is treated thus, it is good. And if it is not, perform three cauterizations within the head, descending to the neck, with a span between each cautery.
Treat it as the others, but if you see a need for adjustment, and the patient is suffering, perform one cautery in the middle. And if necessary, place two others on the two horns [of the cautery instrument], and treat until it is healed.
and let the cauterization be that which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
The head must be cleansed of hair and according to what we have said before;
After cleaning the head of the patient, then cauterize on the head and each horn [of the skull], and behind it, three times along the spine of the neck;
And if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from a severe disease, then treat with four cauterizations along the spine of the back; And let it remain until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand. After the treatment is completed, make sure it has healed, and use the cautery method called 'olive oil', which we previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments as we have mentioned in the section on treating severe patients who cannot tolerate medication.
And if it is a child who cannot endure this, have them gargle and chew often with nourishing meats to soothe the brain.
After that, place the ruler on the middle of the head, and perform the cautery as we have mentioned before, applying it to the vessel and each corner. And if the patient is strong and suffering, perform cautery as I have described for those with paralysis and bodily weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil in the manner mentioned earlier.
If the patient is a child, apply the subtle cautery as follows:
When the cause is due to melancholy, stemming from excess or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then apply cautery with thin irons as we have mentioned for those suffering paralysis.
And if the cause is melancholy arising from excess descending into it, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned earlier in the classification.
After rising, lift up the patient's head; After making a well-made flaxen pad, shaped like a circle, place it in the middle of their head.
And have the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported from all sides.
After presenting the flaxen pad, apply some old goat butter. Heat it with moderate fire so that the skin can bear its application. Remove the circle from inside their head, allowing it to cool down.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with other good treatments, until they are healed.
And if you wish to cauterize with points, make many points throughout the entire cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally;
And then apply moist cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
of the eyes' awe When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the section above, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, protect it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath many times while fasting.
After this, instruct him to lift his head and cauterize in the middle of the scalp, performing two cauteries on the two temples if both eyes descend together, or one cautery if it descends individually.
Cover all the veins and arteries below the heart during the entire cautery process, ensuring that the cauteries are long, extending across the width of the temples.
Beware of excessive bleeding, and if you observe too much blood loss, stop the bleeding with as much force as required but no more.
And I will teach you, concerning the extraction of arteries and incision, the caution with which you must stop the bleeding.
and sometimes one performs cauterisation at the space between the two rear bones.
and one sees that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then apply the cautery which I mentioned at the beginning, to the eyes from below. Perform the cautery in between the head, two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries at the space between the two rear bones. et if there is more need, carefully cauterize it above the eyebrows with small cauteries.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the classification, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights' worth of cock's urine. after the king, cauterize his head in the middle of the olive-shaped mark; and make two 'clavilis' cauteries on the two temples, a little below the hairline.
be careful not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the 'clavilis' cautery:
When the pupil of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called 'olivare'. from which this takes shape:
And if you wish to do so, make two cauteries on the two temples as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not leave your hand there unless until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of the hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards, prick the eye, and a cauterization is performed according to two methods: That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow back evenly, then place the patient in your care; After, sir, on paper above the eyes make a drawing that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign from among the hairs.
Then put moist cotton in egg white and parsley mush on the eye, then heat the cautery with what is here its form:
After cauterize on the drawn image that you have signed, dot by dot many times until the heart is burnt at the spot.
And the sign of success in this work is that you see the paper curling back and the hairs rising to the height of the eye.
Then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scalding is removed. After the treatment of healing until it is healed.
And if after this, the hair grows back, and the skin is softened again, then repeat the cauterization on the same spot as before, just as you did initially;
If the hair falls out, cauterize it until the skin rises to its natural position, and is even, without irritating or pricking the eye.
The burning medical cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
Then take French soap and quicklime, one third of each, and grind them well together; and let it harden so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the mold you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some from the eyes on paper. and if the disease is only in one eye, you should operate on that one, and if it's also in both eyes as well; and place underneath the eye cotton moistened with egg white.
and let the patient's head be in your lap and put your index finger on the medicine, and press it once and move it around every time the patient feels a tingling sensation from the medicine, for they will feel a burning sensation as well.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your hand. And when the tingling has passed, remove your finger from the water and check if it has risen, and look to see if the paper has also lifted as though raised by fire or incision. And if it is so, then it is good.
If not, apply more medicine to the place where it was opened for treatment, until your work is even and your eyes are precise.
Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burned heart is covered, afterward treat the area with an ointment called 'diaphenes' and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to, be careful in your work with great vigilance so that the medicine does not touch the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs grow in the eye, repeat the treatment on that spot where it has softened due to the paper, just as you did before. Afterward treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and according to this, be your restraints;
and may the correct path never be denied to one who studies this art.
on the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must perform cauterization in this way.
Instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy shoulder; Hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist his head;
Afterwards, apply moist cotton dipped in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye;
After that, heat the cautery iron which is such:
and it is shaved at the head like the shape of a vaulted arch, together with which the cauterization should be performed;
if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you notice, it should also look like a tent;
but nevertheless, this one who is shaved is better for your work.
Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus, then dry it. and if it is closed, operate on it, and draw out the pus forcefully.
Afterwards, apply the hot cauterizing iron above it, and hold your hand over the cautery with your thumb on top of the eye, so that your hand does not slip. and place the cautery in the grease of the eye, and it corrupts.
If you reach the bone with the cautery at the beginning, it would be beneficial. If not, restart the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, then leave it for three days.
after, place cotton soaked in butter on it, and treat the affected area with drying ointment until it is healed, but if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. and treat it according to what comes in its chapter.
There is also a method of cauterizing a fistula, which none of the ancients mentioned. Examine the fistula, and split the site open. after place in the fissure one subtle probe of which this is the shape: Et they make it to the quantity of one third of a pound; Et hold your hand or paw firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into their eye;
And it is necessary to put on the patient's eye moist cotton with egg white or butter;
The lead enters the place of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good. If not, you must administer the perforation to the nail, and restore the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is necessary in its proper place.
Cracks in lips. Often occur cracks in lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as described in the previous sections, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And place cauterization in those crevices until it reaches the bottom.
Afterwards, treat the area of the cerate until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and swelling, becomes inflamed, and turns into a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in previous sections, but it does not heal: then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after the botch or hole of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and behind it;
and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in previous treatments, until it is healed;
And if he is cured thus, it is good. And if not, you must uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head on your lap. Afterward, heat the cautery, which will be formed as follows: place a cane over the tooth;
And put the hot cautery inside, holding it there until the patient feels the heat reach the tooth's root.
Afterwards, lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
Afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, hold it there for an hour, and rinse vigorously.
In this way, the moving tooth becomes confirmed in its place, and the softened gum is restrained, while any corrupt moisture dries up.
From toothache
When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether from cold air or water, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then cauterization is necessary according to two methods: One method involves butter cautery, the other fire cautery.
Butter cautery is performed thus: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of it with an iron or brass spoon; Afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a pen, soak it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down.
and so it often happens that its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you wish, moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
The cauteries with fire are such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
after heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterward, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery has cooled down.
do this often, for the pain will be relieved on that same day or the next morning.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the preparation of this cautery, and then let the cold go afterward.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make the cautery for whatever jaw you want, and according to your ability;
and this is the shape of the chain:
scrofula When scrofula is of cold moisture and phlegm, and it does not respond to digestive medicines, then heat the red-hot cautery which follows after in this shape, and make two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side of the cautery;
and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, leaving it in place for three days. and put moist cotton smeared with butter on top to remove the burn.
afterwards treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be evacuated through dissolvant medications.
Afterwards, apply cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go beyond that point or burn any part of the heart except a little bit.
After treating it with fire cautery, perform another cauterization at the neck's junction with the spine, and use the clavicle-shaped cauterizer as described previously.
Treat the site just like we mentioned before until it is healed.
Whenever all lung diseases are caused by cold dampness and the patient has no fever or dry cough, and it is a chronic condition, apply two cauterizations on the arm above their armpit. And another one in the middle of the chest between two nipples.
Let it be that the cauterization is done with what we call a "clavicle", according to the shape described before.
And if you see fit, perform cauterization by pricking with the point, as was described before in the treatment of ear disease;
and let the points be up to XXX or thereabouts.
After treating the site as previously stated, apply three-row cauteries in this manner:
And for these cauteries to be lighter, do three at a time.
Of the shoulder dislocation:
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, remind the patient of their illness on their back and side. then lift up the heart, which is inside the thorax, with two fingers of your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cauterization iron which has two handles; this is its form.
cauterize the heart until it is pierced to the side, and the form of the cautery will consist of four pieces.
and for this reason cautery is performed with the three-pointed cauterizer, which creates six shapes of cauterization.
and the nerves, according to their subtle nature, require the form of the three-pointed cauterizer:
and at times it is adjusted on this one nerve so there are eight cauterizers.
Then place the cautery tool and grind it with charcoal; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is properly healed.
And if it is dislocated again soon after, then immediately perform a cauterization on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at once with intensity.
For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and excessive moisture arise in the stomach to such an extent that they remove it from its normal state, and catarrh is multiplied within him, and with usual treatments he does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and extend their legs and hands. make three cauterizations afterwards: one below the heel with an area equal to that of a thumb, at each corner of the square (the four corners are the locations for the first cautery), and two cauteries outside these two sides so that the shapes of the cauterization form triangles, and there is enough space between them such that they do not touch when they cause suppuration;
And let the cauterization be so thorough that it reddens the two sides of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without any adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization on the stomach according to this form;
And for those who fear this type of cauterization, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach in that place. Prick according to the quantity you wish to introduce; Then cauterize with a total of six "pricks".
After the treatment of the previous condition, once it is healed.
When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, to the point that it is removed from its natural state due to excesses; The sick are cured of what we have said in division, and it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded of their ailment. And for the third sign, apply cauterization in this manner and with this design, and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the man's ribs come together.
Allow space between each cauterization equal to the width of a finger. Let the length of each cautery be that of your body, but do not press too hard with your hand throughout the entire process.
Only burn halfway through the heart, and let the patient stand upright on their feet.
and if he cannot, let him lie down, and stretch his legs, and lift his arms;
And if your intention is, then cauterize these cauterizations with the knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn through the entire heart, as it would cause drying of the whole body; and do not let it reach the mouth, as the heart is very delicate in that area, and you would cause drying for no reason.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong.
And if it is in the membrane, they feel excruciating pain.
And so when this treatment is needed, the patient must be reminded of it on their head;
Then lance the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, of which this is the form: Cauterize the wound with the hot iron until the core is burned, and go up to the surface, so that the pores are all closed.
After the treatment, treat it according to the treatment of linen cloth until it is healed.
And it is not suitable for anyone other than those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine and whose hands these illnesses have been cured before.
Then one may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that leaving [the wound] be is better.
The cautery of soft wax
The ancients said that one should make several cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: Take one long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fingers; Oil the root and place it over fire. Cauterize with one large cauterization between the forearm and neck, and two smaller ones just below in the area under the beard;
Two more cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, sloping slightly backward; and one cautery between the breasts, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders;
and do not squeeze hard with your hand, but apply pressure gently, as if perfuming.
And some ancients said that no man should use a fire cautery like the barber's, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess; and if pain is felt, just as we said for the liver abscess.
But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
From the mouse.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery which are all good.
Of which there is one way that you should make three cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned before;
And do not rush your hand with the cautery, let the patient lie on their back attentively.
And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two cords, just as we have demonstrated in the case of shoulder dislocation.
Lift the heart which is towards the armpit, where the patient's wound faces left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its height, along the length of the body, and let the cautery be placed across the width of the body.
After placing the two flaming cords so that they pierce through to the other side of the heart, then pull them tight, and thus there will be four of them.
And if you see fit, cauterize with a three-ner cautery.
After the treatment when it has gotten rid of the inflammation over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned above.
Cauterization is not useful for treating dropsy, except in the manner known as 'ascites'.
When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in our divisions, and your treatment does not bring benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the swelling, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back along the spine, and one towards the breast; and let the cauterizations be close to the base of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus over a long period of time, and do not cease treatment of the patient after the cauterization. And healing will come sooner, combining these two intentions with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly shall be the clevis we have previously shown. And that for the back is an olive-shaped tool, according to what has been set out above.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger. And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go in too deeply, lest you puncture the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the little finger. And let the long cauterizations be below the knee in front and the other behind, halfway down the leg.
And leave the cauterizations untouched for a long time without treatment, until it comes out.
After curing other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the distension of the belly comes from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digesting virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by natural means; And you see the patient in great suffering and of strong constitution, then make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously for the stomach cautery, with the circular cauterization. And four subtle cauterizations around the navel with each cauterization being slightly smaller than the other, and two on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are located at the fundament, whether there is one or more, and they are ancient, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in previous sections, but to no avail, then perform cauterization: On the spine of the back, where it is entirely outside the medulla oblongata and gradually tapers to a point in a triangular shape, perform one cauterization beneath the bulge two inches.
And if you think their stomach is cooled and the meat is not cooking, and one can see swelling of the face, then perform a large cauterization on the stomach as mentioned before, another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with all three cauterizations being fastened together. And leave the open cautery for a long time. After treatment, let the wound heal.
When you treat the anus, heat up the cautery which resembles a plane, and then place it fully ignited on top of the treated anus; And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the wound, from which the blood flows out;
Do this once or twice, and if there is much of the anus, cauterize each part as we have said; After the treatments with ointments, let them heal until they are cured;
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will provide greater relief.
When a patient cannot endure any cutting or opening, as we will explain in this place, then such an illness arises that can only be cured by cauterization.
When someone has a fistula and it is filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you should treat them with great care and ensure that you know the entire extent of the abscess.
After heating the cautery which looks like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the tube that has entered there, and restart the cautery until those corrupt parts are burnt, one by one, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed.
And take care not to burn the nerves which are close by, or large veins.
If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and the intestine, avoid those areas and only perform the cautery on fleshy tissue, while taking care that it does not penetrate.
Afterwards clean the wound until it is dry, and if the area has been dry for a long time and matter has been removed, then know that the wound is completely healed.
And if the matter is not removed, know that the bone has been pierced, and it has corrupted the marrow. And thus as one of these we say in its place.
When pain from cold arises in the reins, and there is severe flatulence, and it does not resemble a woman's condition, then you must perform a cautery on the reins, one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery we mentioned earlier;
And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, which will provide greater relief.
On the bladder. When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then cauterize outside on the bladder, where the arm hairs begin, on the right and left side, with each cautery as long as a thumb's width.
and do this cautery outside the back, or two if you need to.
and let these be the clavicle cauteries according to the form previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends come late; and when they arrive, one feels great pain. then it is necessary that one do three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two outside the back.
and let these be the clavicle cauteries, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint, and due to this it moves out of place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
And you will find the place of the nerve origin, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a circular cautery, and make an incision in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle;
and let the cautery be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
If this type of cautery is not present, make three olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts;
And treat him until he is healed.
Of the pain in the hip. When pain comes to the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but is not healed, and the illness is long-standing: Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of excessive foul-smelling humours with pills or other suitable good medicines. After that, cauterize him.
And the method of cautery is according to two methods: That is to say, by means of all burning medicines together, and by fire cautery.
Cautery by fire is so according to many methods, of which some are such:
That you cauterize on the hip's box with three triangular cauteries in this form, making them deep and large, leaving space between each one equal to a thumb's width, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, so there are four of them arranged like this:
And if you wish, use the circular cautery we previously mentioned for the hip's dislocation;
But do it in such a way that the circles encompass the whole hip, and all the flesh of the heart be burnt.
This is the method used for sciatica when the pain is confined to the hip and does not extend down to the thigh or leg.
And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cautery above the ankle, slightly more on the left side.
let the cauterizations be made with a spatula, and burn off any excess fat around the heart;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or nearby, cauterize where they feel the pain with three points or four at the 'point' cautery. And if necessary, make more [cautery marks].
and if it seems that the pain is below the knee and towards the thigh, make a cauterization with either a spatula or circular tool, and be careful in all your cautery marks to not leave them so long as to burn nerves and large arteries, and cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery performed on their ankle, and they let it be until the leg was completely swollen, as well as the foot, and all of the feet were pierced and corrupted. After an abdominal operation in which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply a fire cautery to one part and then the other, following this method.
And the wise men said about the cauterization of the hip: thus is its nature, make such an iron tool and let it be at the top as thick as a navel of a date fruit, or a little less, and [let] it be serrated with each tooth being as wide apart from one another by the distance equal to that of a bean.
and let the serrations be cut in two parts, and also like knifes, and there is one well-made iron handle.
and this is its shape:
And it should be heated until it is glowing red and emitting sparks, then place it over the affected hip bone, and rotate it along its healthy side.
et le cauterizes une fois, puis retires le cautère et laisses [la plaie] trois jours. ensuite fais un emplâtre de beurre, et laisse la plaie ouverte pendant longtemps ; après le traitement, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Albucasis dit que nous utilisons peu de ce cautère à cause de son aspect, et si peu l'utilisent.
et pourtant c'est un bon cautère, quiconque peut le supporter, mais laisse là où la peau se durcit.
Les cautères médicaux ardents sont faits avec un instrument à deux branches où descend le fil de la porte, soit en cuivre ou en fer, sur une paroi longue, et à une hauteur de deux coudées, avec entre chacun l'espace d'un pouce. and are exposed from below and above, and they join together like this:
Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and quickly press your hand firmly onto the box of the hip; After that, pour the two circles of warm wax, heated over one firepot, in between them and leave it there for an hour; let the patient endure the heat and burning sensation.
For they will feel stinging as if from fire.
And when the stinging sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, leaving it like this for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burning has gone. Et leave it three days until it decays straight away.
And this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make him an instrument that holds tightly according to what you did on the hip equally.
And this is the way of the hot instrument, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. Where there is a small opening so that the point of a lancet can enter.
Where there is a small opening so that the point of a lancet can enter. And place over it another vessel well sealed, and put on alkali and heat it with gentle fire until there are two fingers of liquid above the powders when you have gripped it in your hand.
And let it sit until water drips down to the lead and tin or can plumbebate, then take all that water, and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
And then there will be much water, which is administered in many works of medicine and cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs another work like fire, and has other medicines that are used for cauterization such as the hip with wax, honey, and hot soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment in which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica; he suffered greatly, and says that no other treatment was used, and that he was healed immediately after this cure was performed, and he bathed as follows: as it is taught hereafter.
And it says to do so that you take fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it very well with one pound of grease, and apply it onto the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, then bind it.
And let it sit for three hours, depending on how long it takes until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little heated, and make him get into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps greatly;
and the cautery must be done in such a way. Take woolen cloth and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the "fossa".
After that, take dry goat dung and heat it until it becomes charcoal, then place it on wool and leave it until it is extinguished.
Repeat this process again, and continue doing so without ceasing until you feel that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased.
and this manner of cautery is called "goat cautery".
From the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling, being struck, excessive strain, or similar cold substances spreading through it, no type of cautery is suitable except for that which comes from an influx of cold material.
It is necessary that after the patient has been cleansed of fetid pills or other similar remedies, which are placed on their back where the pain persists, three lines should be marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more should be applied depending on the strength and tolerance of the patient;
and these cauteries should be made according to the method called 'point' cautery;
and if you see fit, apply III or IIII clavicle cauteries in the middle, according to this pattern;
This illness often affects young children, the initial signs are narrow chests when they rise and fear; And you find in the last vertebra of the spine, as we do in ours, a resemblance that arises on other vertebrae.
When you see this one and cure it, cauterize with the clean cautery according to this form. So that the cautery touches every part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you see it, cauterize around the vertebra with the cautery making two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care not to apply cautery on a hump that is over a nerve.
Of the pain of joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the foot, which doctors call "podagra" specifically, and when it is due to coldness and medicine cannot treat it, it should be treated with cautery in the following manner:
Make several cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to apply it to the front of the foot, perform a cautery at every point where one would make a "dot" cautery. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens frequently, apply three or four cauterizations on each knee or every other part, always using the olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to do more, then make more incisions, but keep your hand away except for when the tip of the heart's spear is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands, make incisions around the wrist two lines long.
and if there remains no pain in the fingers, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pain reaches the arms or shoulders, cauterize each affected part, and provide good care to the patient and administer medications.
For if you provide good care and cleanse the humours, he will be healed by God's help.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, if it is a recent occurrence, on the day you treat it, ensure he does not eat. And let him use things that loosen the belly, so that the feces may descend from his abdomen.
After this, have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the nostrils are repaired, then pull them towards your fingers, and cauterize below the rupture onto the wrist bone, and make an incision in the form of half a circle above the body.
Then heat up the following instrument for this procedure:
As long as they are white and cast no shadows. Afterward, reset the balls to their place. And have your assistant hold his hand in place so that it does not return backward.
and work well the thighs of the patient, and place a cushion beneath him, with a strap on the thighs, and another [strap] above his hips to hold down his hands;
then place the cautery over the mark with all your strength, and hold it straight and press until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the lip does not jump when you apply the cautery; so you do not burn it; and so the patient does not die from this, or other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the child's cautery marks be subtle according to their size, and for adults they should also be large according to their measure.
After three days, treat the site of the butter cautery until the scalding is gone;
After the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is fully sealed.
And it is important that their nourishment be sufficient for a long time, so that the wound does not break open when they attempt to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when they wish to get up, have a well-made bandage ready for them, and wear it for another forty days.
and have good rest, let him work little and guard against too much drinking or eating, and from shouting too loudly;
and when he follows this treatment, he is entirely healed.
And I will now say after this the treatment for cutting, in its chapter.
When worms come into other stomachs and are known to be there, and you see that they no longer grow, if you wish, apply a hot iron cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the heart. after treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize with a three-angled iron according to this form:
But first mark the place of insertion and make a line across the width above the rupture, then another one outside, and hold your hand in the middle throughout the whole procedure of cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cauteries should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, strength, location of torsion, and the severity of the pain.
if he is healed from the first cautery, it is good.
If that name should be repeated for another cautery on it, as this custom is such that it must change to the member which is closest, therefore you ought to perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
The month is aided sometimes by cauterization for great help, especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you are about to perform the cauterization, be cautious if the illness is in its early stages and if it has been treated according to what we have said regarding treatment type. If the disease does not subside or remain dormant, and you doubt that corruption could spread throughout the patient's body then apply 5 cauteries on their head: One at the nape of the neck and another towards the forehead near the end of their hair: And two on each temple, with one behind on the occipital bone.
And leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come off so that the vapors from the thick humors can escape.
And cauterize it on the wound according to what is required.
And if the injury is dispersed everywhere; and it clearly deteriorates, then you must cauterize it with these cauterizations we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery on the neck spine, two cauteries on the back spine, one large one on the upper back, another nearby, and two on the shoulders. and two on the elbows, and two on the heel tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves located above your heel so as not to burn them.
And sometimes you apply the cautery to the bone of the wrist, and another on the stomach bone, and one more above the liver.
Know that the more you use cautery, the more help you provide, and it benefits them.
Understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would because their body is already corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the handling of irons.
After treatment, apply flour paste to the wound with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When inflammation arises in a limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then apply cautery to the limb according to its size.
and let the cauterization mark be a little inward from the tip of the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes one must make a cauterization mark on the hand, foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thereby removes the inflammation.
and in any case, do not intervene if you are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the paths of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is cured, and medical treatments are of no use, then cauterize it with a perfect cauterization mark, according to the size of the tip of the heart, until the white spots are removed, and its colour changes.
Then treat with flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and the blood of pigeons and larks, one part each; And mix everything together, bind it with cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
The treatment of cancer with cautery.
When cancer appears at its beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous growth.
Moreover, wise doctors say that one should apply a cautery to the middle of the cancerous wound;
But I do not think this is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which I have already seen happen a few times.
And rather it should be cauterized around the edges with the so-called 'circular' cautery, as we have previously mentioned in the section on types of cauteries.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to the excessiveness of what it does or because of the patient's water when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of the weather; and you want to hasten their death: then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around the area; Afterwards, leave it be. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat up the cautery with what it is made of:
Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let it be such that the patient feels the cautery externally so that the course of corruption is alleviated.
Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healed.
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fires consume dry branches.
If you see this illness in a place that can bear fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large nails, according to what is appropriate for the area or the severity of the illness;
After the cauterization of all parts, make sure to remove all the corruption, leaving nothing behind; ensure that everything corrupted is extracted.
Leave it for three days, then apply to the cauterized areas a soft ointment with oil until all scalding from the fire and corruption is removed.
Afterwards, treat it with an ointment that produces flesh.
And if after three days no inflammation appears, it's good;
If not, restart the cauterization on whatever remains corrupted.
And this inflammation has sometimes been treated with medicine instead of fire cauterization;
However, fire cauterization is of greater help; I have already mentioned the treatment with medicine in the section on inflammation: Take it when you need it.
boils that come to the feet Many times there occurs in the foot a disease that is called "claws" according to our understanding, and it is a faulty bulging thing that wounds the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease has two methods. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautery of fire is that you heat one cautery like a feathered pin, and it should be made of good iron with the measure to fit the nail from all sides, and have fine edges.
After you place the heated cautery on top of the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. Leave it like this for three days until it starts to discharge pus. Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight; the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its root.
Then treat the wounded place with an ointment made of fat until it is healed.
And if they are converted by force in the body, and occur often in hands or feet, then you should treat them with hot water cautery. et it is in such a manner: Take a cane of brass or iron, or a feather from an owl's wing, and place it on the nail and wart, that is to say for warts. Place the cane on it so that it touches all around, then put a drop of hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand while turning it so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and allows the hot water to penetrate deeply down to the root.
Let the patient endure the stinging of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it like this, and it will be uprooted with all its roots.
Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those which are within the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
When some shiver from cold due to nerves, or quartan fever, or other causes, you should apply four cauterizations on the spine of their back, one between each vertebra. and one cauterization on the foot, and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
Allow them to tremble, it will hasten recovery from the cold disease.
Sometimes one notices breaks in the body with baths or stinking pustules which come from large corrupted substances.
When they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pimple. A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, whose tip is seized by fire, or with the root of long aristoloche, or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it prevents them from growing any further, but the excess from which they come is broken down, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
There are often great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut open at the wound that comes to the surface, or during the incision of an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb, and in similar situations. and it is quite difficult to staunch (stop the flow of blood).
And yet, when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press firmly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger, with no more drops flowing out.
Then put the olive oil cautery to the fire, multiple small and large ones until they are all red.
Then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the place where the artery is exposed, and place the cautery onto that vein while holding your finger on it, keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
And if it sparks when you lift your finger above the wound, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another of the cauteries from the fire.
And do not stop doing one after another until the blood is staunched.
Beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that other mischief does not befall the patient.
And know that when blood escapes from the artery, it cannot be well staunched especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods we have mentioned. by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by applying medicine which has the power to staunch blood; and bind it tightly and hold it still.
That which will bring about stanching by binding tightly with bandages or applying hot objects, or other similar things, is of no avail unless it be done promptly.
And if it should happen to anyone and they have no mirror or medicine present, one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is staunched over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it moist with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched;
and prepare in advance all that is needed for cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicines, and we described the operations, their causes and instruments as well as the shapes of cauteries.
And I have set forth this chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this same way in this chapter so that what one seeks may be more easily found.
And so, as I begin this work, dear child, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is greater danger and fear than in the previous one about cauterization, thus requiring even greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For there are many ways in which people come for treatment. So there are those who become so fearful with their illness that they die quickly due to the confusion caused by their condition and its great severity. And we must fear these.
Among them there is one who will give you his advice and tell you: Wait, I am healed"; But the illness is spiteful.
You should not give in to those who come to you with this manner but put more trust in your honor than in your greed and do not act rashly but wisely regarding what you are sure of and can gain rightfully.
Use prognostics and diagnostics for treating your patients so that their health can be restored.
And this will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he wish to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vous ai ordonné ce chapitre en le divisant par chapitres, selon qu'il est présenté avant celui sur les cautères, que je vous ai déjà décrit du haut de la tête jusqu'aux pieds, afin que vous trouviez plus facilement ce dont vous avez besoin.
Know that this disease often comes to children during birth when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it happens for reasons that are unknown, as yet.
And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, but it brought death to all the children that I have witnessed. And for this reason, it seems best to leave the work of treating such cases to others.
And I saw that child whose shoulder was full of water, and his head swelled each day until he could no longer bear it;
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone above the shoulder-blade, between the heart and the bone;
and the procedure is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a wide incision in the head;
and let it be as long as two thumbs, so that the moisture drains;
and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs of the skull being open at the sutures on every side, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to treatment: So you must make three incisions within the head like this:
And after the incision, extract all moisture. After the incisions are clean with gauze and powder, apply wine and oil, and leave for five days.
Then unwrap it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, allowing the head to remain extended evenly, while providing the patient dry meat from a pig without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to look where the swelling of the abscess appears, and its collection of pus.
For sometimes it will be in front (of you). For some times behind. Never once to the right. And never once to the left.
Cut therefore at the place where the abscess appears, and treat the fluid accumulation, and open it according to your ability.
And take care not to cut an artery. If there is bleeding of blood, the patient may die due to loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Therefore, when you must cut the veins, it is necessary for the patient to lean back their head. After you rub the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then choke the patient with all your might using this cloth. Then look where the vein beats, and the bones of both are behind the ears, and they are covered with skin.
Then mark the bones of the neck, then strike both with a sharp spatula twice as thick, so that the cut reaches the bone, and it is made on the wide part of the head.
And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover above it, cutting as deep as necessary across the wound.
When the vein is cut open, blood spurts out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure three finger-widths, then mark the neck and cut down to the bone.
And the amount of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the patient can bear and the fullness of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If it remains on top of the bone without a splint, remove it so that hot abscesses do not form there; then open the wound and bind it, treating with ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine. When an old migraine comes with a cold and due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and an old persistent headache and similar things, and it is medicated through various medical treatments but nothing helps, we remove the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the way of arrow extraction is as follows: have the patient grasp their own hair from their temples and feel for the artery that beats in the temple, for it shows clearly by its pulsation, except in some men who are too cold-blooded.
And if it is recessed, let the patient grasp their own neck with some fabric and then rub the area with a rough cloth, moistening the spot with hot water until the artery becomes plainly visible. then take the spatule of which this is the form: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with pincers, and remove any membranes that are underneath on each side;
and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut off, the blood cannot flow out everywhere all at once.
and draw out blood for six quarters, down to three;
and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that blood cannot come out before the wound heals and flows continuously.
Then cut the superfluity that is between the two ligaments at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-like cautery down to the bone until the head is cut.
And it is a dangerous procedure if the patient has no fever and they are of hot constitution. For cauterization helps to dry up moisture: because it is of greater help for moisture.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
and when one releases them, let it be cured with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with bandages until it is healed.
And if you sense blood flowing from the artery while operating, quickly cut it off with a cauterizer, or use a mixture of vitriol and alum to stop the bleeding; If you don't have the aforementioned available, place your hand directly on it until the blood is frozen, and pour cold water over it until the bleeding stops, keeping it tight as required;
There should be a thumb's width between the two knives, and once you have joined both sides together, place the heated iron on top until it reaches the bone, then cut the vein into two. and they must be separated between the two shoulder joints for it is not completely welded with this cauterization.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
What is easier and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery into two parts, but make sure the cuts are wide to retain heat longer. For when the instruments are too thin, they retain less heat.
Tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from veins that are above the top of the head, and no medical treatment is beneficial, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel a sensation of trembling across their forehead; and if their skin is taut and moist so that the hair on the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are burned and scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. The ancients called it "contusion treatment," and what you must do for the patient with this ailment is to shave the hairs from their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly spaced along its length;
The ancients called it "contusion treatment," and what you must do for the patient with this ailment is to shave the hairs from their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly spaced along its length; et soit l'une des fendures ainsi comme deux doit tout emmi le front en avalant aval jusqu'à neif, et les autres deux aux côtes par-dessus les poitrines, et te garde de l'incision des artères qui sont aux côtés par-dessus les poitrines;
et éloigne ta main de la continuité des deux mâchoires, et que chaque plaie ait une profondeur de trois doigts en travers joints;
et aies préparée une pièce d'éponge avec beaucoup de chiffons secs pour essuyer le sang, puis introduit l'écope pointue en deux parties dont voici la forme:
de l'incision qui est sous le tempe jusqu'à la deuxième incision; and scrape out all the heart that is between the two clefts to the entire surface that is above the bone, then make another similar incision from the middle one until you reach the other second [cleft], and then extract this spatoulina. Insert into the first slit the instrument which is called a 'cultellarium', and it is very sharp on one side, but soft and not sharp on the other side, and this is its shape:
Place the sharp edge towards the flesh near the core and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle slit.
cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until you reach what appears of the heart, and then make another similar one in the middle cleft up to the other exterior [one];
and then extract the blood equally, and express the place for taken blood;
then put in each cleft a tent of old cotton, and place on it dressings moistened with wine, oil, and egg white, and ensure that no hot abscesses come to the surface;
On the third day, untie the bandage, and apply a large compress of warm water, then treat it with basilicum ointment mixed with rosehip oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds until it is healed.
When someone has chronic inflammation of the eyes with recurring episodes, and you notice their eyes becoming sunken and small, weakening their vision, and the eyelids burning; And their hair falls out, and there is pain throughout the head, and the patient sneezes frequently; Then you should know that these symptoms and this inflammation arise from multiple causes, and the only true remedy is as follows:
And you should instruct the patient to lie on their back, then make a big incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear. Start by making an incision from the left temple to the right temple, cutting down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move to eat
and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all blood with a sponge, then dislodge between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages; then bind moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of warm abscesses;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote healing.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment. And apply medicine to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
Of the stuffing of ears
Whatever falls into the ears is one of four things: Or grain, or beast, or mineral stone like iron; Or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils; Or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
When a stone or any other object that does not fit the ear falls into it, and cannot grow in the ear, place the ear under sunlight.
If you see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or oil of cicely, then administer its extraction. And have them sneeze with cumin, and block their nose when the sneeze comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear. and lift the ear above.
Many times one sneezes due to this treatment;
and if there is no sneezing, they administer an extraction with subtle pincers, which are shaped like this:
If one sneezes from the pincers, it is good;
if not, they administer an extraction with a small subtle curved blade;
and if one does not sneeze from that, they make a reed cane and insert the end of the cane into the ear hole forcefully, then plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that no air can enter alongside the cane. Then treat the fire severely, for often it comes back as we have said.
And if it does not come back in this way, take glue and cover the instrument with it as birds are caught, then put a piece of cotton around [the instrument]. Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and treat the fire.
And if it cannot be treated with all the methods we have mentioned, then hurry to open the ear rather than an abscess so that heat and spasms may come.
The manner of the incision is such that you first bind the patient's head with a headband and draw some blood according to his strength, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or tissue underneath. and let the fissure be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck swiftly towards your mouth;
and treat [the wound] until it is healed.
And if there are grains present and they swell, administer their removal;
and if it cannot come out, use the spatula very gently in this way: And bring about an incision of that grain.
But do not attempt this if you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many small incisions;
then extract [the grains] with fine forceps and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should first sneeze and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them lie on that same ear where the water is. If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them slightly over the fire. And place the patient's ear over an opening, with their feet apart on either side, and strike another stone upon the stone in the ear. Do not stop striking stone against stone until the water comes out completely, and thus it will all come out.
And if you see this, take a reed and insert one end into the ear, and blow on the other end with fire until the hottest part of the reed is burnt.
Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said about stones.
In the extraction of a small creature, such as a flea or similar, treat it as described in the section on divisions.
But if it is of a large body that one can feel, then prepare an extraction with pincers. And this is the lightest thing to remove that could be in the ear.
In the extraction of worms lodged in the ears, when you treat it as described in the section on divisions and deal with the distilling process, and the treatment is not effective, then one must examine the ear in sunlight. If no worms appear, then remove them with fine pincers; and if none are seen, take a thread of the same kind.
And it is narrow beneath and wide above. And press the most subtle part of your head into the ear according to the amount of suffering felt by the patient, then suck strongly along the entire chain. do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, then plug the chain with cotton as I have said for stones.
and if they do not crawl out as we have said, then administer the distillations that ancient doctors have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these tools, of which this is the shape as you see it. And whether it is made of silver or copper, place it narrow below into small holes, and above cover to distill.
to compress within the distillation with an instrument made of copper for this purpose, and if you wish to take a razor and wrap around its point like cotton. then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish from your vessels into the tube, and let the tube be in the ear.
then insert the razor with all its cotton inside, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or reaches the end of the ear. and let the patient smell it inside [the ear], and be its distillation either warm from the fire or fresh as you distill into the ear. And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born without an opening in their ears.
And the same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound or wax inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes so severe that it cannot be seen.
And at times the obstruction appears outside of the opening, which is clearly visible.
The one that becomes severe and cannot be seen is quickly treated in multiple ways, and for this, it is necessary to expose the patient's ear to the sun. And look inside: If you see the operation revealed, work with all this spatulum which is its shape:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, all evenly so that it does not wound the ear;
If the operation is on the ear lobe or body, hold it with subtle pincers and gently cut away until all flesh is removed.
And if the suppurations are complete in the ear, take a delicate, lightweight razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you sense an operation causing the patient to feel itching when heard, pierce lightly and be careful not to damage the ear's nerves.
Then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this on any day when the wound is healed, or take a tent-shaped dressing and dampen it in pink water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the dressing and apply another, dampened in a paste made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone. Then treat it until it is healed.
And if there is loss of blood, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other remedies that stop the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
This remedy for rheumatism which comes in paper rolls for the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you spread them with tongs and pincers, and remove the rind from its roots using a spatula. Then place ground vitriol on it.
And if you strip off the skin, cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and afterward the cauterizer moves following the incision.
and often return, whenever something remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
of the hail Often come in the eye papilla things that appear gritty in its form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "glaucoma," which is an assembly of thick moisture on both sides of the papilla. The work is such:
The work is such: Take care if glaucoma moves from one side to the other, which is a minor thing to know;
Making it thus wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cut it.
If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin slightly, it does not greatly harm the patient.
And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not use force, for the ointments will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
And if the hailstone descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn it over and extend the hailstone with pincers, cut it and press from one side to the other.
and if the paper is separated by incision, it matters not;
and when the cataract is couched, apply warm water to the eye, and treat the place from which matter proceeds until the patient is healed.
from the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease which gathers on the paper-like membranes above, and this happens more often in children than adults, greatly affecting their eyes, causing catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears well up in their eyes;
and for this they lay on their faces thereafter, and sleep with their paper-like membranes beneath their eyebrows moistened by the vapour and appearance having covered them in exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press down on the place with your fingers and feel the exit point between them.
And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head on your lap.
then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that extends beyond each part, then place it on top. press with your hands on either side, so that the excess is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit no wider than the wound made when opening a vein;
and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the excess; and in various arrangements, moisture appears from the slit, like the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract it therefore with one piece of padded cloth between your two hands on the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
And take care not to adjust it in the groove, lest you come into contact with the entire spatula up to the eye, and cause an injury.
And if the bone does not emerge at the beginning of the groove, slightly increase the size of the groove gently until it appears.
Then extract it as we have described, then wet the cloths in warm water and place them on the site, and bind firmly.
For such people who grind herbs and place them on to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if it comes to a hot abscess, treat it with soothing emollient plasters until it is healed.
hairs of paper. When hair grows in places other than where it is naturally intended to grow and becomes ingrown, this can be detrimental to the eyes, leading to various ailments such as habitual tearing, softening of the eyelids, and discharge, ultimately resulting in eye damage.
and the treatment is carried out according to four methods: by means of fire cautery, or by medicinal means according to what is presented before in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, as I will explain.
Place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their left eye towards your left hand;
if it faces inward, that is good; if not, insert a needle with thread into it; and let it be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow or above these hairs, and pull the thread through to the other side, then turn it with the back of a razor;
Then make an incision beneath the paper-like membrane under the hairs, cutting all of it away until the large bone (humerus) and its projection is exposed.
Remove the thread and place beneath the membrane a small tent made of cotton and linen, then suture over it an anchor-shaped figure as in myrtle leaves; however, be sure that its size fits your intended elevation of the divided membrane.
And if necessary, cut away large portions of the membrane according to how softened it is.
Then make an incision across the entire humerus along both lines you have marked, starting from its large projection to its smaller end. and be one of the incisions close to natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the uncinus into one of the two corners of the heart, and then remove the skin completely;
then bring together the two lips with a seam using a needle and any fine woolen thread, wipe away the blood, and remove any excess thread on both eyebrows or any sticky substances if you wish to perform this.
and if not, have no concern for it, then leave the seam and threads until three or four days have passed.
then treat the wound without a seam using drying and binding substances, for paper lifts upon the healing of the wound and its reunion, but a seam is dangerous (as the ancients said), and these are works without fear. and if it is done in another way:
and if it is done in another way: and you should bleed the skin to produce a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, with three ounces of salt removed according to this form:
Then cut this which overcomes the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the figure; and place another thread near the larger lobe, and the second thread near the smaller one, and join between your two fingers the threads evenly;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have bled, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed;
and if an abscess forms at your incision site, soothe it with a cautery and similar soothing ointments.
and sometimes the hairs of the scrotum become twisted:
then you must use what we have said about incision.
but the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of canine bites follows this form: You must turn the scrotum inside out according to what I have said, and then make two incisions per side, as well as two fine threads of suture as long as the width of your little finger. and hold both shoulders of two parts where you are holding the threads;
then join one and the other delicately onto what is above the paper of the eye, and stretch the two chains of the two parts formed; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and blacken and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, apply force to it, then treat it until it is healed.
and when the wound is healed, if the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer prick.
and this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and with these measurements in length and width:
The works are such that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a soft and delicate silk thread; Then join the heads (of the bones) together and knot both sides delicately, and let the length of the thread be one palm in length.
Then arrange another fine silk thread inside the wound, tie the ends of the threads together tightly.
Then place the patient's head on your lap.
And be by the sunlight so that the work is illuminated, for it is delicate and fine work. Then insert the needle into the wound all the way to the root of an adjacent hair, piercing through until you draw it out above a natural hair.
then extract the hair up to the shaft, and push into the shaft that hair, whether there is 1 or 2 or 3 or more.
then extract your hand until the hairs come out fully into the shaft in the paper with its natural hair.
And if the shaft is intact and the hair does not come out with it, you will treat the shaft from below along all of its length that you have instructed, until the shaft comes out through the hole above and you see it by the eye's vision;
then treat the shaft and its length, close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over it;
and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long hair from their natural growth pattern, and raise it along with the one you leave [alone], until they elongate and then remove it.
From the corruption of the eye When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the scurf arises in the eye, it occurs in two ways:
one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And this occurs suddenly due to a wound, or from a cutting instrument or cauterization, and through similar procedures.
And the way of treating it is that you split that weld [wound?], and separate its lips, and place inside linen bandages, and bind it until it heals.
and it is not suitable that you use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict [the eye?]. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before.
but use softening substances like fenugreek. and the decoction of water or other liquids with flax seeds is cooked, and ointments made from melted diazion are mixed into any oils, and a poultice is prepared; treat this condition as described above.
And the secret of your treatment is that you must be cautious not to let it heal in a form different from its original shape.
And these treatments we have mentioned are only meant to address this illness so that it does not return in its original form.
This disease, which is dislocated and truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Accidents arise from wounds, fractures, cauterization, and similar procedures.
And the way to work on it is as follows: take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, piercing from the left armpit to the right, so that the thread comes out through two points of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh above the entire needle and strike it with a broad spatula. And if the appearance of the flesh returns according to what is required, it is good.
If not, take a razor and place it in the wound, turn back the flesh, and make two incisions on either side inside the flesh.
and let the two sides of the incision be placed at the two corners you have marked, and make these angles so that when they are assembled together the shape resembles that of the Greek letter "I";
then remove that flesh according to its quantity from underneath the skin on either side of what follows the paper, then join these two parts together, and sew them with a woollen thread;
then treat it with the softening medications as we have said earlier, and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
And if the wound comes from a split or a stitch or a burning, then you must make an incision in full underneath the skin of the flesh and according to what is described above. Then sever between the two lips of the wound, as I said;
Then sever between the two lips of the wound, as I said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in its forms, and wise doctors devise every means within their power to restore the shape to its natural form;
and the patients themselves, according to what is required of them in terms of operation and instruments in various positions.
When this adhesion occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper over it is stuck with the white part of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up;
and extend them to the pincers, so that you cut off what is hard with the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and injuring the eye.
and let your incision, where you peel away the assembly, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form.
and is cleansed all that assembly, and they sometimes make an eye-wash with salt water, and add fresh water, and collorium.
then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened with egg white. and after three days, use collorium and soothing things until it is healed.
Know that a nail (or claw) is of two types: One is nervous and resembles hard skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and treated with pincers, one cannot do so;
And both of these appearances start towards the upper eyelid, and grow piece by piece until they cover all of the eye's vision, light, and movement.
And the manner of incision is that the patient should place their head in your lap, then open their eyes; And lift the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small pincers, extending it above; Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or cow hair, or oxen hair, and strong thread. Double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it between the nails, piercing through with the entire needle, then tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, scraping away all the hair on the side of the nail that covers the grape-like growth and the sinew up to the head; cut off what remains at the root of the armpit using a subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh in the armpit so that the body's fluids do not flow out through the incision as is customary.
And sometimes stretch only the nail with the spatula, and with the thread, as we have said. Then you must flay the entire spatamil, soft from which it is so formed:
And take care that the spatamil does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, nor should the marrow be pierced;
After the incision, pour a pinch of ground silphium into the eye, and apply collar made of litharge, leaving it until the next day; Then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor can the hooks enter it, this similar case of a nail has often been treated by physicians;
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it cut, operate on the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula with a sharp edge according to this form: and lift the eyelid carefully, and if you see that it doesn't reduce [the inflammation] and the reason presses you, then distil into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper sulfate, which is finely ground, and plug up the eye until the next day;
If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then restart the other work according to this same operation, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with an onion, and cut away part of it but not all, so that a body of tears doesn't come out.
Then drip into the eye red colloidal mercury which is made of litharge.
Some men's eyes are born with a red scar, which covers the pupil and spreads over the whites of their eyes to the outside corners, resembling a red rose.
And the procedure is that the patient places their head in your lap, you then open up their eyes and roll back all of this flesh with suitable hooks and hold it firmly.
Then cut the first layer of flesh and keep on cutting with a razor until you reach the end, being careful not to damage the eye during the procedure.
And the incisions should be made with a spatula, as we have mentioned before in the chapter about nail incision and small forceps to remove them, as this chapter shows.
and when the incision is complete and all flesh removed, apply ground linseed oil or if you wish to distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, place on the eye outside a cotton pad with egg white so that it is covered from an abscess of heat.
and if nothing remains there, and warm blood rises above it, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and so do likewise whenever flesh has been removed from the eye in this manner.
However, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye according to natural ways. And for accidental wounds, in ironwork;
Nor should you thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is capable of bearing the treatment.
Below the veins are red lines that cover the eye, obscuring its sight and weakening it daily.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine the eye, in what state it is, whether it is healthy or diseased, and that there are no other ailments beyond this. Then treat it as follows:
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, then cleanse those veins as thoroughly as you know how, and ensure that these cleansings are doubly subtle according to this method:
Et let there be two ounces by degrees in the body according to this form:
Then cleanse those veins thoroughly with the fingers, and wipe away the blood one hour later, until you see the veins of the eye become strong again.
And be careful not to injure the eye with the sharp edges of the spatules, and perform this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as not to cut anything but those veins.
And when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the film.
And if you cannot gather all these things at that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances for the pain of the eyes, and leave it there for some days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess assured, then begin again according to this method until it is healed.
And this is the form of treatment:
The doctor calls them "arissati" when they are fistulae:
When you treat it with cauterization and medicine for a burning ulcer as I previously mentioned, and it is not healed, if there is pus in it that you must open over the abscess, leave where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument by which it was formed.
It is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron going to the head, and pointed like a file as it currently appears:
Place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that corruption is removed.
And do this once or twice, then apply astringent medications to the site.
If the wound has healed over and grown flesh, and the body of the vein is also healed, remaining so for forty days without reopening or becoming abscessed, and no ill accidents occur, know that it is cured.
If not, there remains the procedure of reopening the fistula to the sinus using this method: And it is that you reopen the bone a second time with an iron instrument and caustic medications, and when it is reopened take a trephine of this design, and let the tip of the bit be three-sided, tapering to a point as shown here:
Then place it above the bone near the armpit, and move your hand away from their eye by one thumb's length, then turn the drill completely until it pierces through the bone and they feel it because the wind passes through if they hold their hand over their nose.
And then apply the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the scar forms and hardens the places, it goes to the nose. This is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye has opened fully without any obstruction or reduction of breath, you must bind the patient.
Then clean it, then apply cups or hot iron without wounding to suck, then place on the eye a poultice made of aloes and incense and sarcocolle, then strain the eye, and apply plaster over bandages and cloths.
and the manner of bandages is such that you take soft enough bandages, and fold each into four, then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eyes need.
then strain it through a hard and tight bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without bruising;
then remove the cups and keep the eye tightly closed day and night, and if the ties loosen, you must strain it greatly.
afterwards, remove the ties after day and night, and if you see that the eye is restored, it is good.
if not; If it starts again, apply the plaster, cloth dressings, bandages, and cups until it is healed.
From the rupture of a hard membrane When ruptures occur in the cloudy cornea, it opens up, and something hard comes out like resin grains, which is dreadful to see.
Then if you see it cut, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of one part below until reaching above and then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the orbital fissure. And pierce it, leaving the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the doubled thread and bind part of the cornea around it tightly, then remove the needle and apply moist lint soaked in raw egg onto the eye.
And leave it until the son of onion grows with the egg, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is restricted by an egg on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye shows great signs of injury, pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out through the eye and drains the white moisture and lowers the eyelid, entering immediately.
Then remove it until it is healed.
This illness, called "alconatti", is caused by foul matter assembled in the eye, appearing like descending water but it is not water.
and the manner of appearance for the operation is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between your hands from two sides, and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes. then be fixed, and do not lower or cover the light, and let the patient see things as they usually would.
and if it does not descend below, know that this is due to water retention, and if the descent of the bow is not equipped as we have said earlier.
have the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the corneal tissue through a pore by following the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea, until the bow comes out.
and when it has been removed, drip warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Watery eyes We have seen the appearance of fluids during the procedure, and what is required to puncture it; so act according to good health.
You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from direct sunlight for the eye to be bound very tightly.
Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-sided, or on your right hand if they are right-sided.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea at the thickness of a hair in that whiteness of the eye towards the lower part of the tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of almagda matches perfectly the space from the pupil to the end of the black part. This is the cornea of the eye.
If you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, then you can place the instrument up to where the water is, and express it underneath a way after another.
If the swelling goes down now, the patient will see before them and the instrument in their eye.
After rest the small one, and if the water rises again through a second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in there and does not rise, then extract the alum gently by turning your hand back and forth.
And then pour in a little sealskin, and lift out the eye from it. Then place over the eye with dry lint or wet wool in rose oil and egg white, and bind it with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, put on it crushed cumin with plenty of egg white.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deep, but make a subtle hole, then put in the alum, as we have said.
And upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient an upcoming pleasant bed, so that they may sleep on their back in a dark place.
Let them abstain from all movement, and eat light food, moving neither their head to the right nor left. Bind them according to their condition until the third day.
Then release them in the same dark room and test their vision. Show them various objects to perceive and then rebind until the seventh day.
You should not perform this during or immediately after the treatment but rather in anticipation of water rising quickly.
If an abscess develops, that you release the eye before the seventh day and address it with treatment for abscesses.
And when it is eased, release the bandage and place on their face a small kerchief to cover for one day, then remain in that dark house.
Then remove from the house little by little, and accustom them to these conditions.
And remember that no disciple should interfere in this matter. And a man came to us from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make pierced alembics for distilling water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps this is a new invention.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almug, because whoever does not know them will see them.
and be made of pure copper. And the head is of the same subtle material, and the end is in three angled corners.
Sometimes there arise joined cars diverse, from which some appear like scorpions with many feet;
And if there be such, where it has chariot enhanced with red fox fur, and also soft chariot of good color. In this soft chariot that is not enhanced, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun.
In this soft chariot that is not enhanced, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun. And open their nostrils, apply ointment to those chariots, and draw them forward. Prick with what you can hold steady at the spatule's sharp point from one side, so that you know this flesh is all removed.
And if anything remains which cannot be cut, open it entirely with the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains there. and if it overwhelms you, with abscess cauterization, do the operation as required;
and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize so the blood is stanched and all flesh is removed; then apply warm wax or wine. If the wound operates and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healing;
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, which prevents instruments from cutting.
then you must insert into it a length of linen thread somewhat thicker than the others and tie a knot at each end leaving between them an inch or less of space. have the patient grasp with his hand that end of the thread which is attached to the shoulder and draw it in gently until he can smell it coming out into the mouth through the nose;
and this is often done to children at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it.
then hold the end which comes out through the nose with one hand and that which is drawn from the mouth with the other, and draw the two ends together being careful to keep your fingers on either side of the thread.
Do this so that you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the son, wipe away the blood, and dampen the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it back into the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, so that the ointments erode all that remains of flesh;
And then place in the nose a leaden tube for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose;
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube and its handle.
and if you see fit, make a tight cage, and have the instruments ready to cleanse the head.
hold the handle firmly against the head to keep it still when heating oil or any liquid.
from the flesh above the nose
Often a tumor is born in the head which grows large and becomes visible to the eye.
And for this, you must cut it at the beginning, removing all of it, then apply a cauterizing agent or burning medicine to the area.
and if it is left to grow large, take note if it is hard, dark in colour and has poor sensation.
Do not touch it with iron for this is a festering abscess as when one pierces through it once there comes great pain to the patient.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of fixed colour, and you see that it can be entirely cut out, then empty the patient's bowels and cut it without fear, treating the wound with drying and constricting things.
Know that when the operation of continuing into one of these cartilaginous works yields little benefit, except for some men.
Therefore, when it happens to anyone, one should look to see if the wound is fresh and full of blood. Then bring together the two lips in a seam, afterwards treating it until it is healed.
And if the lips are torn apart on both sides, one should scrape away all parts of their hearts until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in a seam, binding them tightly, and dusting it with powder made from dragon's blood and ground frankincense. and place a piece of strong plaster or another sealing plaster on top, and leave it until it hardens by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The way of the suture is that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or by thread, just as I made you aware.
Of abscesses of the lips
Men's hands develop inside the lips as hard abscesses, resembling warts, both smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips back, split each one open and take pincers to extract its contents in each part;
Then apply the place after the incision with powdered vitriol, until the blood is stanched;
And then leave it to heal easily, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Often there arises on the gums flesh that grows in an unhealthy manner, which the ancients call 'albulus';
You must hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the bowels or blood run out;
Then put on the area powdered vitriol or other restraining and drying powders;
And if that flesh grows back after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; If it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes in the gum area of the mouth, hideous and rough bark-like objects form around teeth. And sometimes the tooth turns black or yellow-green, indicating decay has spread to the gum and causing foul odor.
You must have the patient sit between your hands, their head in your lap, and you remove teeth or bark-like growths until nothing is left. And do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned.
et if one removes what is at the root cause, it is good. if not, start again on the second day and third, until you have healed everything.
and know that teeth require various types of instruments to extract them depending on the work that needs to be done because the rasp used for extracting teeth protruding from the gums has a different shape than the one used between the teeth. and these shapes, and others, should be prepared for you.
When treating tooth pain, it is important to delay the extraction as long as possible because this should not be done lightly. For it is a very important matter until such time as one has no excuse to exclude it.
Then when the patient is forced to extract (the tooth), you must be certain of which tooth is causing pain. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, so they have a good tooth drawn. And yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, as the bad tooth remains, for we have seen it happen with these sufferers.
And when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula, taking care not to damage the gums.
Then grasp it with your fingers or with delicate pincers at the first blow and blow, until it is well loosened, then close the pincers tightly. And let the shoulder of the patient be on your lap between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, use one of these instruments and gently insert them on each side, moving it as you did initially.
And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the hole is. And extract it carefully with tongs so that it does not break when you remove it.
And one must work very carefully around the gum with great bleeding to extract the tooth.
Be careful not to break the tooth, leaving a part of it behind, as this will cause the patient even greater pain due to the remaining root.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who in their haste and boldness sometimes breaks the jawbone, and does not attend to what we have described.
but sometimes cause great illness through their roots that remain, or the cart that they break, just as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or oil and salt;
and if blood flows from it, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the place;
and if that is of no avail, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one first loosens teeth, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you draw the tooth.
and these are their forms: And they should have thick shafts so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron with teeth to grip the tooth.
From the root of the teeth. When the root remains intact during extraction, you must place moist cotton with butter on it over the area for one or two days until the tissue softens, then insert the forceps known as "algefri", which resemble a stork's beak.
and they should be shaped like a file on the inside as well, which is their form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a scalpel, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and thick so as not to break, and if the root jumps out in this manner, it is good;
but if not, use all available instruments, for which the shapes that follow are provided:
And if one requires assistance with this instrument, which has two blades, of which the form is as follows: and other iron instruments that are positioned at the root of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which the form is as follows:
And let these instruments be strong so they do not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned here;
and wise master doctors find their own instruments themselves, according to what their practices and the disease require; for there are such diseases that ancient scholars did not teach any instrument for them due to their diversity; if a bone of the shoulder or other bones is broken, one should search for the suitable tools I mentioned to you earlier, and assist with gestures, this is how it is formed:
And they should be thick and sturdy to hold the bone firmly, so that it does not slip away but can be held and removed;
then restore the medicine to its place accordingly, and if there is any rotting in the bone, and it is small, then use all these instruments:
When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth is newly born after another one, and it's not in its right place, and cannot be treated or filed.
Then remove it. And if it is hollow with the tooth, take this instrument which has this form, and resembles a small beak, and let it be sharp iron at its tip.
And strike it several times with a hammer during the day for its hardness, and so that you do not move other teeth, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with this kind of rasp whose shape resembles this.
And it is also like the file used to make needles.
And use the file to smooth the tooth back and forth gently so that it does not move until it is finished.
Then the full cure for everyone who shaves; and if the tooth is too sharp and injures the tongue, you must file down its roughness until it is even so that it does not injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the front teeth become loose due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew without them dropping out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but it doesn't work, then...
In that case, you must restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes.
And make sure the wire is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth.
and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the head between the damaged teeth, whether there is one or more, until you come out on the other side of a healthy tooth; then restart the covering until you reach the part where you began, and carefully extract your hand skillfully and gently, so that it does not move.
and make sure your tie is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the head of the tooth with some pincers, and put it back together, and replace it between the healthy tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
and then leave it tight as much as it can stay put, and if it loosens or the thread twists, tighten it with another piece of thread.
if it stays in place and serves like this for a long time, and that is the form of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two moved teeth, as you can see.
And when the tooth falls out, we put it back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said before.
and do not let anyone who is not skilled and patient interfere, and sometimes we make the form of a tooth out of cow bone, and put it in place where there is a missing tooth, and tighten it as we have said, and it stays and serves like this for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue naturally, as one is born this way. or by accident from a healed wound;
and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold their head in your hand, then lift their tongue.
then cut the nerve of the tongue, so that the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is a recent wound, then cut out the thorn and sever widely this ligament.
and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies beneath.
and when you have done this, raise the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then put beneath the tongue a linen cloth.
And let the patient have baths each night so that the wounds cannot heal.
And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol onto the wound. And if the blood flows excessively, then cauterize it with a small cautery, which is beneficial in such cases. Then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
And if you see it turn a different colour, be it black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
And if it is turning white and there is moisture present, then drain the pus, and cut it open with a thin spatula, releasing it from both sides. and if blood overtakes you during your procedure, apply crushed vitriol immediately until it is extinguished, then return to your procedure until everything is completed.
then clean the place with ash and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
abscesses of the throat Sometimes lumps appear in the throat which are called "godaths", and we properly call them tonsils, and when you treat them as we have mentioned earlier, if they do not heal, be careful:
if it is an abscess with little pain and a pale colour, do not treat it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not treat it with iron due to blood flow concerns; But leave it until it is dead, then you will cut it off, or it would break by itself.
And if it is of white color and the root is delicate, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their shoulder in your lap, and open their mouth while you take hold of their jaws between your hands, then press down on the tongue using all the instrument, this is how it should be positioned.
And let it be made of silver or fine copper, just like a knife.
When you press down on the tongue with this instrument and see the abscess, take the needle and insert it into the almond, then pull it out forcefully from above as much as you can.
and draw all thread out of it with a hook, then shape the tool from this material so that it looks like tongs. but nevertheless the head is curved, with one end fitting into the other, and it is very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
And if you don't have this instrument ready, then cover it with the tongs, of which this is the shape: And be sharpened on one side, but blunt on the other.
and once you have shaped one of the mandrels, shape the other in the same way, and after making the incision gargle the patient with warm water mixed with alum, and if there is an outflow of blood, then gargle the patient with water or with boiled pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops. Then treat until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just as you would the two tonsils alike.
I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small abscess;
And it had almost completely blocked her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained like that for even one or two days.
The abscess was so swollen that it had burst, with two streams of pus escaping through the nostrils.
So I immediately made an incision, and inserted a hook into one inch of the throat, then pulled out a large portion of bowels;
Then I reinserted it through another hole of the nose, and the worker opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue.
After inserting the onion into these abscesses, and cutting off a part of it, only a little bit of blood came out. And thus the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water, then wine, and did not stop having this abscess cut for a long time.
And the abscess reformed again, filling up the space I had emptied until it became very large.
Then I tricked her and cauterized inside her throat. Thus it remains without growing.
And I depart from these parts, and be that God made of me afterward.
Of the eye.
When a beam descends to the earth, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is thick and round below, it is called an "egg".
When it is hollowed out as we have said in the division, and the ulcer does not heal, and you see that the flesh around the abscess is calm and delicate, then you must cut it.
And that which is round and gathered together, not long; and if it is bloody or false colored or black, you must avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I mentioned, considering its whiteness and length, make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we previously discussed. Then insert the needle into the eye, draw it out from underneath, and cut at the intersection of the two instruments that I mentioned for incising both testicles.
And you must not cut any further than the superfluous matter that is beyond the natural limit.
for if you cut any more, it will harm their voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears cutting, you must employ an engine for cauterization to ease their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is quicksilver. And have the patient put their head in your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with hot water that is neither too thick nor too thin; use the tip of this instrument, which has this shape:
And on the head, make a hair-like incision where one would apply the medicine, like the teeth of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine applied to the eye;
And have the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus run out of their mouth, carrying the medicine with them, to prevent it from going down their throat and harming them;
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it blacken and the stinging from the medicine subsides;
And if you see this, take some cotton and wrap it around an instrument, then dampen the cotton with the medicine and insert the instrument through the cotton into the eye until the cotton rests on the eyeball.
Do this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry out, and it will fall off after four or five days.
If you need to repeat the medicinal cauterization then do so and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, cleaning away any excess medicine.
And it is immersed in cold water, and it is healed with gargles until it is cured.
This treatment is safer than incisions or cauterization;
if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take gentian and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in one pot, adding easy-to-find items, then boil it;
and the pot is well-glued with strong clay, and inside the pot have an instrument carved in this way: And it is made of silver or copper, and one end is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises to the affected eye until it is mortified.
After you restart it often, until the wound dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess being hot, because many things happen there. and do not attempt to do this for the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg white into the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not get too hot. because the egg white will not let the steam harm the mouth, and this is a good treatment for overall health.
Many times it happens to the throat due to a fish bone or spine, or some other object.
So you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue with the sun towards the instrument so that you can see the movement of things.
And for that which does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps by this the thing will be expelled through vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of sailcloth, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread. And tie to the sponge a thread, then swallow it. And when it reaches its place, it will be expelled, and then you will pull on the thread.
and if it does not come about from what we have said, then take a lead instrument of this form:
and let the instruments be curved towards the head so that they may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upwards. and ensure that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest choking occur, nor push against the bone within.
and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, because he knows where things are located. then insert it downward or pull it out forcefully with all the instrument evenly until it is fully removed.
from the phlegm of the throat
In some cases, surgery may be the treatment of choice as I have mentioned before in our classification system; and when this does not work, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument I mentioned to you.
And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not work, take a hair from the tail of a horse, insert it into the patient's throat, then attach a hot iron to the end of the hair, and repeat this frequently. And if the patient has water retention all day long.
then take a full glass of cold water, open their mouth, pour it in as if they were swallowing, and move their hand frequently; and as soon as the tongue feels the water, it will stop.
If it does not stop as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times, for it will stop without fail.
And the manner of the fumigation is such that you take a pot with visible coals, and cover it with a perforated cover in the middle, and through this hole place the head of the instrument.
Then I throw my fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes, but rather goes up to the tonsils.
And now the tonsils will fall out, and if they do not, restart the fumigation several times;
And let the patient feel thirsty, eating salty things and such, but not drinking water;
And then it will be necessary for them to go outside due to this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to extract leeches is like bent tongs when one can see them, with curved arms for insertion into the throat. and it resembles the beak of a bird with its roughness like that of a file, such that what it grasps, it cannot release.
There are many variations of abscesses as the following accounts from one source and another in this book describe, differing according to whether they are punctured or cut.
and it is in two ways first according to its appearance itself, and second because of the moisture it holds.
And the second kind is according to their location in the body.
For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own treatment.
And if there are abscesses, one must not pierce them as long as the bowels remain dead according to their condition.
And if there are such cases that require piercing when they are ripe, and the bowels do not die according to their condition, like abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses develop near joints, and one leaves it until it rots all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it dies, it will harm the principal member.
When the abscess is near the fundament, pierce it without waiting for it to die.
And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completing the digestion process unless it is near the fundament and cannot rot in place, and become elongated inside with the development of a fistula. And it cannot heal within a long time.
And you should know the stage of the abscess' perforation which is ripe according to its development, and this is when the pain eases, and the fever breaks, and there is lessening of the pain and redness, and from the softening and pointing of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
and you must make the perforation sit where the base of the abscess is, and where it appears softer;
and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no bending. In those that bend, according to that member.
And when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you allow the perforation to remain until it is confirmed as healed by complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, then the body would be elongated by the venom from it, and it is full of much filth. and perhaps harden the lips and its depths.
And for any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member requires.
And you must treat small abscesses and minor injuries; and in large abscesses, big wounds, and many cracks according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess;
and if at such abscesses where it is necessary to sever the heart, and cut; when it becomes young like wool, and is soft, then you must do as with boils;
And there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others from which one also scrapes like the leaf of myrtle, just as in abscesses caused by gangrene.
And there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Those without a head, such as soft superficial abscesses, should be pierced fully through;
And when the abscess is large, and it has formed a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, do not extract all the pus at once that hour, but only some. Then pack the abscess with wool until the next day, then extract any remaining matter immediately. Do this several times from place to place until the bowels are completely emptied.
Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly decrepit men. For the spirits sometimes twitch with the exit of the bowels, which by chance may kill the patient, and you won't realize it.
So use this chapter with great caution and, when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, then examine whether the wound from the abscess is small. And if it is an open gash wound, pack with linen bandages or old cotton rags. And if it is a large abscess with many openings, you must insert a bandage into each one so that they touch each other.
and if you have cut into the abscess and a portion of the skin, you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then remove the bandage, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding during your procedure, bring cold and light water, dampen the cloths, and place them on the bleeding area multiple times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, apply medication and ointment, and the powders I have mentioned in various places in this book, and if it is during winter, and the wound or abscess is very raw, you must place tents and moist bandages with wine and warm oil on them;
and if it is during summer, and the wound is fleshy, you must apply moist bandages with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said;
And then unbind the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how one should proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
Where the skull of the head is soft come small abscesses, and they are like cloth, similar to the inside of a hen's egg, and there are many such things (abscesses).
There are fat ones and hard ones where there is also moisture like pus;
And there are hard ones with stones in them, which are not dangerous if the arteries do not behave contrary to expectations.
And the work of cutting is such that you must test every instrument which is called an "entromissoire", from which its form comes afterwards, what thing it contains.
For if there is moisture present, they do so above the long bone.
And when the moisture is drained, one should carefully remove the skin that contained this moisture without leaving anything behind, for it will return if you leave any.
Then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if present; If not, dip it in water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it there until the next day. And this will cure what remained from the night before.
And you may replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that nothing remains from the night.
Then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess retains its fat, cut it open in this manner, from end to end. And you throw your relatives aside, flay them from all sides, and pay close attention to drawing out the bone where it lies.
And if the artery makes you hesitate, do as I have told you after that.
And also of the abscess if it is full, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the incision on the full abscess and moisture is lighter, as they have little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads lack moisture, like the one I cut from an old woman's head;
and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken. and if one were to have cut it open, they would have also made a wound as deep as that of a stone.
In other abscesses occurring on the head, whether those that come to children's heads or at the roots of ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so as to let out the pus;
and treat them as they ought to be treated.
Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and connected to each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its side, just as the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities to these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey the rules of health.
in that which you see is of good disposition to touch, and is similar in colour to the body, and moves from each side and is not empty towards the nerves of the neck nor the artery or the passage, and it is not deep;
You must cut it from above and peel the skin away in each part, stretching the two lips of the heart with pincers if you need to, just like we said for head abscesses;
Keep jabbing it back and forth, making sure you don't cut the nerve or vein, nor use sharp spatulas that might slip from your hand, lest you cut too deeply without seeing what's ahead, cutting something you should not.
And if you cut a vein or artery and it will not stop bleeding, apply powdered glass or herbs that staunch blood to the wound, binding up the injury tightly. Leave it alone until the abscess is drained, and the wound softens, beginning to fester with rot.
And when the blood is stemmed, return to your work until you complete it.
Then examine with your index finger if there remain any small boils; remove them and clean them thoroughly.
And if there is a large wound at the root of the boil, it is not advisable to cut this boil in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off on its own, without harm.
Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
And if you remove the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, given that there has been no delay in treating the size of the scrofula. you must proceed to cut the root of it, and draw out the humors, and suture it as we have said.
you must proceed to cut the root of it, and draw out the humors, and suture it as we have said. Boils that hold excessive pus should be lanced where they appear to die off.
And pierce it like that one mentioned before, depending on the situation, then apply tenting with ointment and similar treatments so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
The ancients spoke of the incision in the throat; But I have never seen it done in our land, this is merely the writing of their words.
For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary that the flap in the throat known as the epiglottis be removed. And if no help is given by this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or both tonsils.
When the illness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to escape the destruction that comes from suffocation.
It is necessary, then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we divide it beneath three circles or four with a small crosswise incision between two circles or in accordance with the quantity of the incision on the surface, not at all in the cartilage.
And these veins are suitable for the division of the epiglottis because there is no flesh at this point, and the vessels are long in quantity.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat entirely around, then divides the heart until he reaches the trachea. And remove the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut the surface as we have said.
And it is proven by the cutting of the dog's windpipe that death occurs from the place where it was broken and through the fault of the voice.
Leave the wound open in one piece.
And when the time has passed that one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it all up without the cartilage.
Then administer medicine that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Al-Bukhari states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breathing becomes impossible. Therefore make a hole in the epiglottis for when the patient cannot breathe, and they will inhale through the wound, thus saving them from death.
And for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the poison of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would command to sew up the wound and treat it until it was cured.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the veins of the heart.
And I was called upon to cure her, but I found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found blood flowing from it; I knew she had not cut a vein or damaged her lungs, but air was escaping through the injury.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed.
And all it took for the damsel was to clear her throat, and she returned to her normal self afterwards.
Therefore I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
This abscess is called "hernial goiter", and it is a large abscess with a yellow colour, which occurs often in women.
and it has two types: natural and accidental;
or natural has no cause.
And the accidental type has two forms: one similar to our fat, and the other form resembles an abscess caused by our artery; and there is fear, and it should not be treated with fire cautery except in the small one, proven and sought after by all those who are involved: If you find it as hard as our fat, and cannot reach any vein, cut it like one cuts nails, and draw out all its skin if there is no hair. And cauterize it quickly, and treat it as required until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways to do this, of which I will describe all the similarities;
And it is necessary that I explain all the differences between our method and theirs.
I say that theirs is hot and feverish until the ebullition passes, and the putrefaction is complete; Then the fever and heat subside.
With the nut there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one cystic, which is its own sack and matches the body's colour. It starts like a pimple and becomes swollen
and they come in two forms: hard or soft, and very varied in colour as I have said before.
It is necessary, when you come to treat the shoulder, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument which is called an 'entromissoire', according to how its form will appear in the following chapter.
The way to examine abscesses is as follows: take the softest spot you can find on the abscess and rotate your fingers back and forth until you feel the instruments have pierced through. Make sure this is proportionate to the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the instrument carefully so as not to spill anything.
If running moisture is clear, whatever its colour, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
And if no moisture comes after the opening instrument is used, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross shape, and take pincers to gently peel away the skin from each side and keep the membrane where it lies so you draw it out clean with the knot.
And if you cannot draw it out clean, then pull it out by pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the wound will return many times;
And if a little remains and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put on hot substances that ease abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if it is large to us, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat that which produces flesh.
And if the beating vein is contrary to you or otherwise causes hastiness, use a place of powdered vitriol, and leave it bound for two days or three, until the wound rots, and stops the boiling of blood. Then return to cut away that which has remained from the night.
See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds: Large, medium, and small.
And there are three types of squares, which are called "albaret", and one type is called "breb", and they come in three ways: Large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulas.
And they are like the needles with which we sew seams, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are golden are better suited for treating gangrenous fistulas.
And they come in three types: Large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the wound.
The shapes of the probes are very similar to these:
And there are probes that have two curves of three types as well;
and so for those who have three dislocations, and they are also of three kinds;
and also for those who have two dislocations or only one dislocation, and they are of three types
and all these [dislocations] are necessary in their place.
The head of these [dislocations] is where they are sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, which can strip away the nerves because the vein or nerve is not severed.
and these intrusive ones [dislocations] are the raised responses in many cases, so that the patient does not perceive them when abscesses open.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should not use fire there unless it is in fleshy areas like legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the bark of fig trees, according to this form, with which blood is stopped: and it is placed back into position to heal by compression of the veins, arteries, and sometimes according to this large form.
Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to deteriorate, so that they resemble women's breasts;
and they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure them, one should proceed according to this form of the following lines .b. until .g.. Then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal flesh-forming paste, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the nipple sags downwards, and is softened due to its size like what happens in women, make an incision into it in two parts above with similar cuts; so that one part holds the other at their end, so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this form, from this line (b) up to the line (g); Then scrape away the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully complete, due to the patient's unwillingness to rest, or because of blood loss, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it until the membrane and fat separate, then clean it until it is healed.
These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofulae when they have sides, and if there is moisture contained within them.
Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g. And when all the matter within the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and dress it gently until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofulae incisions; and if the wound is deep, apply cauterization as mentioned before.
When the artery is torn, and the skin above it is sealed, many abscesses often occur, and likewise, swelling and abscesses appear in the vein.
and if you recognize it as such for the artery, then the abscess is long and perforating. and when you feel it with your hands, you sense a tightening.
and when it is for the vein, there are clear reasons to act;
and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, especially when it is below the armpits and on the neck and many other places, and it is very large. One must therefore avoid iron treatment, and for the one at the head, it should also be avoided, as well as in cases of an arterial swelling that breaks through above the long skin.
then operate at the waist with a lancet, and carefully separate the artery from the veins until it is exposed.
then insert a needle below it and pierce through to the other side, and secure the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I taught you about extracting the two arteries located at the temples.
Then mark the place between the two ligaments of a tourniquet so that the blood there comes out and the abscess is loosened.
Then bring about the treatment that drains the pus until the ligament falls away. Then treat what is next to it, proceeding in order until it is healed.
And if the abscess is on account of the size of the vein, then you must grasp with your hand as much of the abscess and skin as possible, then push the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side. Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a ligament of one part to two parts of the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will not go through, insert another needle along its path beneath all of the abscess to the incision of the first needle and hold the threads in four places.
Then lance the abscess until all of its excess comes out, then lance the heart's superfluity and leave what is bound.
Place upon it a cloth moistened with wine and oil, then treat him with tenths of the ointments until he is healed.
Likewise abscesses come to the arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are torn, or due to excessive heavy labor, and similar things.
These happen more often in the shoulders and hands where there are joints, and they become abscesses, taking on a colour resembling that of the body with pain felt across many areas.
And when it is held tightly, the patient feels pain, and it is not complete within the body, but beneath the heart.
It moves well from all sides, it neither goes forward nor backward, not below or above, and one that is dislocated should not be cut with iron. Perhaps there would be contraction in this case. And one who is at the head or forehead should make an incision with a spatule.
And one who is at the head or forehead should make an incision with a spatule. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root.
If it is large, suspend it with a hook and remove the skin; then take out the abscess and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
Sometimes occurs in bellies and nowhere else an inflammation, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its likeness with mushrooms, and its root is subtle but the head large.
and in it there are small ones and very big ones.
and I saw a man who had two in his belly which resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, were slightly split, and moisture came out of them.
I cut them open and found one weighing eighteen ounces, while the other weighed six thirds. The procedure for incision is to check whether the patient is moist, and if the material's colour is white, moist, with a fine root. If you treat the broad spinal bone, let the fire cautery be present before you.
If you treat the broad spinal bone, let the fire cautery be present before you. As there is often too much loss of blood from the cutting, and if you faint from it, then quickly begin with cauterization.
And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread of lead, and bind it to the arm as we have said, leaving it for two days.
Then restrain them, and do not stop tightening the lead thread until it reaches the arm bone, each time feeling for work by it.
And if the roots are thick, fear to cut them especially in the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tissue that is of a pale colour and poor texture and has no veins.
For this is an aggravated abscess, and I shall come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
When it rages with hunger. If the appearance of swelling comes from a wound cauterization or tear caused by poison, and it is on the abdomen and affects some of the intestines, as happens in other injuries, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or due to windiness;
and if it is due to the tear caused by poison and the release of pus, then its colour is similar to that of the body, being a mild condition without pain and appearing with multiple discharges. And if it is due to an intestinal discharge, then it becomes more varied: when pressed by two fingers it retracts and reappears, or perhaps it stretches out, becoming enlarged at the entrance of the bath and after heavy labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it becomes apparent when you press it with your hand, but it does not cause any restriction.
and if it is due to blood, it shows these signs: large, hard abscesses that are fixed in one place according to a certain quantity. and if it is due to wind or gas, it is soft to the touch; and for the treatment, you must examine whether its appearance indicates arterial blood, venous blood, or wind/gas.
and if it is due to wind or gas, it is soft to the touch; and for the treatment, you must examine whether its appearance indicates arterial blood, venous blood, or wind/gas. You should leave the treatment. For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
and if it appears to be related to the intestines or the stomach, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat and straight; then bleed them all around the navel. then have them lay frequently in your hands, and go around the place you marked with all your fingers; then extend half of the abscess above all the large thumb. Then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of sturdy silk firmly, and let the knot be secure.
Next, open the extended half of the abscess over the knot, and insert your index finger, searching for the intestine. If you find it trapped by the knot, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
And if you find the wound, grasp it with a hook, and cut away any excess.
If the artery or vein opposes you, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have pierced in a cross pattern.
Then extract the abscess in four locations above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, leaving the place to rot, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself. or you must cut it when it is soft and rotten, then treat it with what is appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you must cut it when it is soft and rotten, then treat it with what is appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is necessary, and heal the wound.
Of cancer We have spoken about the likenesses of cancer in the division, and how to treat it with medicine, and how one must avoid iron treatment.
And we say that cancer engrained in the flesh requires great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped away like cancer of the breasts, thighs, and similar places, one must remove it entirely at its beginning.
No one has ever healed it before me.
And for the treatment, when it is in place and can be removed as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
Then make the patient bleed if there is evident congestion, then prepare him well to undergo the treatment.
Then remove your ulcers or cancerous growths, shave him all over, and extract it completely from every part without leaving any remains.
And let the blood flow freely, press the area well with your hand or an object, and if the outflow of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already spoken about the different types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, along with the signs of each type, and the cures that can be achieved through medicine or surgery.
And one should not use iron in these two types (of dropsy). That is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are mortal afflictions.
Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicine, and the cure is ineffective, consider if the patient is weak or suffering from other ailments like constipation, stomach issues, and similar conditions. If you use iron [instruments], then there is doubt [about the outcome].
And if you see the patient is strong [has a strong constitution], and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this: Make the patient lie straight on your hands, and press his abdomen with your fingers to release water from the lowest part of the stomach [abdomen], then take the sharp-edged instrument in this manner: Et let it be divided into two parts. It should be sharp-pointed but not so much as to reach the intestine when inserted and cause injury.
Then examine if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines. You must cut above the hump three fingers directly above the wrist. And if it is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the hump at three fingers' width.
If it is due to the spleen, then make your incision on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie directly over the wound so as not to weaken the afflicted area with their weight.
Then pierce the entire skin with your instrument and push it through, lifting your hand to take all of the excess skin between the hide and the subcutaneous layer just like you would when skinning an animal down to one nail's width or less.
Pierce the subcutaneous layer until the water cavity is reached and then drain it by drawing out all of the fluid, using this tool which I will now describe. And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and is made of light brass or iron, and has on its underside a small hole. and where it ends on one side, there are three holes. and two at the other end, and one on another side;
and the tip is cut like a quill, which is the shape of the incision as described by the writers who cut quills.
at the top is an arm, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately rises up onto the instrument.
empty it then by half or a third part, because if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to their spirit leaving the body, or they may fall unconscious, or they may come close to death.
but evacuate it according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the condition of the patient's virtue signifies, and his pulse;
then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which stops up the perforation that I spoke of on the surface, in this way that you pierce it;
then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
do this every day, and be careful not to draw out too much water but only a little bit.
And if you are doubtful about the patient and leave a lot of water inside them, it will destroy the heart due to excessive sweating or bathing in hot sand or sun, and prevent them from drinking. And treat with drying medications until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the water, as I said before.
There are times when children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its correct position.
It is necessary to pierce it sometimes with a very fine spatula in this way...
Then insert a soft tube into the bladder, and bind it, holding it for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
And perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes out will not allow the tube to stay in place.
Those in whom the fistula is small will be treated with the white lead plug as we have said and this will widen it.
Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are distressed, as some people are born without a tube at the head of their penis, which is why they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards. and cannot heal because the material cannot reach the marrow, and it is a serious illness.
and the method of treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, then stretch the head and neck as if they were extending an arrow, so that the hole pierces through in the middle, just as it should be.
and beware of the escape of blood which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Pustules on the penis This inflammation often occurs in the throat, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh.
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones.
You must take them with a subtle pincers, grasp and clean them all, then place cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment over it. Then treat with fine healing Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cleaned it, and if the albath is on top of the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the albath that is inside. And when it is fused, treat it from the outside.
For when you treat them together, the head of the rod is not secured so it may be pierced, and blackness and decay will come inside the rod and joint.
You must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which has been prepared from pomegranate bark and figs, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic according to this form:
The cauteries assist the two dispositions together. That is to say, in the evacuation of blood and in corruption;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a hollow reed into the penis and make the patient urinate through it.
And when the skin is tight at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to a wound or abscess, then you must peel it with a sharp instrument so that the ties are loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides.
and if this is an important thing to discuss, you must then peel it with a spatula on some part of the head of the penis and skin.
then carefully remove it between two [fingers], and place a fine linen cloth dampened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds; nevertheless when we do this work of our own accord, and especially for children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
for I have seen most masters and doctors performing circumcision around one day, with forceps, and all at once [i.e., in one cut];
If the heart was pierced because there were two knives, and perhaps one of them fell out while the other remains inside. Now you must cut it out again, and the pain is doubled, and during the removal which comes from its root, the tip of the knife was not properly secured inside the body.
And during the removal of the nail, perhaps the iron slips and runs wild, and many times it happens that they do not need treatment and I wish to share this with you.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le lien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.
Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly across all the flesh beneath it. But make sure that the knife is tightly wrapped in leather.
and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child believe, if he understands, that you are not tying a thread around his penis just enough, and then you can make him ejaculate in any way you can;
then make it stand straight between your hands, and hide the cords between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on his penis and blow into the heart, and pull it upwards so that the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, and bind it below with another link;
then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, and bind it below with another link; Et hold it with your two fingers - the thumb and index finger - and cut between the two lines, then lift up the heart quickly and draw out the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow forth repeatedly, for this is an injury. And put powder on top and cover the powder with a cloth glued with raw egg cooked in rose water, prepared with good fresh oil, and leave it there until the next day; treat him with other remedies until he is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
The two blades should be curved and sharp, and the blades should also be as big as the handles equally:
The error of purification is when the heart within escapes to the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch it with your nail, otherwise the flesh will form an abscess.
And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then grasp it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if it exceeds three days, and that which is beneath the ridge becomes swollen, then leave it until the hot abscess subsides, and gently pare it.
Then cut it as you can move, and take care of the part of the ridge, this will not harm anything.
Cure therefore the location of burning wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if it bleeds excessively from the heart outwards, and it goes above (the wound), it will not harm.
Treat it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
where there is retention of urine
The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or faeces, or new flesh (scar tissue), or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section on obstructions.
And if the urine is not released, and you find that the retention is due to stones in the lower part or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent forward over their knees. and place his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and restrain the patient's elbow as much as you can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above it, which loosens the urine and allows it to pass.
and if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe," this is its form:
and made of fine silver, light as the feather of a bird's wing; and be half a palm in length with a fine point at its tip.
And for the method of urine evacuation, you must take a doubled thread, and tie it to one end of a wool or cotton bag, then insert the other end of the thread into the syringe.
cut the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and a raw egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a stool, anointing their bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water.
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the organ, and bend the penis upward toward the belly.
push the syringe forward into the bladder, and have the patient feel it until the bladder is empty, this cannot be done correctly if the guide (the syringe) has gone astray from its intended path.
Then stretch the thread through all the wool here and there, and the urine will follow the wool, then extract it out, and make the urine flow.
And restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient rest.
When scalding or blood enters the bladder, and putrefaction has gathered there, and you wish to see urine and medicines distilled, then make the whole instrument which is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed and has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And the narrow end which the doctor cuts should be such that it stops up the tube well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary;
And when you see that your medicine is being put into the bladder, place the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what comes next;
If you draw out the moisture with a caustic agent, then firmly reset it by pulling on it. It will enter the moisture within, and come to the bladder immediately so that the patient feels it.
And this is the subtle form of the enema with which we enema the bladder.
And it is made of silver or tin, with the head being at the top.
And you loosen it at the side where the ligaments fall.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to enema into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong piece of thread, and heat this pouch over fire.
Then insert the head of the clyster into the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder with all your might until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, then pierce it roundly all around. Then insert a strong thread through this hole, then gather the circle as one would gather a bag, and put in whatever you wish of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Of a stone.
We have spoken of the types of stones and their extraction along with treatments.
and explained the distinction between kidney stones in the bladder and all their symptoms, as well as which stones require surgical intervention. in the bladder and in the urethra;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that stones which form in the bladder occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine escapes from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
and it makes the patient's urethra hard and rough, causing them to urinate frequently, and then it scabs over. And to many of them it causes their foundations (to fail).
And healing is light for children until the age of four years, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is average for those who are young, for those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones, compared to those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes impedes trying to reach the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it falls out from above.
Then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed below their thighs, so that the bladder is completely declined downwards.
Then you grasp it and feel inside.
If you feel the stone in space, then quickly proceed to cut above the stone.
And if it does not fall upon touch from all sides, then wet your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger if they are a grown youth; and push it into the base, and feel for the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, then direct it toward the neck of the bladder;
then press down on your finger, and push the stone outside at the place where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to pull up the testicles with their right hand, and with their left remove the skin below the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
Then I inserted the spatula cutting, which is its shape: And splitting what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin;
and be straight over the stone, and place your thumbs near the anus or foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide on the outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
if by chance the incision hurts your thumbs that are near the anus, it may need more work;
and know that there is such a stone where it has corners and edges; It must be pulled out gently.
And if there is bone underneath, similar to a pea, and round with a small opening.
Where it has corners and edges, make the incision wider;
And if it doesn't come out, you must extract it with tongs that are like a file at the end to grasp and pull out the stone so that it does not escape. Or you push aside the delicate curved instrument from its head;
And if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the hole with your finger, and if blood flows, extract it with vitriol.
and if there are multiple stones, push the largest one first towards the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, pull out with forceps, and treat the smaller ones afterward if there are several.
And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a bigger wound. For two things happen to the patient: where either they die, or urine returns due to the wound being unable to heal;
nevertheless, make an effort to pull it out or crush it with tongs until you extract it in pieces.
and once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe and dragon's blood, hold it tight and place on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine or in oil, rose water and cold water to soothe the hot abscess. Then place the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when you release them, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and an ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
And if an abscess develops in the wound and there are blood clots in the bladder, causing a retention of urine, which is known to occur in such a manner that it comes out with the urine: Push your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will affect the bladder and cause damage;
Then clean the wound with water, soap, and silk, and aid it in every way you know until it is healed;
And during every hour of treatment, bind the two thighs together, and apply the remedies in place.
And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, stuck within, and the urine cannot exit; if the treatment I describe here requires cutting, you are excused from performing the cut due to this therapy. I have already proven this thus.
Take iron forged with three-pronged ends fixed on one spike:
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot retreat into the bladder;
then gently insert the probe into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the probe with your hand within the stone gently, until you are able to pierce it from another side;
the urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. If it is dislocated again soon, and urine is passed quickly, then the patient will recover.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders you, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the flesh towards the stone between the two threads, then extract it quickly, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound. Treat them until they heal.
Of women's stones
Sometimes stones form in women, and if this happens once, then the treatment is quick, but it is prevented by three things:
One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And secondly, one cannot find a woman who is an expert at revealing herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that, by chance, one cannot find a woman who is an expert in this craft of hands;
And the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman may be more perfect than that of a man, which requires a deeper incision and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises for this, you must take an expert surgeon, and rarely can one be found, and if not, then seek out no chaste but subtle mirror;
And the present is a wise counsel in the life of women, or a woman who knows one part of this art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone. and carefully check if the woman is a virgin;
and carefully check if the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary to insert one's finger into her anus and search for the stone.
and if she finds it, push the stone away from your finger, and advise her to insert her finger into her vagina as deep as possible, and press and massage with her left hand firmly on top of the bladder.
If she finds it, move the stone gradually from the bladder entrance to deeper inside until reaching the root of the thigh.
Then squeeze the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina where it is located, and feel for it in this area. And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, let the incision be small at first.
And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, let the incision be small at first. Then push the rod into the incision; if you feel a stone, widen the wound so that the stone can be extracted and know that there are many types of stones.
That is to say, small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with cracks.
If you know these similarities to understand the outcome.
And if the blood defeats you, quickly apply powdered vitriol, holding it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work, ensuring the stone is extracted and having the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from men ready to assist you.
and if the blood overtakes you, and it is from an artery that has been severed, place the powder on the wound and apply the juice of tents and bandages, do not restart this procedure again, leave the stone alone and do not extract it, as the patient might die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is cooled and the site is accessible, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
Ramus aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white of egg, which lies beneath the heart of calves and is contained within the egg.
and it is called 'albumen', and sometimes it is properly contained within the membrane of the egg, so people think that it is another egg. and it is the calf's skin between the white of egg we have mentioned.
And this does not happen unless the patient agrees. And the generation of this ruminant aqueous is due to weakness that comes to calves, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from blows to the hips, and this moisture has many colours: where it may be discoloured to yellow, or there is redness, blackness, white watery fluid, and this happens more frequently;
and these are the signs to recognise this dislocation, for if it is white and soft like we have said, then the abscess is ripe, ready to burst as with an egg, but does not open the hip joint because it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the surrounding tissue, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg inside it, and for this reason people think that there are more than one.
and if moisture is between the skin of the calves and the white sinew, one will feel it well;
therefore when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, test all parts as described above, from which its form is derived. According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron [instruments], the patient must be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body;
then place them supine on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put a lot of cloth underneath them;
then sit on their left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and stretch out the leg towards one of the two sides from the centre of the calves;
Then take the spatula and peel back the skin of the calves between their length to just below the wrist, and make your incision straight while dividing the calf muscle down until you see white fascia, then carefully remove it according to your ability.
Then pierce the white fascia with an aqueous solution through a wide orifice and extract all of the water and then place your fingers there to stretch out the fascia.
And do not touch the heart of the calves but only the white fascia. Peel it all or in pieces especially the side of him carefully so that if you don't remove all the water sufficiently it will return.
And if the egg pops out during your work then replace it in its place when you have finished treating the fascia.
Then join the two sides of the heart of the oxen with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the suspending vessels, fearing blood loss.
Then cut open the oxen along with its suspension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have described.
And if fluid gathers in two parts together, know that these are two branches. Cut open the other part as you did with the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood and place moist linen soaked in rose oil onto the wound.
Cut open the other part as you did with the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood and place moist linen soaked in rose oil onto the wound. et put defoer auter lane moilli en vyn eyn oylye, eyt syx lycyon, eyt dyssys drapayz doblyes, eyt ly lye syx tot ly lyn qe st sylons cesth forn
puys prayn syx drapayz, eyt llys emplye de lane charypy sylons cesth semblans eyt syont asyambley pyr custuure en la ghorle des brayes, eyt ly yns ddes chyays preynt sus ly fondymyn jusc’aw dos, eyt ly ytare a la partye du poynyl;
eyt ly ytare duy cheyf syx lyssynglys, eyt syot tute asymblye ly restrynfor en la blyq du bayere;
et sometimes this type of cautery is used instead of cutting with an iron knife, and you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery, and slice the skin from the testicles, and heat it as we have said so that the white part containing water is exposed.
then take the cautery in this manner, and pierce that white part with your nails, and scrape it with this heated fine cautery.
And you should scrape it in every way possible until everything is scraped out.
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
and know that this work is safer. And watch out for bleeding, and beware of operations involving cutting.
And if anything opposes you, whether it be a hot swelling or bleeding or any other thing, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
If the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then administer an anaesthetic as I have told you, and when you are confident through the signs we have discussed that water on the brain is present, make the patient sit on a raised seat. Pierce the abscess below at twice the width of the thumb, and make the hole as long as the body.
Make the openings wide so that all the water may flow out.
Then place cotton on the spot, bind it, and leave it to drain the rest of the water, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white membrane does not allow water to escape through the wound's mouth, you must insert a feather or the instrument used for drawing water from hydropic patients, which is shaped as previously described.
Widen the wound's cavity, and know that water will return; it is gathered after six months or so, and when it has reassembled as before, then the patient will live through their days.
Be aware that in many situations when dealing with this branch of medicine there is much fear involved, therefore it seems to me better to leave it alone.
And I will tell you about the procedure and similarities of an abscess.
I say that many abscesses come from boils, especially on the head. And it is due to these circumstances.
It arises from the excess of sour and sharp humours which is spread over the head, or by concussion.
And its colour matches that of the boil. It does not cause pain, but is a deep abscess.
Sometimes a deep, fearful, stony-hard abscess is of a dark colour and originates from a new artery or the swelling of a vein.
When it is due to arterial blood, it is recognized by the hot abscess-like disposition when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
One who is afflicted with edema of the vein is recognized by its feeling when touched with fingers, and one can properly make an incision on this as well as other similar swellings; and it is that you cut the heart of quinsy, then break the egg above, and drain out its white substance, and remove the covering membrane from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already solid with these new growths, then you must drain out the egg and cut it.
For air is in the wound or within the vessels, you must release all that pressure and round off the edges.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the place behind, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, as we have said.
Once your work is completed, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the flesh, and the patient becomes ill when it bursts.
And the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as the one before it, yet we shall tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
You must have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then place the flesh-softening suspension below your two hands, at all vessels near the shaft, and hold them firm, while stretching it hard.
Then cut with the sharp-edged spatula across the vessels until they are exposed, and then remove the skin from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries found in temples.
Then insert a needle where there is a doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and then tie it again to the other end. Then cut them in half straight down the middle, along the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as with other bow wounds, so that no vessel bleeds to nourish one of the portions.
For in this way there is no harm done, and if all the vessels have become veins, it is necessary to drain the portions from all the vessels. So that the wind does not escape its direction due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
The events of this branch are due to the rupture that occurs in the diaphragm or its extension on the abdomen in the area of the omentum, which causes the intestines to descend through this opening into one of the cavities.
And this rupture is either in the diaphragm or its extension, and these two types of hernia arise from many causes:
due to impact, jumping, straining, lifting heavy loads, or similar actions;
The signs that it is an extension of the diaphragm are a gradual development over long periods and do not occur suddenly. And the abscess is equalized towards the surface, so that the skin covers the intestine.
And the signs are that when it's a case of sectioning in the sacrum, there is sudden pain at first and the abscess appears differently just below the skin, due to the intestine protruding through the body outside the sacrum.
And sometimes the tendons descend with the intestine, getting caught, which causes great pain to endure for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments with iron [instruments], there is fear, so it must be abandoned.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to gather the intestine with their hand into the wound if they can reach it; then support his neck between your hands, and lift up the thighs;
then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin from the hips down to the length of the leg; then push the hooks of the scissors into the abdomen, making an incision according to what is needed to open the wound, and make it such that the stomach can emerge;
Then scrape off the sinew that lies beneath the hide of calves, so that the white hard sinew is uncovered on all sides;
Then insert your index finger into the calf, in that which is between the white sinew lying beneath the hide of the egg, and the second sinew, separating what lies behind the egg from the second sinew;
And move your right hand inside the calf's heart, stretch the white sinew upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg towards all of the sinews at the waist; Instruct your assistant to stretch the egg upwards and untie that which is tied behind it;
And look with your hands for signs of intestinal swelling or white hard cysts, and if you find any such things, push them down into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of six strands, and insert it into the rear part of the cyst, which is beyond the sinews. After measuring, cut through the head until you see four strands of thread appear. Then bring them together one on top of the other in a cross formation, and bind the cyst, which we said is beneath the sinews, with a strong two-strand thread. Then wrap the head of the thread and bind it with a two-strand thread so that none of the nourishing vessels can enter us, preventing an abscess from forming. and place again the ligament according to the first long ligament two fingers from that, and after these two ligaments leave a depression which is below the heart of the thigh the length of a finger. and after all this, follow the curvature that the egg presents
then cut into the part that is below the skin of the thighs, as far as the blood and bowels run, just as we have said before.
then apply damp wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and attach the ligament that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white skin we mentioned is cauterized after incision due to fear of excessive bleeding. For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it dries on its own.
And if it takes time to fall off, let it be soaked in warm water, and place on it what we have said [earlier], until it falls.
Then treat the wound with another ointment, until it is perfectly healed.
Of fleshy hernia.
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said it is made like a screw thread that holds together a nut, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after making an incision below and above [the wound] lightly.
Then cut into the middle [of it], and treat the abscess with what works [on it], until the vessels fall out [i.e., are severed].
And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in anger, as we have said, and the skin tears.
And none of the intestines fall into the wound, but if they do, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
However, if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or ulcer grows until the intestines fall out.
This happens due to the extension of the ulcer at the wound, as we have said, for it is spread out, then softened and swollen, and the skin tears.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
Sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: And it is that the patient often lies on their back between your hands, then feel the place of the rupture swollen as wide as three fingers.
then extract the sinew that lies beneath the skin, then take the thread and place it on the surface of the wound.
press it at the front of the belly, then cut two places visible on the wound above the head of the thread, and stitch one after another.
then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut or stretch the sinew in any way, as I have instructed you for the treatment of intestinal rupture. then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the sons' hairs, clean them thoroughly and treat the wound until it is healed.
The surgeon is compelled to act; there are no signs of healing in the wound, and cauterization here is necessary for recovery.
from softening the skin of the calves
Many times the skin of the calves is softened in some men, because the muscles within are weakened, and it is visible.
And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient be made to lie on their back, and cut away the skin which has softened, down to natural flesh;
Then join the two lips together with a seam, and if you wish to see it first sew away any excess of the softened skin with three or four firm stitches.
Then cut between the seams, treat it like any other wound, until it is healed, then remove the thread.
L'amputation
Know that such procedures are taboo in our law, so it would please me to not speak of them in this book.
and it is necessary for two reasons
one of which is that the doctor should be able to provide an answer when asked, and know the treatment.
and the other reason is because we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit, such as goats, sheep, cows, and others.
I say therefore that castrations are performed in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
In the method we use traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and relaxed. Then grasp them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Of circumcision: you must hold the animal and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspension bandage, and cut each testicle with one stroke when you have properly skinned them;
and leave no pouch of the fat nor the subtle fat which lies upon the vessels;
and this method of castration is better than the one done by traction because in that case some part of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to still have sexual desires;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Il sont bestes monstrueus qui ont les deux membres et ont la vertu de copuler comme l’omme et la femme, ce sont por ceu des bestes impures et abominables.
Hermaphrodites occur among men in two ways: One way is when between the two testicles there appears a structure similar to the female genitalia, where hair grows, and sometimes urine flows out of it.
And this other type [of dislocation] occurs in women, affecting the wrist like a rod and with two knobs.
The treatment for men and women is that you should separate the joined parts completely and then treat them like any other wound.
In the second manner, for men whose urine escapes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment needed.
A fistula is a joined part on the natural body that is too ugly to look at. And some women have them as large as a hand, which is the treatment for it.
You must hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or pincers, and cut it lightly.
and do not cut too deeply, lest blood flow out, then treat the other side until it is healed.
and in another case where it appears at the mouth of the wound, and fills it; and perhaps falls out, and is similar to cow dung; for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". You must cut it off, as we have said with tendonitis, and treat it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the woman's nature is not yet pierced or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth or accidental due to illness that has come upon her.
and it is natural by birth or accidental due to illness that has come upon her. Where it is fastened by a bandage, or with fine silk thread, or thin metal, and is tied securely in the groin, or on the side, or below, or wherever it may be.
and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flow of menstruation.
And this knowledge is gained by observing the bathing place.
If the obstruction is close to the surface, take it with your fingers or a rod.
If it is secured with fine silk thread, and it is close to the two fingers, be quick, and tie it like this:
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart;
Then stretch the two lips wide apart until the fine silk thread is tight and covers the vulva.
Then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it on the site; make the woman lie with her husband each day, so that it cannot heal.
And if the wound is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
If the blockage is made of native wood, suspend it from the ceiling and cover it.
And have the hemostatic medications ready as needed, such as dragon's blood, incense, along with some egg whites.
Then bring an open trough of bronze, wide enough so that the wound cannot heal.
And it should be this way for some time, and bring him a dry linen tent.
Then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And when a tumor develops in the womb, it should be removed in this manner, unless there are embedded abscesses. For the abscess that is embedded in the womb, one should not attempt any treatment involving fire.
Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood normally escapes, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumor-like.
And we have already mentioned in the classification their similarities with other ailments, and the signs, and now I will tell you which ones can be cured.
I say that hemorrhoids and hard tumors, when they are perfectly located in the anus and do not protrude, should not be treated with fire.
Those who are at the mouth of the mare's [illness], one can feel, are those that can be cured.
You should thus place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the tumor with forceps, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder made of blood-coagulating medicines such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then make her stand with her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water.
And if there is bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, and galls, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply this poultice to her back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, have him apply cupping glasses to his back and breasts without injury;
Then take linen, dip it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
And when the abscess is healed, treat the area with an ointment until it is fully recovered.
And the one called "albathir" is red, similar to a harsh head, it should be cut like the teething ring that I mentioned. Then treat it until it is fully recovered.
Many types of abscess arise in the cheek, such as cancer, stone-filled abscess, herpes, shingles, fistulas, haemorrhoids and hot abscess, along with numerous other diseases that I have mentioned in my classification.
It is therefore necessary for me to discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears on the genitals, which is not among the abscesses that should be lanced.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at its onset, full of heat and fever, and becomes red when visible to you. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die until the pain subsides;
And then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small stools where they can lean, supporting their back and bringing their feet outside the legs;
And have their thighs spread apart, place their arms beneath their knees, and bind them well with a good bandage;
Then turn them towards their right side and bring the instrument used to open the joint, which then takes shape;
and it is necessary that when you go to introduce this instrument, that you first insert the tip in order to know the depth of the wound so that what enters within from the instrument does not go deeper than it should and does not injure the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not harm them.
and it is necessary that he places the handle of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and it is done with the hand softly, it is necessary to cut at its head, or with a spatula gently.
And when the bowel is empty, you must place into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or in dry green oil.
place the tent far outside of the wound in front of the orifice, and put on top of the orifice and over the wrist clean linen moistened in water where mallows have been boiled.
then treat it after two days of this treatment until it is healed.
and every so often irrigate the orifice and wound with enema of water and honey, then with water where white lily roots and long aristoloche have been boiled. then return to the treatment.
And if the wound is red in the flesh, you must be cautious of applying hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
Of childbirth Mestier est premier a la baile
Then the child must hurry to get out of fire. Therefore you know that these births are according to natural position, and the child comes out under its head, with the secondary (midwife) helping it.
And when you see these signs, you should gently apply pressure on its belly so that the child comes out soon.
For when it descends onto its head, the secondary helps with it, and the man is rid of his excesses through a good cleansing.
And this one who comes in another way does not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes out on its feet, or from the body or shoulder, and with hands, or it comes from the belly, or often, and is turned by chance onto its neck, and in other evil positions.
If it is necessary at the bath that she should be wise and skilful in these matters, avoiding error and deception, I will show you all the ways in which one must help her.
If the child comes out head first due to natural delivery, and the woman labours intensely during childbirth, and her strength is weak, let them make her sit on a saddle or seat which women hold for her.
And her nourishing broth of oil or fenugreek be boiled, then pour some bathwater between her two hands with the small spatula of this shape: And open up the amniotic sac, and cut by her fingernail so that the fluids which are within flow out;
And press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil.
Then make her swallow coltsfoot and sneeze, holding her mouth and nose closed for an hour. Now proceed to extract the child.
And if both hands appear first, you must gently return them, one at a time. And if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet upwards. Then raise the chair from the ground, supporting the woman so she does not fall when rising.
And if your hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut open their hands with the knife that was mentioned before, extract the child, and reset them evenly.
At the child's birth from its feet. When the child starts walking on their feet, you must push them upwards. And then turn it over repeatedly until it is even.
Then take one of their feet and stretch it again and again.
When they jump up to their thighs, instruct them to grasp it, and make them sneeze frequently. If jumping happens, may God want it.
And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to its natural form. For then it will be lightly done.
And if it does not happen as we have said, then take mucilage from flax, and oil of lilies, and melted gum, and grind everything together in a mortar. and place this ointment on her feminine nature, then have her sit in warm water up to under her ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make a collar of myrrh for her, and place it beneath her, leaving it there for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose shut, and press gently on her belly, for the child jumps now.
Of the child's exit onto their knees When the child comes in this manner, he puts his hands first forward and then backward. Then she should be supported under her neck, with her feet hanging downwards, and let her lie on the bed. and folds his hands back and forth, then he presses his hands on the stomach, and removes the cushions from underneath, until she is aligned downwards; and if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them vigorously, then massage his stomach upwards, then put your hands on him. and rock the child back and forth. and tell the woman to hold herself as long as the child comes out.
Of the child's exit from the broad side, with one hand hanging out. I must devise a way to bring back the hand: If one cannot restore it, then make the woman get up and go away.
If she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed and lift her legs vigorously.
Then bring forward the poultice I described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then help to bring back the hand; And turn the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the baby comes out.
Of the child's emergence from its collarbone, let it spread its hands, with its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and lift the child lightly;
And when it is equalized, place the natural poultice of fat and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move gently back and forth;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grasp it. make her sneeze. in this same manner for all secondary dislocations
in this same manner for all secondary dislocations When it comes out forcefully in this manner on the first attempt, scoop the moisture away with your nail, until it is emptied.
and if any of it falls on her face or neck, wipe it off immediately, without delay, and remove the child.
then insert the child, ensuring it is placed correctly, and instruct the woman to hold onto something once.
Of the dislocation of the hips Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; And this is not a strange thing, and often happens. Two such things are strange occurrences, and they do not live long if so named.
Two such things are strange occurrences, and they do not live long if so named. I know these, that they multiply, and are dispersed by the surgeon who divides them, which is connected to the scabbard.
And sometimes they emerge naturally just as toes do, as we have said.
And if they emerge severely, then the treatment should be as we have described, and the surgeon must be skilled, acting swiftly and lightly in their actions. And act accordingly to bring about recovery. of many children
Some are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and they are all shaped in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him. He should do as he ought.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I said in the previous section, and it does not come out easily, and you are forced to perform manual labor; It is necessary that you know if the woman has sound virtue and no mishap, or she fears death;
The woman should be positioned on her back with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised;
And the minister holds her down with two parts of his body, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot move during the child's descent.
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils, a mixture of alum, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint her stomach with these oils and mixtures.
Gently shake the pregnant woman and place her in a position where she can easily expel the fetus, ensure that it is well-aligned with the birth canal, take care if the child's head has already appeared.
If the child's limbs are entangled in its eyes or neck, mouth, palate, under its beard, clavicle, or near its sides, and if it is descending feet-first, then push with your hand, holding firmly on to their middle and lower ribs.
and he must hold the hook with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and push gently with all his might, and insert the hook into one of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
then insert another hook opposite it, or the third if you need them, so that the extractions are even;
and then stretch them evenly by moving one way and the other, to take it out, and let the hooks be toothed so as to hold [it], just like this is the shape:
And if any part remains inside, anoint the hole with some of his fingers' oil, and push those fingers into that part, then pull out the other part.
And if there remains none, then place this sling higher up, and do so until he can pull himself forward with it.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull it back due to tightness, then you must wrap a cloth over it until they are both even. Then wrap the cloth around the junction of the palm or wrist, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the passage or has an acute presentation, then you must insert the sharp-pointed spatula between your fingers, split open the head and extract the fluid. Ou you la ront a l'estrument qui est apelez "almidach", de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est apres cestui;
Et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;
Et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;
Et s'elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;
Et s'il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre;
And if the child is on their feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustments at the mouth of the womb are slight.
And if there is constriction in the belly or chest, it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and open the belly or chest until the moisture within is released;
and if the other member is removed and the head remains, push your hand along its length from above the joint to the mouth of the socket; then insert one or two fingers and draw them out forcefully;
and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to hot inflammation that has arisen there, it should not be disturbed but instead softened with moist and greasy things. and administer plasters, as well as moistening agents in water to soften and moisturize.
And if the child is lying on their side, and you can position them evenly, administer what we have mentioned for a living child;
If there is no other option, pull it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the caul (membrane) behind.
And when you have done this, administer what we mentioned for hot abscesses that form in the groin;
If there is bleeding, apply cold water compresses to restrain it, and provide further treatment as needed.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead, then another was born on top of it, and the other one died as well. After a long time, an abscess formed in the jaw, swelling until it burst open, and began to rot (or stink).
I was called to treat him, and I thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an object came out, seemingly like bone, then after some days another one did too. I was greatly puzzled as to why the belly has no bones.
I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, extracting embedded bone fragments until the woman was in better condition; And the woman lived a long time like this, and there was now a small piece of flesh from that place.
And I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find a strange case, may know how to provide assistance.
After this comes the form of the pressure bandage, for which we have the books;
And on page two, at the second head of the second line. However, the horns should be more subtle than the restraining device, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree it bites into should be one palm and a half long. and between the two limbs there should be two joints of this same wood, which are firmly attached to each other, half a palm in length or slightly more.
and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of pliers. and it has two joints at each end, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width.
and when you see that the socket needs to be opened with all the instruments, have the woman sit off the edge of the bed, her feet hanging down and legs open, then insert the two joints, which are attached together, into the socket, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instruments, just as you did with the equal pliers, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the joint, so that the bail can do what it wants.
This instrument is fully mounted, and its shapes are multiplied; And when you have these instruments ready, the work is all the more urgent, and it brings greater esteem to men for their skill.
If you do not despair of the instrument which you have prepared, because their need is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze vigorously, and keep your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she succeeds with this, it is good.
If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, putting into it herbs that can open the pores of the skin as gently as possible: rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood and centaury. All these herbs or some of them should be boiled in water inside the pot over fire.
Then put one end of the tube or hole from the pot into the patient's mouth and the other towards their nose, holding it so that the steam enters the patient.
Then make them sneeze as we have said before. If the injury is caused by a fall.
If it remains after this treatment and does not work, command the nurse to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot juice, then put it inside the patient's anus and massage it; she must also check the womb. and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straight, so that the husband does not suffer during extraction.
but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled. then it will come out and dislodge itself.
And if the husband's throat is narrowed, we have mentioned the cure of sneezing and herbal fumigation;
and if it does not respond to all that we have said, take care that you do not rush when pulling it out;
but it is necessary that he who is at the husband's throat be bound to the wife's thigh and enema her with ointment of four-fold composition. If there is inflammation and it returns afterwards, you must treat it again.
But nevertheless, when inflammation occurs and it leads to foul smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient. It is necessary then to use suitable fumigations for this:
None of the ancients have tested fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and second-course is as follows:
And it should be similar to the appearance of a dog's head, with the subtle parts placed above in nature, and the larger parts over the fire.
The fumigation should be above the coals, and let it last as long as is necessary, then start another one anew.
Many children are born without an open anus; instead, it is sealed by a subtle membrane. Therefore, it is necessary for the nurse to pierce this membrane with her finger, and not use a sharp spatula, being careful not to harm the child.
Then place soft wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and treat it until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a plank peg into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wants to go outdoors.
And sometimes this sealing occurs suddenly due to a wound or abscess. It is necessary to cut through this sudden sealing. Treat it as described for the anus of a newborn.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;
and when this old dislocation heals, it forms a white or subtle scar, and sometimes these are piercing fistulas;
and they are recognized by those who have experienced it through evacuation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee.
And thus one recognizes a piercing fistula in the anus, but not a non-piercing one: and that you insert your index finger into the anus, and gently push a thin needle made of brass or iron into the fistula if it is not twisted.
And if it is twisted, insert a slender probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or air nor a visible wound as we have said: know that it does not perforate; then hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine passage, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the probe has reached its destination. If there is no twist and the pain is around that area, then it is likely in a curved section of the intestine, and neither medication nor immediate treatment through poultices are effective.
And for these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but toil, and the foolish pride of surgeons who meddle with them.
In that which is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
And lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs inclined towards their belly; Then insert a tent of iron, or brass if there is torsion, until you know where the tip lies.
If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your index finger, and when you feel that the tent has pierced [the fistula];
And if it is uncovered where you feel a fissure or flesh, then know that it is Persian. If it is not worked on, one cannot heal it.
One says nevertheless that they may be well healed, but this happens rarely.
And the treatment one applies is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. And place all of the hot [tool] into the fistula until it reaches its base. Do this twice or thrice until you know that these faulty tissues are burned, which resembles a bird's feather.
and then treat wet bandages with butter until all moisture has left, then treat the ointment by drawing out matter and sealing it together.
If he is thus healed, it is good.
If this, no other way can be healed;
and if the tent enters, and does not pierce all the way through to the right side of the anus, and between your finger and the tent is a thick layer of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that which sews together the covering from within; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and push it back before the tent, and then cauterize after, until you reach the head of the tent. and the tent will be released, and fall out.
Then avoid those damaged parts that look like a bird's feather, leaving them untouched.
And if blood rushes into you and comes between your body and the work, cauterize it with fire or with medicated paste.
For fire cauterization combines two things: that is to say, the burning of these damaged parts and the stemming of blood flow along with drying out moisture;
then treat wet wounds with butter or ground substances until the skin turns pale, and remove burnt flesh from the wound.
then treat open sores with soothing ointments for hardened skin, using dry medications.
For once it is reset, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes right up to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus and ask the patient.
If you notice the wound and there is either skin, membrane, or flesh between two parts that are about to break through, with no apparent way out and little hope, then administer one of the three methods below:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, apply tents and treat it as first described;
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the membrane that holds the foundation and cause involuntary evacuation. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. perhaps it will be ulcerated, so you remove the covering and clean it once cut near the foundation, either with a tent or another pointed instrument. then remove that faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as you can. then consider restoring the wound and removing the fistula from the part outside of the foundation.
then consider restoring the wound and removing the fistula from the part outside of the foundation. If it were a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes they form fistulas in this way: and it is when you insert the tube into the fistula, and it is near the fundament next to the skin above, take a perforated tube with this shape: ...and insert the thread awry into it in II, and pierce the tent with the thread into the fistula until its head is reached.
If it is pierced in the margin of the fundament inside, then remove the wire from that perforation, just as you would insert your finger into the fundament;
And pull the ends of the wire together, bringing the two sides into contact, and clamp them tightly to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
And clamp it periodically until the wire cuts through the flesh between them, allowing drainage;
Then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not rupture, make it burst in every way you can if it is not too deeply embedded. For it is not suitable to treat a wound that deeply embedded with cauterization; and then you must cure it as we have said until it heals.
The shape of the spinal needle used to make the fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side, and serrated on the other. On the other side it is not sharp because we do not want to cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: They are found inside the anus like small grains of resin, and they can be small or large, with some containing blood, and there may be one or several. They also protrude outside the anus and at its opening.
But those which are deficient have little moisture, and also here or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the colour of the body;
And the treatment for those who have them inside the rectum is that you instruct the patient to strain when going to the bathroom until the faeces exit and the object appears. If you hurry, grab it with forceps or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
And if the forceps cannot hold them due to moisture, grasp them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. Pull them out with your hands, then cut it, and sprinkle some hot powder on top as a caustic agent. Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat other treatments until they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, administer to the patient a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it may exit clearly. When the patient asks, and if the filament is forced out of the fundament, then the treatment is light.
When the patient asks, and if the filament is forced out of the fundament, then the treatment is light. And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with pincers and cut them off, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and be wary of cutting with a blade. Thus it is appropriate that you apply the suture in this manner:
Thus it is appropriate that you apply the suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, then draw the thread up and pierce the needle from the other side, turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let them hang loose.
Hold the thread tightly, then tie a knot in it, remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to draw out any excess blood.
Place on the bottom a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it over the wound, then instruct the patient to rest.
Leave it in place until the poultices fall off, and once they do, treat with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
By drying out of faeces from the bowel/rectum. Often there is drying out of faeces in the intestine, due to constraint by natural forces and when illness is longstanding and does not respond to treatment. You must remove the bark with the tip of your spatula or nail, making sure it doesn't get wet. Then treat it until it is firm as needed.
And if it cannot heal, begin the rasping again more vigorously than before until it bleeds a lot and becomes raw. Then treat it until it is healed.
From swelling. A fistula is a small faulty appearance between the body, which goes deep inside.
And sometimes it goes numb, and one feels it like a dead limb due to the tremors, spreading throughout the body, mostly in the hands more than other parts.
And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this quill onto the trembling, so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around; Then turn your hand over the entire quill so that you cup it all around the trembling, and put it in perfectly, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
And if you see fit, make such a cane from copper or iron according to this form, and let it be thin below and thick above: Do not pierce at all, but hold it with your finger, and press it firmly.
And if you see fit, then cauterize the trembling, as it is described in the previous chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes an argentum, or arquus, or molten iron alloy is made into a clyster.
And sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to what they are adapted for. Those which we adapt for the treatment of children and those who are weak and full of pain are small.
Those which we adapt for the treatment of children and those who are weak and full of pain are small. The form of the small and great clyster is thus broadly as follows: the bellies are tied according to this manner
And if there is an opening or the belly is tied like this, as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
And has one side with two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
And let the belly where one places the medicines be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and have one finger's width between each hole, then thread into these holes a strong twine woven in a crisscross pattern like an X or tied tightly around it, and sew together the belly as if it were a goat; and when the physician is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then clyster.
and this is the shape of the circle;
And let the physician not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it; then grasp the ministers with both hands together until it is completely visible, then remove the clyster and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the physician wants to exit, hold them as much as possible; and if he sleeps for an entire night nearby, it is even greater help.
And if you give him an enema for a bellyache, and the medicament comes out quickly, repeat it until he is cured.
And if the haemorrhoids are either on the anus or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle clyster, upon which the skin is stretched:
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section;
and we shall tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their practice.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what has caused them, where they have been inflicted, and by which means.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stones, and cutting by sword or knife, or by lance or stick or arrow, or by similar objects;
or by the location of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, since their memory will return in its own chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a blow from a rock or similar object, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect hot abscess. then make it bleed a little with the cerebral artery, especially if only a small amount of blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injury.
and purge the patient of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
And if they do not wish to bleed, their meat intake should be reduced, and they should refrain from drinking wine or eating meat.
and place on the wound, if a hot abscess appears there, cotton moistened with rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, apply on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and has not been moved by air, a powder which I will mention shortly afterwards;
and if the air has moved it, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will explain for wounds in the belly, regarding suturing.
If the wound exposes the bone, is gaping, and only hangs by a small piece of flesh, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medication and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meat, such as beef and wheat pudding, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
And if you find skin with a rash that does not reach the bone, then cut out all of the affected area, discard it and then treat [the wound].
And if there is an artery in the wound or incision that does not stop bleeding and cannot be staunched with medicine, then seek out the artery and if you find it severed, tie it with a thread. And if this does not bring benefit, then cauterize [the wound].
And if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is also light [and straightforward]: It matters that you put this powder in, which seals [the wound] instead of letting it heal on its own.
And the manner of preparing this powder is as follows: Take frankincense, one part; dragon's blood (resin), two parts; quicklime (calcium oxide), three parts, and finely mix the powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly, until it dries completely and seals with all its blood;
bind it well, and leave it untouched without unbinding it, if there is no swelling; for the medicine should not be removed until healing has taken place.
And at times one uses only lime [calcium oxide] when there is no frankincense or dragon's blood available, but the art has healed the wound.
And if the burn had caused the wound to die, especially inside (the body), do not use this powder there at all;
but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it becomes soft; then treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine pincers;
and I will tell you about skull fractures hereafter.
of the neck wound.
If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between this and a head injury; however, if the carotid artery or the jugular vein in the neck has been severed, this is critical.
If it is the brain, there is no other treatment besides letting it heal, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the brain and causes it to retract. and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest organ.
but let the medicine be washed in warm water sweetened with rose oil, and cooked cabbage also washed in sweet water, and other stones of salt according to this way, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep, and it is covered with hair and full of bowels, then pierce it in a lower place.
and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, then uncover it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the windpipe of the throat is severed, or the heart, and breathing is maintained, as the flesh still lives, then cut the heart above the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. And then restrain it carefully, leaving it for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound has penetrated into the bone, treat it with cautery. If there are bone fragments, remove them forcefully if you can, and for those you cannot reach, leave it to let the wound rot, and ease the discharge.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned earlier. And if there is bone in the wound with a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the injury is deep, observe whether air escapes as the patient breathes in. Know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind it to stop the blood from escaping entirely, and returning to the heart, which would kill the patient; But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
And if you have no ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; And there will come no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart or breathlessness; And when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed. Treat it then with tents and other remedies until it is cleansed.
And if it cannot be healed, and the wound persists, then know that there is a fistula present.
So treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, be it on the chest, arm, or back, treat as per the front. If it is large, suture it.
And if it is small, treat with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone or broken into pieces, clean the wound, and realign any displaced parts. and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, it will relieve the extraction.
and for other wounds on different limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
Rupture of the abdomen
The ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, leading to the introduction of others.
The suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound causes more trouble than the large one, because one must put back the intestines more carefully, unless they are placed back step by step.
Because the intestines swell sometimes when they feel cold, so they retract more tightly, and thus the medium-sized wound is preferred, because one must put back the intestine to its place rather than the other parts of the abdomen.
And know that a rupture of the belly occurs according to four manners:
the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more specific with the suture of the belly, and I shall say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and a part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to replace, this can be done through one of two methods: or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in such a manner: Moisten a sponge or soft cloth with warm water only, or cook it in water infused with vinegar and spice, then apply to the intestine until the swelling is reduced.
And having made this constricting wine, it becomes mature under the sun to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling start to subside, dampen the intestine with water or other soft cloths that have been cooked in malves, for by this method it is alleviated of much discomfort.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with an instrument used for cutting haemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is to close the wound by cutting it so one must not cut unless there is a great need for it.
and this is the instrument to open it with:
when cutting inside along its curve and not outside, and see here the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have come out, then replace them carefully according to their natural form into their proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is located in the lower part of the abdomen, one must lay the patient on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head. And if the wound is in the upper part of the abdomen, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, when the abdominal rupture occurs on one side or another, position the patient so that the affected part is higher than the other.
And thus you must manage what I say for large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what has been provided to you, take it in your hands and carefully apply a gentle medication that covers the entire wound, bringing its edges together.
This is the common method for stitching: take a needle or multiple needles according to the width of the wound and leave two inches at the tip of the wound before threading it with strong thread. Pierce the two sides of the skin with two ends of the siphac, which is beneath the skin on the inside, so that you make it pierce through from this part, and bring together the two ends of the siphac in a group of four.
then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound appropriately, and then leave one finger's width, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop until all needles are tied according to your need, until the entire wound is closed.
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for the fine ones cut through all the flesh, while the very thick ones cannot enter properly. hence it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
and one should not insert the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sutured.
and then cut the skin around the needles so they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and place tents or bandages over the needle sites to hold them in place, leaving them there until the wound is healed.
This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds because it only requires one or two needles.
The second type of suture is common, and it involves gathering together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with one needle or a strong medium-sized thread.
And when you have pierced these four sides together, draw the needle back to the starting point, like one would sew fabric.
and place a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb.
these stitches will be used by the man, and I sewed a wound that a horse had on its belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was larger than a palm, with the intestines protruding by two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was healed up to fifteen days, I treated him, and he was cured.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, as I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until it was healed.
Now I shall tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
Take the needle, and push it from outside to inside through the wound;
When it has pierced the heart from right to left, leave the tip of the needle where the vessel rests or pierces where you have pushed the needle through, and make it go through again from inside to outside.
And the method of this suturing is that you sew it like a peltier sews furs, leaving one vessel on one side and taking it up again from another, until the entire suture is complete.
The second method of suturing, as Galen describes it properly, is done by bringing the two edges together naturally and pressing one tip of the vessel onto another in such a manner:
Insert a needle at the base of the nose, and pierce that place only, leaving two holes on either side. Then turn the needle, and pierce it outward from that place until you reach inside, at the two holes on either side.
Pierce one and then the other outward from that place until you reach inside, at two more holes of the nose which are on the opposite side.
And this is the modern method, and the most common way of suturing.
Galen said this word, and many witness that one must suture the belly with two needles, having thread in each.
and you must pass one needle from one side to another, like those who sew leather straps;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those of other parts of the belly.
The judgments about the wound are such as the judgments about other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than let it dry out, you should replace the intestine and sew up the wound.
then apply the powder of burning flesh, and if it has dried out, then put some ointment that is appropriate until the wound heals. Tie the thread, and let the eyelids and eyebrows fuse together. Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
And if you don't have medicine, apply old cotton wool to it as soon as it begins to drain pus, and move it twice daily until it is healed.
Because you don't need any other medicine in many instances when the wounds are simple.
And if you suspect that the wound might cause the main limbs to become infected, you must dampen a light linen cloth with lukewarm oil or rosehip oil, and place it around the groin and under the armpits.
and if he feels pain or inflammation in the bowels, and it happens often, then cleanse them with a clister of red wine, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine;
and pierce it from within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to treat than the small one.
The intestine which is called 'jeun' cannot be healed when it is wounded, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the belly button falls out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned worms or black, you must tie the spot that has gone black to prevent bleeding as there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the tie, and hang the two navels from beneath the wound outwards to ease its extraction when the belly button falls, and the wound heals.
On the rupture of the mouth
When the intestines are round and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, for I saw a man who was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which excretions and gas came out;
I treated it according to my ability, and I did not cease to clean it until he was healed, and the wound closed up.
And when I saw it healed, I suspected that the patient might have an ailment in his belly; and there was no illness there, but he remained in better health, eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: take coarse thread from large gut, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the thread has opened its mouth, put it on both lips so that it tightens their mouths above.
then cut the head of the thread and leave it so that it cannot be untied, then put another piece of thread afterwards in this same manner as before, until the wound is completely bound. and cut the wound.
These stitches adhere in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and if you want to sew up an intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, do it this way:
Take the end of this gut string, which should be very thin, then tie to its end a fine linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle and sew up the gut, then pull it back over the tear.
And this way of sewing, it is not false, only according to the path of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal bowels, there is no cure or health, only skillfulness.
of a fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is healed and bowed inwards.
And a fistula is truly a false knotting that is hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it also has hair like the feather of a bird.
and sometimes it leaps clear, and other times dense. sometimes little, and others enough.
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is true only for one of nine causes: that is to say, due to the scantiness of blood or pus; or because of its nature; or due to the hard flesh within it, and on its lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much corruption [putrefaction]; Where there are sores and the substance is of poor quality; where the medication is not effective in treatment; where due to this, the corruption is like a plague; where due to the properties of the region, digestion is slow, healing takes time, and it swells naturally; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments with remedies in the section.
Now I must inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that affect the large veins, arteries, nerves, anus, intestine, bladder, sides of the body, spine, or any joint in the hands and feet; and if there is any return to the property of the main member, and its similar places.
And all fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to cure, there is nothing but work [to do] and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have mentioned, and you are confident of the treatment, and you know how to identify it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, make an incision.
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for it with a thin tent of lead, because the lead can bend and move along the twisting.
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot locate it well with tents, then cleanse it by clisterizing through one of the openings, as moisture flows from one opening to another, thus cleaning it.
Then carefully examine it as best you can to determine if there is bone or nerve involved, and whether the injury is complete or not, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where exactly he feels this pain.
And when you have truly located where it is, whether it is close to a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or any of the places I mentioned, treat it accordingly as I told you, and remove whatever is damaged and corrupt within.
Then cure it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is deep in the right spot, you must treat it perfectly, as much as you can, then place moistened bandages soaked in healing ointment, pushing them inside until the tip of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes any excess remaining at the bottom.
And then I apply invigorating ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
If the wound or inflammation does not burden your principal limbs as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, cut away until all corruption is removed, then treat it with invigorating substances until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, and bends backward as before, know that you have not gone deep enough:
If it is uncovered and searched thoroughly until you reach the bottom, remove all the decayed matter, then reset its position.
And if it is healed in this way, it is good. If not, know that the decayed matter has penetrated too deeply, and you cannot reach it. If there is another instrument left by nature.
And if there is a small decayed bone that you can extract with pincers, remove it with the suitable instrument for this purpose. If there are multiple bones, remove them all together, leaving none behind.
And if moisture prevents you from continuing without any errors or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that causes suppuration to the wound and leave it until all the flesh is rotten around the bone. Then they will be able to extract the bones more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, treat only the suppuration until all discoloration has disappeared and then redress the wound.
And if a large part of it has become suppurated, and reaches the bone marrow; It must be cauterized and cut until all suppuration is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg so that you may take example from it and apply it to your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, such that the matter came up into the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external reason to open [it].
But the doctors, in their folly, worked on it so much that the abscess opened up and a lot of matter flowed out, becoming a fistula, and there came forth many discharges which threw out all bowel contents and moisture from the body;
And many doctors put him through various treatments for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of medicine, until I was called upon, and I examined his leg and the medicines they were using to treat it, and saw what was flowing out from the openings in great quantity. And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellow complexion.
I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then examined all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and cut into one of the openings until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching deep inside to the bone.
I scraped away what appeared to be the corrupted part of the bone and believed there was no other corruption beyond what I removed.
And I began to treat the wound with soft medicine over a long period of time, but it could not heal.
Then I started again and exposed the bone as before, finding that the corruption had spread into it. I scraped it away, then removed it, and tried in vain to close the wound. but I could not cut around one palm's width of bone, and it remained stuck to all its soft tissue, then I treated it with medicine; and it was quickly healed and fused, and there was no need to start the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure more, and because of my fear of his death. For the evacuation, he often bled, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard tissue grew, and it had good consistency and caused no harm or damage whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
And if any bone in the body is broken, it should be treated in this way: take a bandage, and bind the head of the bone that protrudes, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and place another thicker bandage made of wool on the flesh that is above the bone, and extend the head (of the protruding bone), so that you pull away the corrupted flesh beneath, and uncover the flesh over the location where you wish to operate, ensuring that it does not cut into the flesh;
And place a hot iron or a table beneath the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh.
One must be very careful to see and feel where the corruption is, and check again thoroughly.
And if the bone is corrupted but does not break open, and the corruption lies either in the middle or on one side, expose all the flesh.
Then place the hot iron underneath [the wound] and cauterise from one side to the other over the entire length of the corruption with a probe as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut away the corrupted joint [surface], and cauterise the bone on its other side.
and if the corruption is located between two joints, there is no other option but to cut it out.
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is indeed very severe, yet you must still inquire about this corrosion, how it presents itself to you. purify it in every way possible, but make sure that neither the vein nor the nerve oppose you.
know that there are many types of incisor tools and saws for cutting these bones, depending on the arrangement of the bones, their appearance, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, and hardness. and for this it is necessary to match each type of operation with its appropriate instrument.
And know that your work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the signs of different illnesses. If you think about the instrument you need according to its purpose.
The head can be affected internally or externally;
And when you have treated that injury with medicine and it doesn't heal, then you must amputate the limb up to where the corrosion begins so that the patient may escape death or the evil consequence of losing a limb.
And the signs are that the limb turns black as if burnt by fire and then after the blackness it spreads from limb to limb taking over the whole body.
If you hurry to cut it, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as a scorpion or snake, and the corrosion is on the top of your arm, then cut it, but do not give it time to reach the hand.
And if it has reached the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not extend to the arm.
And if it reaches the arm, then cut it with a knife.
If it passes the knife, then it is death, and no strong remedy will save them except for quantities of its virtue.
And do likewise when the corrosion comes to the foot: If it comes to the first joint, then cover it after the other joint.
And if it happens on the foot, then cover the whole foot. And if it ascends to the leg, then cover at the knee joint.
And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to let the patient die.
The method of covering or binding the limb is that you tie it above and below, and have some ministers pull on one of the bindings downwards while others pull on the other binding upwards, and you cut away the flesh that lies between the two bindings with a spatula that is wide enough to expose the bone.
Then cover it with cotton or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, preventing further injury and an abscess from forming in the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you operate, cauterize the area immediately or apply some hemostatic powders.
Then return to your medical treatment until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man with a wounded foot:
He had a blackened wound that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion started on his big toe, spreading across the entire foot.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he rushed to cut off his foot, and was healed.
and long after, the corrosion returned to his thumb, and he came to me, and I applied resonant substances to it after purifying his body, but could not stop the corrosion.
and he saw that I had to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I hoped to reverberate the matter. and I also doubted that if I amputated his hand, he would die, because the man's health was weak.
and he became desperate, returned home, and hurried to cut off his own hand, and was healed.
And I have not included cases where it is done otherwise, if one needs to do so.
There is no instance where an abscess forms in the flesh and remains for so long that it creates a large accumulation of pus; And then it hardens and ruptures, discharging the pus which remains visible in the wound, just like a vessel; The skin above is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve; such a condition is called a "sinus" and is not known as a "fistula";
But if it extends all the way to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
and the skin is such that you cut this skin all around it, especially when it is delicate, just like a piece of cloth. and it does not matter for its corruption.
And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the decay is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then clean it thus with a clyster:
check if the breasts are large, and the bowels that are inside emit a foul odour, then clysterise with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take equal parts quicklime, oil, and litharge, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it as an enema for the breast, holding the opening tight. Leave the medication there for two hours, then remove it by feeling around.
Do this several times until the breast is softened, and remove the pus.
And sometimes you can use an enema of ash water if this medication is not available. Take ashes from grapewood and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know the breast is well softened.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medication nor ash water, then use an enema of water and honey where there is a bit of powdered litharge. where you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for honey has the property to purify and wash, and wine causes the blood to rise.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed, then cleanse it with what makes flesh grow in it, and take definitive cataplasm, and make it with rose oil and wine;
where you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties in the treatise on ointments;
and if the wound of the breast is small, and the cane of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron rod a little, and put in a bit of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, cut it and leave only enough space for the clyster to enter, and if the opening that emits excrement is above, then close or cover it at a lower place where it is located.
And if you cannot cut the skin below as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the bowels are directed to the lowest place they can be, for when the bowels are perforated, it does not allow food to pass through and if you cannot cut the skin below as you wish, prepare it in this manner: That the bowels flow slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowels behind;
That the bowels flow slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowels behind; and take consolidating medicine to put on the wound, and extend it onto a linen cloth that covers the entire wound. then cover as much of the surrounding area as possible with a hole in the center larger than the original one, then extend ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the wound and place it over the injury to ease swelling. Do not remove the large outer bandage for several days.
and the one on top of the wound, remove it often to reduce swelling and wipe away any discharge. Examine what comes from this swelling - is it poison or pus or just a lot of fluid, or is it digestible or undigestable?
and take note if the patient experiences pain and whether there is an abscess or not. Once your medicine has been applied in this way and you observe what emerges from the wound, know that the tissue is healing and bring the patient closer to health.
Then you must release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle venom emerges after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing is approaching.
For there are men who heal slowly in their wounds, and those who act contrary to this;
and if the bowels remain undigested after many days, you should know that this breast has not healed;
and if the breast heals slowly and is remote (far away), apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in effect, such as a definitive ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, which is the final medication.
Take definitive ointment, make it with rosehip oil, and moisten it with old wine equal in volume;
Then boil it and use it.
And this same thing is better boiled when there's no definite ointment present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it up, and sprinkle the powder on honey while it's still on the fire.
Then mix it with a linen cloth and spread it over the chest. Sometimes an aristoloche is used, or roots of celestial lily, which are like barley flour and chickling vetch. Use it as either a simple medicine or in combination with other treatments. Grind them up into powder and mix it onto the honey I mentioned before, then apply it.
And if the cure is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has reached the bone, or to hard tissues, or ligaments. If the treatment for curing fistula, as we have said before.
A panaricium is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or it may appear in other places.
And when it is neglected and left untreated, an abscess can form beneath the nail, leading to a deep pus-filled cavity that erodes and destroys the root of the nail, and sometimes even removes it entirely.
It causes corrosion down to the bone, resulting in a foul-smelling pain and the affected area is wide and discolored.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cut away all the remaining unhealthy tissue near the nail with an iron tool, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound;
And if the nail presses against the flesh, beginning to prick and wound it, you should place a needle beneath the nail that pierces the flesh, push it upwards, and cut away this flesh carefully and lightly, then apply burning and corrosive medicines onto the remaining flesh to remove all. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away, and pull hard, for as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, healing cannot occur.
And if you see the finger is corrupted, cut it away from us as described before, then treat it until it is healed.
and if he is wounded, and kicked, and feels great pain, then you must first treat his wounds.
then cut the nail with the sharp spatula by slicing across it, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, place something soothing on it.
The two adjusting thumbs that are born in some people's hands are sometimes very fleshy, and there is either skin or bones; at times they have nails, and one of them grows on the root of the joint, while the birth occurs in several of us.
One who is born with a deformity of the finger will not move it, but one who is born at the knuckle of the finger may move it.
the incision for someone with fleshy fingers should be made in this way: Cut it at its root with a wide spatule.
He who is born in the root of the joint, so it is hard to cure. So you must hold on firmly while cutting.
In one who is born or must be delivered by the posterior route, you must first cut the round flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth for it, and cure it until it heals.
The joining together of bones occurs either by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you cut the sutures, so that they may heal according to their natural form; Then place between two tents or moist cloths with rose oil, so that they do not adhere. Or you place between two soft cloth pieces, until the flesh is sutured, as it should be done.
If a fusion occurs on someone's hand with the palm facing upwards, cut this fusion as it is required.
Veins are open wounds filled with melancholy humours that come to many body parts.
And more dislocations happen in legs of those who walk on foot and work hard, compared to others.
So it is necessary for you to administer purging of the bile sometimes, then treat with the basil plant.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: One method involves scraping [the wound] and drawing out the black blood; The other way is to raise the vein and draw all of its blood out.
The incision should be done in this manner: First immerse the patient's leg in hot water that is very strong [in temperature], until the large vein becomes subtle, then pull the sick person's leg up from above the thigh to just below the knee.
then cut the vein at I place or II or III with a wide incision and lift it up then pull out black blood by your hand from one end to another until there is enough bleeding as the patient can tolerate.
and then tie it up, and instruct them to abstain from food that generates black bile.
and repeat the evacuation process and cauterization when veins refill with blood and harm the patient.
The remedies will be as follows in this manner: place the patient's leg in warm water and shave any hair on it until veins become dilated and prominent.
and if you have no bath, heat it over the fire, then place it on the wound from the top of the knee down to the foot or below the ankle.
then work the skin with an unciner, and peel away the wound from each side until it appears when touched.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord.
then push the thread underneath so that it is raised from the skin and then smooth it with an unciner gently, then place another piece of cloth on top three fingers wide.
then peel away the skin above the wound until it appears and then lift it with the thread as you have done before and smooth it with another unciner as you did initially.
Then cut another slice, or several if you need to, then lift it up and cut it at the toe of the foot, then draw it out and lift until you reach the second slice.
Then extract it slice by slice until it comes out completely, then cut it.
And if you cannot draw it and lift it out, then put a needle in from one side with strong double thread, tie and pull, push the needle underneath, turn your hand to either side until it comes out. And make sure it does not cut, because if it cuts, you cannot draw it or lift it out, and this will harm the patient.
And when you have drawn it all out, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil onto the wound. and treat [the wound] until it is healed.
And if the face is distorted, twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it open in a crooked manner, but do not amputate. and draw [the incision] as we mentioned before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the face is curved, and does not slice, so that it incises the vein.
And it is of a thick curvature, because if it were delicate, it would slice the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is entangled in the legs, in warm parts of the body where no herb or tree grows, and on earth where there is no moisture.
And perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to the decay that originates beneath the skin, much like how snakes and worms develop within the body, embedded between skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein starts to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, you must wrap it with a piece of wood that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it in place, and leave the wood hanging from the leg. Each time fluid exudes from beneath it, rewrap around the wood and retie it;
If it is too long, cut off a portion of it, then rewrap the remainder and do not cut into its root so that all of it emerges. For if you cut into its root, it will retract back into the flesh, causing abscesses to form as well as decay at that place and a painful illness.
For this reason, it is necessary that it should be treated little by little until reaching the head, and that nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when it is treated and reaches five palms in length or more, a man came to me whose vein extended for ten palms long, and when you cut it, it exudes one stream of pus through an opening, and perforates all the way through so that everything comes out;
The matter inside is evacuated, and medicine is applied to the area for some time to prevent putrefaction, then it should be treated like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is very delicate, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or foot, where many openings form and it must be carefully treated.
Cure it, therefore, as we have said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh. This disease is called 'ox disease' in our land because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body up and down, and one feels it move from limb to limb until it tears the skin where it was, and escapes;
It is born of the putrefaction of certain humours, just as worms, serpents, and larvae are born in the belly;
And one doubts its evil nature, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, and goes into the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; And this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot resist but when it goes away:
one must therefore bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then press upon it and draw it out, and if the poison is perfect in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is to run into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming towards the eye or near it, firmly pinch below it with the eyebrow, then press upon it and draw it out;
And it is necessary to use purgatives on the patient, cleansing the body with soluble medications for harmful humours and avoiding putrefying foods.
Of the pain that comes from windiness. This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that arises in certain limbs, able to move from limb to limb.
And I have seen what I tell you. I was called to see an ailing woman, who uncovered her arm, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after that, I saw it rise up towards the shoulder like a worm, more than anything else, just like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another.
The pain departs from its place, lodges in the shoulder, then spreads throughout the body, eventually reaching the other arm.
Then it returned around the body again, as I witnessed.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, because I had never before seen this illness behave in such a manner. However, I had heard that pain could often move from one place to another, but I had not experienced it myself until I saw it in the woman.
And I thought it was because the woman had a slender body and her veins were exposed, which made the wind's effects more noticeable.
It does not appear according to this reasoning for those who are delicate and have moist bodies with covered veins.
And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind it above and below tightly, and cut above so that the windiness is forced back into place; and cauterize the area.
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as if raising the wind, with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they land.
The variations of it are such that some have large spikes, others small ones, while yet others are furry or smooth. And there are those with two horns, others with tongues, and yet more with parts.
and this one which falls on any limb, it happens in two ways: or in the principal member of the body it occurs, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it happens therefore in any part of these organs, and the sign of death which I will tell you next appears to you: you must be concerned with the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many situations afterwards; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not stuck deeply, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and if there is any damage to the substance above the brain, it appears as a black spot in one or both eyes, along with swelling, redness, dizziness, inflammation, reddening of tongue, spasms, loss of consciousness, and vomiting bile; And perhaps it goes without saying from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moisture white like pulsation, and there is also as burned flesh;
and if these signs appear to you, hold on to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you also feel as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty. and perhaps the arrow moves with the heartbeat, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. Know then without doubt that death descends.
And the sign of an arrowhead that has not pierced the lung is that there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily while rejecting cold drinks.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the intestines, it is near the small ribs; and he suffers great pain and great difficulty breathing; and all the limbs of his shoulders move.
And if the arrowhead falls into the stomach, sometimes something undigested may come out of the wound.
And if the arrowhead falls into the belly, and no excrement comes out through the lower intestine, there is no hope for a cure or the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows continuously, and the patient feels severe pain; know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the arm and forearm, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, thigh, legs, and similar parts are safe according to many arrangements. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me so that you can do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his arm at the base of the neck: I tried it, and I tore it from underneath the fat of the ear, and she was healed without noticeable injury.
And I extracted an arrow that had lodged in the fat of the eye beneath the white part below, and the arrow was bent, and I could only reach its point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, all iron without barbs;
The eye healed, and no ill consequences befell it.
And I extracted an Arabic arrow from the throat of a Christian; this arrow had barbs.
I cut away the barbs, and manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrow from a man, which was lodged in his abdomen or stomach area, and I thought he would die.
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all; I incised above the arrow, released it, and pulled it out quickly, and he did not suffer any ill effects.
And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound has healed over it;
and if the arrow remains inside him, and he does not experience any changes in his natural condition or functions, nor finds any harm in his normal activities.
And you see another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound has healed over it; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many similar others.
And extract an arrow from the prince's man, which was stuck in his nose and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely bent.
I was called to treat him after it had been stuck for three days. I found that the wound was quite narrow.
I tested it with all my skill but did not feel anything. and he felt pressure and pain behind his right ear.
I thought it was due to the point of the arrow, so I applied an attractive and digestive poultice there, so that his skin would not swell. And the location of the arrowhead appeared to me.
And the location of the arrowhead appeared to me. I applied the plaster immediately, and the wound healed promptly. The patient remained ill for a long time until they felt the arrow one day inside their nose.
And he told me (about it). I applied corrosive medicine to the wound right away until it opened and I tried again, feeling the tip of the arrowhead that was exposed.
Then I inserted an object into the wound's opening with that corrosive medicine until the arrowhead became visibly exposed.
And it took almost four months to fully penetrate the limits of the wound, and then I widened the wound so that I could insert the tongs, but when I did, (the arrowhead) couldn't come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I then restored it, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you may focus your care on what I do not mention, because a book cannot possibly cover everything.
But wise masters compare very few great things, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, to deal with the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are stuck, but rather according to two manners: Wherever by low place where they enter, or from another side;
and that which shoots forth from where it enters is an arrow embedded in flesh, and sometimes it may be seen now.
And if it cannot be seen, leave it until the flesh around is rotted away, and its exit path has eased.
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it so for a few days, moving it each day;
and then it will appear, and if not, pierce around with an awl so that the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is buried inside the body where it cannot be seen, search for it everywhere. And if you feel it, draw it to any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve involved, cut it open until the wound is large enough.
Draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is impaled on them from two sides as best you can, then break or bend back the barbs so that you may draw out the arrowhead.
Be careful not to break the arrowhead as you would then have more difficulty drawing it out.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten; then pull it out, as the extraction would be eased. And if the outflow of blood works against you, manage it as we have said regarding treatment in its chapter.
And beware of incising the nerve and opening a vein, and find a way to extract the arrow without danger, sooner or later, firmly or gently.
Place the patient according to their original position when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be; and if you cannot do so, place him as indicated by the signs before you.
If the arrow came from another part of the body or if nothing is apparent to indicate its path, but you see or feel swelling in the skin where it may be;
Cut above until forceps can grasp it, then extract the arrow. If it jumps now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widens it, then pull it out.
And if she cannot exit, leave her there again, then repeat the extraction until it is complete.
and if it was from the arrow that is in there, push the entire shaft out;
and if it was bone, and you wish to administer a push, provide an instrument with a groove so that the tip of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument.
then push it through, and if the arrow is grooved, insert the instrument with its point facing inward to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is envenomed, you must cut away all flesh around it, if possible, and then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow is in bone or flesh or in the belly or bladder or ribs and it is close to the surface, you can cut above it.
And guard yourself from cutting the vein and nerve, then pull it out, and finally sew up the wound, if necessary. Let the treatment continue until it is completely healed.
The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles the beak of a bird; see below for its form:
And there are many ways to do this: Large, medium, and small, depending on the amount of arrowhead.
The shape of the pointed end is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
The veins from which one recovers are thirty-one, of which sixteen are in the head; namely: Two veins located behind the ears, known as "herbech". And two arteries that are visible in both temples. et two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two glands which are on the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are underneath the tongue.
The veins which we commonly treat are five in each arm;
one is the cephalic vein, which lies on the left side, and people call it "the vein of the head"; The means is called "phlebotomy," composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; laymen call it "vein of the heart. And the basilic vein is found on the right side and laymen call it "vein of the belly"; it's located above the clavicle and is easily seen as a prominent vessel in the arm.
The cephalic vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
In the leg and foot there are three veins: One is located below the curvature of the left calf, while the second is found at the ankle on the right side. and the vein which is called "nesse", which is located at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins underneath those.
The bleeding of the veins which are behind the ears aids in treating chronic catarrh and headaches.
and the quality of bleeding, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth. then hold the patient's neck with a cloth, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head. place your fingers under your thumb, where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there.
Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein upstream, and cut both the skin and the vein completely through twice, and let blood flow out as much as you wish.
Then squeeze it and bind it tight until the vein is clean.
And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for ancient headaches, and solid ones, and for chronic eye inflammation, and also for the body to produce tears in the eyes.
And the quality of the bleeder is as I say. And the patient must strain their neck so that the two veins are clearly visible. He will feel pain in the artery below your thumb, and then you must lance it.
Then raise your heart above the vein near your index finger, push the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, along with its cover, just as you did for the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
Then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton. And afterwards bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have already spoken of their opening and extraction at the beginning of this book.
The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding from the cerebral vein for ancient illnesses of the face, and also for migraine and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called "the digger", of which this is the form:
And place the point on the vein, pressing it with your hand or another object, and let out as much blood as you wish. Then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so that it is tight but not too tight, making sure to cover a wide area with your work.
Nevertheless, the blades must not be too sharp. And if the wound is crooked, because the bone is close by, and sometimes breaks the blade when it is delicate.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, itching in the eye, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a cloth, as before.
Then you bleed him, and let the bleeding be transverse, a little across the breadth of the blade, and a bit long, because there is no flesh there. And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it breaks;
Then let the blood flow until you have enough, then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the nose is useful for fever, and acute madness, and illnesses of the head, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is an old ailment;
And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tightens their neck, then pulls their nose towards your left hand, and you take the fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily there, and now the blood will begin to flow;
and do not go too deep inside, let the blood flow according to your necessity, then leave it overnight, for it is quickly restored.
The bleeding of the two jugulars aids in reducing swelling of the neck, and at the beginning of inflammation, and for many illnesses, impetigo, scabies, shingles, and abscesses.
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens their neck beneath one or other jugular, as we have said.
and let the masters be upon the head of the patient and have the patient sit on a chair. Then bleed at the vein in the neck, slightly wide, then draw blood according to need.
Then remake it on the other vein, then untie the knot, and compress both veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate. And leave it like this until morning, until the wound is healed.
The bleeding of the lips The draining of veins from above helps with glue in the mouth, and gum corruption, and lip cracks, and from the nose and around it.
And the procedure for healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I have explained; Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, you will recognize them by their black color, and also by the small dark veins around them.
Therefore cauterize both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are unsure, then cauterize the larger one on each side; treat all four veins in this way since it is the same procedure for all.
On bleeding beneath the tongue The bleeding of veins beneath the tongue aids after the bleeding of the carotid artery, and it is used for narrowing the throat, and diseases of the eye, and ailments of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and they lift their tongue, and look beneath at each side for a black vein;
bleed one and then the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
or by piercing with a quick, broad-bladed knife, or a slender olivewood one as sharp as a lancet, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so widespread as you can see:
And it is necessary to open up narrow veins that are full of thick blood, and those that contain turbulent blood; and this is the form of an olive flame:
it is more pointed and sharp, and it is used to bleed delicate veins, where there is thin, yellow blood.
The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in treating illnesses that affect areas below the throat, and those relating to the neck, chest, and abdomen;
and the bleeder must bleed gently, and take care to avoid the artery which lies underneath. And if the artery is severed, and blood flows out uncontrollably, it must be stanched as I have said; And must not be pressed on the flame but cut like a lancet.
And if basilic does not open clearly, you must extract it, and change to another one. or you desire any vein of it, or you heal in its place the wound between the arm [and another body part]: it opens clearly. and cauterize it with the flame of a lancet, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the wound, it is necessary instead that you extend the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse. Then mark the site of incision, then bind the arm, and open the vein with a knife; and take care not to wound the artery when you see the site swelling, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it rise like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: act quickly then, and apply pressure for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; if the arm is bound, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient's arm;
And let it remain still with fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the bleeding is not stopped, and you faint, and no medic is present, then quickly cut the artery if it is exposed, for this will stem the flow. Stop the bleeding.
Take a piece of ficus bark, split it, then take one half and bind it on firmly until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, that is good. But if it doesn't stop, treat as mentioned before with blood-clotting powders.
And cauterization is not always effective in several conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The bloodletting of the vein in the middle helps as it releases blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said.
The person bleeding must take care of the nerve that is below, and if they puncture too deeply, finding the nerve, it may swell and damage, making the procedure difficult or impossible.
This nerve often appears but sometimes it may be absent in some individuals due to its delicate nature and should therefore be punctured with a fine instrument. And cut through the nerve with your force.
Et if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise.
The incision of the cephalic vein is beneficial, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
And it is necessary to open a vein by striking at the olive branch or the myrtle branch, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it. However, you must seek the lightest place, and do not press too hard if you miss the first time, and start again. And by chance, the place may swell in some people when you miss the first time, but it does no harm.
The quality of bleeding depends on your assessment.
The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is not intended to cure but rather to maintain health and prevent future illnesses.
and let the bleeding be performed on one of the three veins located on the arm that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring when fasting, and in autumn or winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Bleeding administered for illness has no determined time, but when needed, it should be done at any hour and at all times.
One should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman who is pregnant within the first four months and up to seven months of pregnancy. They ought not to bleed the old who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be done, they must prepare the bowels with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess from the intestines which would damage vital organs.
One should not be bled if they are overly full of meat or drunk, until the effects wear off, nor those suffering from dropsy.
Nor should one be bled after having suffered a violent bout of diarrhea, or vomiting, or abdominal pain, and multiple episodes of defecation following intercourse with a woman, and from overwork, lack of sleep, and fasting, nor those whose strength is totally depleted by an injury to the arm or body.
Then purify the humours, if the blood is thick, through diet and drinks and with medicine, if you have the power.
Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood and heal the wound around the arm, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day against work, pain, and lust, and similar things.
And remain calm and joyful, and let the healer be higher than the patient, and let him rub the arm two or three times, then bind the bandage moderately tight, for if it is too loose or too tight, blood will not flow.
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell up, so that you feel them.
Then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on that area to be incised below where you wish to open the incision, so the vein does not burst and collapse when struck.
For there are veins that flow like cords when incised, and some are filled with windiness, so that when you apply flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and this is how they are. And if the vein is opened, but the wound is too narrow, thus it is necessary for the incisor to be mindful of these things.
And if the vein is opened on the first attempt, it is good. If not, restart again slightly below this place or above until the levels are even, if they aren't swollen.
And if the levels are swollen, and the patient is frightened, let them rest for one or two days, and do not bind their arm. Perhaps there will be hot abscesses coming on.
Do not enter the bath, then restart the treatment if it pleases them.
And if the wound is small, or blood trickles out subtly and you doubt it won't be enough to satisfy your need for bloodletting, then draw the flame directly into that same opening.
And do so slightly above this place, rather than below if the levels aren't swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and apply a little lard oil, as it lightens the body of blood, and is beneficial for this location where the lard meets the oil.
And thus administer the lard oil in any wound you treat to stop the flow of blood;
And this same property exists in triacle and beef fat when applied to the wound. So finely does it separate blood and hinder its flow if too great is the amount.
And if there is an abscess present of considerable size, which often happens, especially when the wound was not cleaned before but only opened that one time or where the opening of the vein is small, then you must hurry and apply a moist sponge in water and salt slightly warm to the site and bind it tightly for an hour.
and you must do this after the release of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or greenness, it will not harm him; and if you see, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed with gallium juice, mastich, or similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance at the incision of the temple:
put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this appearance is bad. remove then that you do not apply anything of what we have said, for perhaps it cuts short of the artery;
but for this wound use a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its quality, and the colour of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it as thick, leave it until it is refined; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, make the wound wider, and let the flames be broad;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled often, and it must be done by cutting across, not pricking.
This manner of healing is safe from the loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
And to him whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice. If he is overheated, then take away blood three or four times; and if he is of a cold constitution, moisten with juice before the healing bread in muscatel syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he loses consciousness due to excessive blood loss during the operation, it is necessary for him to drink meat broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and to use other things that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and perform another operation, it is necessary, when he is weakened by severe bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the amount of strength he has, continuously.
And if one wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding operation, and he has a strong constitution, then he should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And if one wishes to bleed in another part of the body, then he should be bled on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within the body which is already overheated, and it brings on fever. If a large quantity needs to be extracted, enlarge the opening as much as possible without causing pain. Then you should monitor all the conditions of healing, and keep your hand on their pulse as they heal, ensuring death does not come to them through negligence, which happens many times when healers are careless.
And it is not necessary, when you wish to release the arm and drain blood a second time, with the opening now closed, that you press strongly upon it. If it is crooked, do not extend the arm forcefully, as that would be harmful.
But leave it alone until it heals for a second time. Where you point with the tip of the flame until the blood that has frozen in the vein escapes, then apply some wool soaked in warm water, and gently press on it.
And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place or in another vein, or even on the other arm.
The vein between the arms is bled instead of the one on the head because it is more accessible.
And the manner of cauterization is that the patient must immerse their hand in hot water until the nails turn red;
Then bind it loosely so that the vein is clearly visible, then cauterize it now across its width rather than its length;
If the opening is wide and it is cauterized close to the joint of the hand, but blood cannot escape, return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not immerse the hand in hot water, as it is done more often in winter than in summer;
and the bleeding from this vein is safer than that of all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves in it.
The bleeding from the vein on the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and here is the way to do it:
Immerse the hand in hot water until the vein is swollen so that it may be seen; And if the bleeding is done in an oblique manner or completely through the vein, it does no harm;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are underneath, completely devoid of flesh, and then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
And when you have drawn as much blood as is needed, apply oil and linen to the vein to seal the wound, and do likewise for each tube.
Bleeding from the left hand is good for disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you about the right one.
The bleeding of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all diseases that affect areas below the waist, such as illnesses affecting the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments in the hips, legs, and lower extremities.
And the quality of his injury is such that the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it bursts, and then binds it above the ankle. and the vein is at the ankle, and from there it goes up along the leg with many branches;
treat therefore that larger branch, or at the ankle, as seems best.
And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and treat it across as in cutting.
And let the flame cool down.
And if the blood cannot exit, place the foot in water, and let it thoroughly drain the vein.
And if you fail to cauterize the first time, repeat it a second time slightly above, as the skin is salty.
Do not be concerned about nerves, as we have said, and treat the other foot similarly in this manner.
The skin of the sciatic vein is found above the ankle bone, and its opening serves to alleviate hip pain when hot blood is present.
The quality of the cauterization is such that the patient should immerse in a bath and then tightly wrap above the ankle for four days by twisting it, otherwise, the wound will not open.
And if it does open, cauterize it in every way possible for you, using various methods of application. And it is better that you cut it off because the skin is salty, and many people suffer from this condition.
And it is better that you cut it off because the skin is salty, and many people suffer from this condition. And if you do not find it, then feel along any line of the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, taking care to avoid the nerves.
Make sure the blood flows freely until you see it coming out, then untie the binding, and place cotton over it while applying pressure. She is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horns, or brass, or glass;
And cupping is performed in two ways: Either by cutting to draw out blood, or without cutting.
And this non-cutting cupping is done in two ways: Where there's fire all over, or without fire at all;
and ventilation which is done by piercing and bloodletting in fourteen places of the body, among which some are entirely on top, like the head; and others are in the middle of the neck; and two more on either side of the collarbone; and one below the chin; and two on each shoulder; and one over the hips; and two on each arm; and the cups of both legs; and the cups of both ankles;
and cupping does not draw out blood, only small veins that are spread across the flesh, and it weakens no one, just as lancing of a vein is done; and it should not be administered, neither hot nor cold, in any illness caused by overindulgence, until the body is completely emptied.
And if due to the necessity of illness cupping must be done, or as a habit, then administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards its end, and throughout any time in between.
For there are some who, when they need to cup, have such heavy heads;
and for those who find fullness and redness in their faces, and in their heads, and necks, and darkness around the eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood; and there are some who dream, and see during the night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is midway through the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours of the day.
The bloodletting from the nose helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventousation is in the place of bleeding from the cephalic vein, and it is not suitable for those with a cold constitution to use it, or those who have catarrh, because it does great harm to them;
and for this reason, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little further down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The ventousation on the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason, it is beneficial for narrowing of the chest, and for splitting the channel of the lung, and for colds, and for fullness.
and it should be used briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes fainting or stomach upset and heartburn.
The ventilation at the two collarbones is beneficial for headaches, eye ailments, migraines, strangulation, tooth root pain, and it serves as an alternative to basilication.
And you should instruct the patient to extend their arm and place it under pressure so as not to injure the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth ailments, gum infections, and similar diseases that occur within the oral cavity. And it serves as an alternative treatment for diseases of the two lips.
Swelling in the shoulders is indicative of an illness caused by heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is just as effective as that of the three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these major vessels.
and instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the skin is bare of flesh and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the anus and ailments beneath it, and it should be large and made of copper, which requires proper suction. and if by chance it was thin, it would break. and it creates large wounds.
The cupping glasses for the legs heal evidently, as they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, spleen, and bladder, and reduce swelling.
and they are located at the two sophens, and at the two ankles, yet they weaken the body over time, and bring on fainting in many conditions.
The way to apply the cupping device is such that you place it first on an empty stomach, and suck gently, then put it quickly, and move it evenly, do not stop until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears.
Then cauterize, and replace the cupping devices, and take care in considering the constitution of bodies, for there are some with thick flesh, and others with delicate skin. You should only cauterize once, and the wounds must be wide, and one deep incision is enough; And suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it should be tapped twice. The first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, it should be tapped a third time.
And when we wish to draw out thick and viscous blood, we should only tap once. And if we want much blood, we must often begin again.
And if the blood is thick, you should tap it thoroughly, and finish when the heart is suddenly pierced, and for those with a thick and hard skull, and narrow arteries, you must grease the cups of the ventouse with an oil that opens and dissolves. if it is applied with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is to be spread, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take almond oil, or oil of balm, or dill oil, and their likes.
And if the one who is healing has tender flesh and large pores, it should not be oiled, but instead it should be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or china root water, or something similar.
And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
And those with excessive swelling should rise from drinking old wine, or suc juice water, or aniseed decoction, or chamomile, or something similar.
and one should not bloodlet with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
and one should not sleep after cupping, and they must be upright when cupping is to take place and when it has taken place.
And watch over those who are healing if they are choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; he must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar items; and eat little porridge, and lean meat, and moist foods.
and eat little porridge, and lean meat, and moist foods. And for those with a cold constitution, they should take honey syrup, and fragrant medium wine, which is neither old nor new, eat little pork, and eat porridge, small birds, and pigeons.
and on the day they cup themselves, they must drink more than eat;
and it is fitting to give certain men treacle or nutmeg once before cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be carefully drawn, but it is not fitting for those who are hot to drink it.
The cups that are placed without causing injury are those that are put over the liver, and over the chest, and gout, and over the stomach and hips and kidneys and hip, because these members cannot bear to be injured on their surface, and it is not done for the purpose of drawing blood from member to member, just as we place them on nipples when a child is suckling;
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we place cups on the stomach and hips to reduce the size of the member;
and it alleviates the pain when there is gravel or stone, perhaps removing by its attractive virtue the gravel, or dislodging the stone from its place;
And so it does when one places it on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these cups are administered empty to draw out only the wind. Sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in pleurisy diseases, and the cup is filled with solely warm water or water that has boiled suitable herbs.
The way to apply a fire cupping device is as follows:
It has two finger widths in diameter and half a palm width at the base, and there is a small hole on its side near the middle, just enough to push through a needle, and it is made of brass, soft in front so as not to injure the patient when placed upon the limb;
And it has in its middle a brass or iron bar running across for placing a candle wick, and there are large and small ones according to the diseases and moisture of those who use them.
For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people differ from those of fat ones.
And so one must place this cupping glass upon the limb:
Take the candle wax or tallow and put it in the cupping glass through the hole that is in it so that the light does not burn the patient.
Then put it on the limb, your hands being over the hole we have spoken of so that when you want to, the vapour can be let out and one removes the cupping glass.
And take the tallow again like before, repeating it often if you need to.
In the cupping glass which is applied to treat inflammation of the pleurisy, being completely hollow, has no rod or hole and can only be used when it is filled with water, then placed solely on the affected limb.
and this is its shape:
Leathers are not to be applied except to limbs where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas. and on bare flesh like an ear or nostril, and other such places;
The quality of the leathers is such that when you find them filled with clean pure water without any sediment, then take them;
and place them overnight in warm water, until they are soft, and have no contents in their bellies; then let the patient be bled by opening a vein or using cups, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches;
and when they are full and drop off, if it is a place where cups can be applied, then apply them, for this brings much relief afterwards.
If not, lift the affected area gently, then water it well, and let it dry.
and if the area bleeds too much after the application of leeches, then dampen a linen cloth with cold water, and place it on until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is multiplied [i.e., congestion], apply crushed vitriol to the skin lesions and similar things until it is extinguished.
where you place half a peeled bean on it, leaving it there until it dries up at the site, and it will now be healed.
and if you need more of them [i.e., beans], take others without skin.
And if the beans [without skin] cannot be taken, rub fresh blood over the site or insert a needle until blood flows out, and then place them there. As soon as they sense the blood, they will dry up.
And when you see them falling apart [i.e., the beans], sprinkle over it some aloe and saltpetre powder or ashes; they will now fall off.
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent;
and for this reason knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found any good [of it];
and I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experience, and through the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in these two chapters before.
It is necessary, therefore, that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains focused on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or torsion or fracture comes to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on one side and then the other, if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of the body, children, or the elderly; Unless the weather is very hot, or too cold;
And avoid cold things, such as cold baths and curd made from goat's milk or sheep's milk, and do not drink wine, eat fatty meats, or fill yourself up too much with flesh foods that fill the veins with blood until you fear a hot abscess or an overflow of matter in the member;
If the patient returns to his former management as he has used it.
When the broken bone begins to heal, one must feed the patient with nourishing meats that promote growth and have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, eggs, feet, cow stomach, chicken eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For too much nourishment causes swelling and delays healing of the fracture.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well mended or welded according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender like the bones of small children.
But have no worry, reset it by applying thick tendons that bind and join the limb together, as firmly as it was before. And do not take away any part of the broken bone; for this it must be nourished with rich meats as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures. For there is fracture that requires resetting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write with.
For there is fracture that requires resetting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write with. And if there is fracture accompanied by wound, or just a small crack in the bone.
And for each type of injury have its own appliance or tool in the restoration process as the memory returns to that place.
And the bone fracture is evident due to the twisted position of the limb, and it appears clearly from the outside, sounding hollow when pressed by hand.
And when there is no twisting or hollow sound upon touching it, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is likely no fracture.
But there may well be tortuosity, or a fissure, or a small fracture. You must not move it by hand, but apply the following medicines, then hold it firmly yet gently.
And know that the fracture which extends across involves two disjoined parts, you must now bring them into equal alignment lest a hot abscess forms there.
and if a hot abscess appears there, let it remain for a day until the abscess is appeased;
then set it equal to the bones which you can perceive slightly and keenly, know that its restoration is lighter than those of broken ones.
Then restrict it as you must do afterward.
And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, then extend it into two parts, be it hand or foot, or your whole arm if it's a small limb, or with two cords, or one cord and your own hand.
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you realign them in their places as best you can, and be careful not to cause any injury or pain to the patient through your work.
and align the two heads of the bones well according to their best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not aligned correctly:
if it aligns beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, or press so hard as those who cause through their work an abscess to form hot and swollen on the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is properly aligned, warn the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way; And make sure the limb is secured so firmly that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
And make sure the limb is secured so firmly that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. And ensure it is properly aligned so that there is no distortion when it is restored.
And the condition of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar. You must wrap it in soft and fine linen cloths. And those which are large, such as thighs and legs:
You must wrap it with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and hold it tightly from all sides equally, so that there is no burden.
Then bind around it with light lint, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all sides of the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture can move a little.
And loosen the bandage a little at a time until you take up most of the healthy place, then take another bandage and start again around the broken area.
Then return to the area below the fracture and tighten it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first binding above.
Then place between the joints linen swabs or cloth strips, ensuring they are all even, then bind everything above with bandages, and finally place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, apply soothing warm poultices for abscesses and reduce the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
Then place your splints above and ensure they are half the width of a cane or rod that is cut in two for bleeding, or made from palm ribs, and let them be according to this shape:
However, the splint that is placed directly on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others.
et let it also be as long as befits the limb, whether small or large; then press upon the bones just as you did at the first hour, then bind it above with a suitable thread, as in the first hour over the fracture. the narrower it is above, the less so below.
and make sure that the thread is medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
for if the thread is too thick, just as I have seen in the works of fools who use ropes made of twisted flax for their bindings, this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have more than two fingers' breadth between each bone.
And if the patient is injured by the head of the rib after compression in their body, place compresses made from linen or woolen bandages underneath so that they do not bruise.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the heart is broken, I will discuss its treatment hereafter.
And you should not extract ribs too close to the broken limb on the first day. For when the limb is large, one must not apply escharotics until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on your assessment of the severity of the abscess that has developed.
And see here the manner in which ancient plasters were applied to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
You take flour that is closest to the millstone's wall and mix it with plenty of egg; then apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way to treat fractures in various locations, especially for women and small children as it is neither too hot nor cold.
Another way to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains with plasters is as follows: pren С with saffron and frankincense and nettle and asafetida and Arabic gum and myrtle; 10 С. myrrh and aloe, 5 C. alechel, 9 C. and make a powder from it, mix with half an egg white; if the man's complexion is hot, apply this poultice, for it has good ingredients and heals broken bones quickly, helping many men.
Another kind of poultice that helps with dislocation: myrtle and mallow, 10 C. myrrh and aloe, take nine each; almond, take six each; Armenian bole, take ten each, grind well, mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another plaster for joints and displaced bones to ease the pain that arises from dislocation or fracture, worn bone surface, and comminuted fractures. Take new wool, soak it in warm water and oil, then apply it to the affected area.
These plasters do not restore health but they are good for treating hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Another plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth-green leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another type of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remaining abscesses. Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one part;
and grind it, mix with wine, if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Another type of stronger plaster for cases of hard abscess during limb restoration. Take roots of mallow, flax seeds, pomegranate flowers, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violet and chamomile, each one part of the above. and grind it, mix with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its restlessness.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not place anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil; he says it must be between two substances, neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen suggests that one should apply dry substances a little warm to the broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, and incense, and similar things, just as we have mentioned.
Another plaster remedy for injury and pain: Take mugwort and chopped men's hair, or bird feathers, viscum, and equal amounts of flaxseed; grind them together into a plaster, and bind it on.
Then you remove the binding after some time, taking care that the patient feels no pain and the bone has not moved from its place. Do not remove it by hand before two days have passed. If pain occurs at the site or there is itching, restlessness, or swelling, be quick to remove it and take off the plaster immediately.
Take a light cloth and moist sea sponge, dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and pain is soothed. Leave the limb to rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it onto a night bandage until you are certain that the abscess is warm.
Reduce the inflammation of the limb and remove any pain, then begin to bind it with a gentle bandage again, applying a small amount of plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before. And gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has cooled, turned red, caused pain, and swollen after everything has been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, then start again, just as you did previously in the same manner.
If nothing from what we have said above happens to the limb, do not release it for at least three or four, five, seven days. And never leave it for more than twenty days as we see fit, until the fracture heals and approaches realignment.
Then restrain him more than before, and thicken his flesh, as I have said previously;
And if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach it; Bathe it therefore in warm water, each time you release the joint, and let this be done every three days, easing the tension slightly;
Through this process, the nourishment is cut off to the limb, and amends the mishandling caused by those foolish doctors who set the limb crookedly;
It is evil, and so are the fearful procedures, and I see no other option but to leave it alone and treat it correctly.
Many types of fractures exist, with diverse forms, and their causes are specific.
For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the point pierces through all the bone up to the soft tissue beneath it, much like an axe or a stick does. And so this type of fracture is called 'haickishure'.
Where the sword strikes through the bone without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'.
And these two types of fractures cause wounds that are either large or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion wound, or fissure caused by stone or wooden pole, or from falling on stones, or other similar causes.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches the membrane beneath the bone or upon it, and this wound may be either large or small.
If the wound is shallow, barely breaking the skin like a hair's breadth, and the crack in the bone is small, this fracture is called 'capillary'.
and if the wound is caused by a strike of stone or by falling, or by similar things, and drives in a bone fragment below, and the skull is cracked like when coppersmiths beat upon cauldrons; if the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, like the heads of children;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small bone fragments become detached like stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we know all manners of fractures through their displacement, examination at touch, and the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The fracture's likeness is known by this: when the bone is exposed, and one rubs upon it, the dark fracture opens up.
In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's accidents, and if you see any ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, numbness, fever, eyes issuing forth blood and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no fearful accident, and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
And if it is in the summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, unless the membrane beneath the bone has become corrupted, and the accidents we mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must open up the affected part like this:
and it is that you take the head of the sick person carefully, and uncover above the bone in every way possible, and on the face of the wound as gently as you can, and if blood flows out when uncovering the bone, or abscesses arise, use whatever aid is necessary, and fill the place with soft rags moistened in rose oil; let the wound rest until abscesses subside and be certain that no more blood flows out; then start removing around the bone, and this is done in two ways of practice:
one way is to cut narrowly from the front, and this is its form:
And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
And the second method is to have various sizes of cutting tools, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, made entirely of iron.
and work gently, so you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it around, rather than using cutting tools with drills that do not go through the skull entirely, and there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent it from penetrating beyond the skull.
and you will need several of them so that each one fits in its place according to the type of bone, and thus have drills for the entire skull.
and this is the form of three types of trepanning:
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place one trepanning tool over the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced.
Then replace the trepanning tool elsewhere shortly after and continue like this around it. Then use incising tools to remove the section of bone between the perforations and do so gently and delicately, just as we have said, until you can extract the bone by hand or with any instruments such as tongs, pincers.
And take care not to touch the brain or the meninges.
And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you retain the cutting tool which remains of the bone with all other similar instruments like an incision knife, but they must be sharper and more subtle than another incisor.
And if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the appropriate instruments. Then treat the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, which is more safe. And strike it very hard; this is his word. You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place beneath it the head of this lenticular cutter, which has this shape:
And do not cut from one side, as it is a narrow space in two directions, so that the cutting edge faces the bone.
Then strike lightly with a small mallet above it, so you gently chip the bone all around and be careful not to hit the membrane beneath.
If it is firmly attached to the bone, remove it lightly because you can safely remove it without causing harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut from above, with small pieces remaining, it is necessary to smooth this roughness, and remove the scales using a fine rasp, of which you must have various sizes, to suit each place most suitably, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Use large rasps first, then smaller ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
For each of the other delicate incisions or fractures, you must adjust your approach accordingly.
It is something that cannot be fully explained to someone who has not studied this art thoroughly.
And if the sore is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dampen it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another piece of cloth doubled over once or twice, dampen it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. do this as gently as you can to avoid aggravating the sore, then place another bandage on top, but do not tighten it too much, only enough to hold the wound together.
leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has cooled, then remove the bandage and apply medicinal herbs such as lily root, oat flour, incense powder, and other similar remedies.
and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer gentle medicine without biting;
watch that the wound remains clean, so as not to leave any infection or let pus form, for when pus forms on the brain membrane, it runs and putrefies, causing great harm to the patient;
for when you apply biting medicine to it, it corrupts from above. Take heed therefore, if any ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is indeed doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackening occurs only due to the medicine you have applied, then it must have such a virtue, so take some honey and mix three parts rose oil with one part linen cloth, and apply this to the sore. Then treat the patient with appropriate methods of treatment until they are healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the upper arm bone are broken, or just one of them, for there are two bones.
The broken part is cartilaginous, it does not break but only bends or twists, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger into the upper arm bone and place this break evenly inside your index finger, then push from the outside so that the bone regains its natural shape. Do this gently, and watch for any pain felt by the patient due to your treatment.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and the two parts cannot come together, you must set it equal to the head of a slightly thicker nail.
And if the fracture is of two parts, reconstruct it as such, and restore the first part promptly on the same day if you can.
If not, after seven or ten days when the hot abscess is cooled down, then place linen cloth tents on top of the nose if the fracture is in one part.
Where you must place another tent from somewhere else if there is a fracture there too. And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
And some restorers say that one must moisten the strips with butter, and change them every day. It doesn't seem right to me but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour. Then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes goose feathers are pushed into the place of tents, and if there is soft cloth around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes upon it. or do whatever you wish.
And if an abscess appears at the nose while you are working on it, put some ointment or moist cotton soaked in rose oil, or a piece of diacodium.
And if the abscess does not heat up, apply a plaster externally made of bran flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light lint on top, and do not tie it tightly.
If the bone fracture is minor and broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut open the wound, and treat any foreign objects within by soldering, such as plasters and appropriate ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the nostril, treat it with tents and insert thin planks of wood until it heals.
When the jaw is fractured from below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside without breaking into two pieces or being pushed inwards like an arch, it can be diagnosed easily.
One must, if the fracture is on the right side, put one's index finger into the patient's mouth; And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger and gently push in the broken part with it, then align it from outside with the other hand, making sure they are even.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two pieces, you must apply extension to both parts until they are aligned.
If there is any movement or fracture of the teeth, bind them with a thread made of gold, silver or silk and then apply wax over the broken jawbone, covering it with a piece of doubled cloth. and place on the cloth a large well-made star, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jawbone, and secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
and if you see that the shape changes, then release it on the third day, and then reset whatever has changed. and apply an ointment on it, made from mill dust with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the scabs.
and put a light woolen plaster on top, and if the ointment hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed. Many times cured within three weeks.
And if a warm abscess arises, treat it as we have said many times before.
And if there is both breakage and wound together, ignore it if no part of the bone has been removed; so carefully remove it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to your need.
Once you have removed all these fragments and there are no more remaining, cleanse the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
The forearm breaks multiple times towards the front, towards the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways:
Or it is broken and torn into two parts with pieces, and this is the lightest to restore;
Or there is breakage along with an open wound.
And the work is thus when there is breakage without an open wound, you must have two assistants so that one holds the shoulder with the broken forearm; and extend the neck towards the part;
then place your hands evenly on the fracture so that its shape is correct and has no irregularity or completion.
And if you need to extend it further, place beneath the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity. extend and raise the forearm, and hold the sphere firmly in your hand so that you may realign the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the arm bone outwards because it is too deep, then the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow beneath the shoulder, and have your assistants push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the upper arm is raised.
Then direct the fracture with your hands, and if you find it disjointed, it is necessary that you strike upon it.
and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then cut it with one of your knives. but make sure to apply gentle pressure with the instrument, to protect the soft tissue.
and it should be like a spoon-shaped instrument, with a rounded edge and not too sharp, its width depending on the size of the bone and the strength required for the procedure.
and it should have two ends, as you see here, one wide and the other narrow, corresponding to the shape of the wound that was made when you extracted the bone.
and when you are certain the abscess is hot, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small or you suspect a deep abscess, fill the wound with soft pads and bandages according to its size.
Et if hot abscesses form, soak a cloth with rose oil, olive oil, and wine, and apply it.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and uncut, is that you place on the bone a poultice made with mill powder and egg white, and put light packing on top, and add a weight underneath if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place two layers of cloth over the packing and poultice. Then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that one end of the bandage hangs. And place the stick over the break, then wrap the bandage around the neck and under the healthy armpit, and underneath the injured armpit. and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the marrow does not move from above the broken bone, then let it heal every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them.
have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their head when they sleep to elevate the shoulder upward. this lightens the fracture of the collarbone due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind their arm to their neck, and do not unbind it if a bad accident happens for up to twenty days.
then apply the plaster again if you see that it is needed, restrain and leave them in this way until they are restored.
And it is restored within twenty-eight days at most, and less for some men.
Of the shoulder's fracture
Before it happens that the shoulder breaks or moves out of place, one should not force it back by touch alone;
Align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it following its natural form, using all possible techniques at your disposal.
Then place over it powdered meal with plenty of egg white, and light swabs, and cover with a double cloth. Then place on top a broad and fine bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the bandage comes loose from the shoulder, fill this gap with linen swabs so that the bandage remains even.
and then hold it tight with a large bandage securely, so that the bone does not move from its place, and check the binding every day.
and every time it loosens, tighten it again, and align the bone if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side.
and the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when these numbers are completed, untie it, and be sure, for this is not an easily repositioned bone.
And if a part of the bone juts out, and pierces under the heart, then operate above it, remove it, and do as we have said for healing an abscess after breaking a rib.
of the breastbone fracture.
The leg is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens. but it often breaks above the knee.
And when it is fractured in the middle, it leans downward and causes the patient great pain, shortness of breath, coughing, and occasionally vomiting blood; the ends of the broken bone are exposed and clearly visible through the skin.
Et the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back, and you place a cushion between their shoulders, then press down on the shoulders, and bring together the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and gently mold it evenly in all ways that you can, so that the bone's shape is as it should be;
then apply a plaster and cover it with fine cotton wool soaked in salt or another light substance, wrap it all in a cloth, and bind it firmly over the broken bone so that it does not move; and wrap the bandage around the back in a circle, securing it tightly but gently, and loosen it every hour to check for swelling, if there is any, then tighten again;
and if it needs to be unbound, due to corrosion or itching that arises in the area, or pain or abscess, hasten and release it, remove the plaster, and address whatever has developed with appropriate treatments.
then reapply the plaster, and secure it until it is healed.
Of rib fractures
Know that the rib-breaker does not come from any thickness in the back or head area, and only bends due to their thinness. and one feels it well when pressing on both sides of the spine.
And for the restoration, you must set the fracture evenly as it should be. Then apply a plaster, and restrain with a bandage if needed.
If the rib fracture is angled inward, the patient feels severe pain and a pricking sensation like needle-points, as the bone pierces the tissue. And it expels phlegm with difficulty, coughing up large clots of blood, which is a serious illness; the old ones have used great devices for this.
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly in order to expel the rupture outwardly.
We do not cause this, but rather the hot abscess comes if it has been there already. And if it is present, then heal it.
And some said to put cups over the place to suck vigorously, and this seems reasonable; However, there is doubt that the cup will not draw out the excess to the place due to weakness of constitution.
And some of you said to cover the place with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the skin around it; then treat it with a phlegmon treatment, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the flesh, there is doubt about the patient's condition. So it is necessary to cut open over the place of the broken rib and one must put under a tool to guard against suppuration.
And then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses appear, put moist dressings soaked in rose oil on the spot.
And treat the area appropriate for an abscess, and have them lie down on their side as needed until it is healed.
And also in the backbone.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if their hands are softened, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in many situations, and if they change and feel well when pressed and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be cured with proper treatment.
And if something similar happens to the backbone, and you want to know if it is healed or not, look out for softened feet, and if there are accidents that happen in their hands, and on the back watch for windiness and involuntary discharge.
And when he is revived on his stomach, there is involuntary expulsion of bodily fluids. And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is deadly. If you do not attend to his care diligently.
And if these accidents do not occur, then the matter is more trivial.
And the treatment is such that you should reward him if there is hot abscess, apply ointment with rose oil or yolk of egg oil until it is soothed.
Then apply one of the soothing and drying medicated plasters, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not let him sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain until it is healed.
And if any bone becomes separated, you must cut above the heart. remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with healing ointment until it is healed.
and if the hip bone is broken, which is called the "thigh bone", put your left thumb on it, and align it with the other hand to exert force, then apply the poultice and bandage over it, if needed.
then hold it still, and if there is any separated bone, take care of it, and remove the bone, then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the broken hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, Et extend it from its length, and bend downwards towards the wound, and pain comes to the patient at the site, and a prickling sensation, and swell what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, until you reach beyond the fracture. And discern what type of fracture this is and its form.
And if the fracture is solely of the head, so make that fracture even, until it is of natural form.
And if the break is long or it angles inwards, make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see to restore this break. And when you have made it even, so apply upon it a plaster cast, then place upon that a wooden or heartwood splint, and bind the fracture, such that it does not move.
And apply pressure under the ribs until the ligament is aligned evenly. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
And if hot abscesses form there, do not touch them until the hot abscesses have cooled, and put on what we have said before; Then return to the restoration process, and restrain it as needed if there are no other complications;
Of shoulder dislocation.
The shoulder aids are what connect the arm to the shoulder blade, and if they are broken one should restore them according to either of the two methods.
One is that you take one piece of wood of medium thickness, in the following shape:
Et bind the two shoulders with two bindings, raise them upwards, and lay the patient on a seat.
Then cast the broken arm onto the trunk [tree stump], until it reaches the armpit, and place in its middle a curved piece of wood, then raise upon some heavy object that the assistants stretch downwards.
Then place the splint to break evenly with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
The other method is to have the patient lie on their back and bind his hand to his neck; command two ministers to hold the broken ends together with one holding above the break while the other supports from below with straps. Then each must pull in opposite directions until both halves of the fracture are realigned correctly.
And if you see that the extraction is more intense, then tightly bind the ligament below the fracture and above it, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective sides.
And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, you must place one binding below the armpit and another towards the side [axilla], below the break.
And also if the break is towards the side [axilla], you must place one binding lightly without force so that the fracture aligns both on its spot and on the side.
Then align the fracture evenly, as it ought to be, and hold it steady, unless warm abscesses form there.
And if warm abscesses do form there, do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth soaked in rose oil until the warm abscesses subside;
Then hold it firmly again, and the way to do so is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture, then position the arm on the shoulder or chest, and place your hand on the patient's shoulder or breast;
And apply the bandage, holding it over the shoulder and arm, so that the arm remains in its proper position, unless something prevents this or if the bone is displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the break, with two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to extend three fingers' breadth beyond the fracture on either side.
Then draw up on the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, with greater force and less separation.
And if you see the position of the splints and the tightness as we have said when restoring the broken limb, and doubt about an abscess getting hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have instructed.
Then check every three days the binding to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, nor any numbness in the limb due to it being too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not release him from his bonds until three days or more have passed, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
place a pillow stuffed with wool underneath the injured area, and check every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move or loosen its bindings.
if it heals by the power of medicine, give them the food we mentioned earlier, making sure that the meat is of the highest quality. and when they start to regain strength, let their meals be hearty.
It is customary for the splint and leg to be rewrapped every forty days of treatment. And then you must loosen it and administer baths and ointment medicines to realign its place.
And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it may take one day or two months to heal.
Of the fracture of the arm:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one of which is small and follows the wrist.
and the other is large, located below towards the little finger.
Should only one of these bones break or both together by chance.
When the smaller bone is broken, its restoration and healing process is relatively easier.
And when the larger bone is broken, its healing is poor, more grievous than if both were broken together.
If it is the small knuckle bone that is broken, you should gently stretch it slightly and make sure it is aligned.
And if it is a large wound, you must compress it more firmly;
lay him on a pillow, and hold the wrist of his hand higher than the others, and keep the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their legs over themselves, and place the pillow in front of them, higher than the patient's body, so that he does not suffer any strain;
then have your assistants stretch out their arms under the part of his body below his hand or wrist, and have other assistants on the other side above him.
Then place the mirror flat, according to its best shape.
And if it is broken into pieces, you should put each piece back in its place and hold the heart-shaped one firmly; if you cannot restore it to its place, cut it out as we have said before.
And if with the breaking of skin I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take care [of it].
And if at the beginning of recovery warm abscesses appear, use a compress made of cerate composed of rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too hard nor too soft; and cover the compress gently above until the warm abscesses are soothed.
Then remove the cerate, and apply a plaster made of the mill powder with plenty of egg white, then place the splints, with the splint for the fracture being adjacent and slightly wider than the others;
and note that there must be six splints on an arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is located in one of the bones or in two;
And hold it tighter above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in removing it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. Let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
Let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough. And the thread of which it is held should be linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And rest the limb and its connection for some days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching which occurs in the limb, you must rinse the limb with warm water until this itching is soothed.
And let the member rest without constriction.
Then begin the compression again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are separated or similarly misaligned, then realign them.
And if you note that blood cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like this for some days until circulation returns, then apply compression again.
And if none of these things we have said come to pass with the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
He should be wrapped in a bandage around the neck, and then you can tie his hands behind it. His collars must remain even, and he is to be guarded against any movements or twists while sleeping on his back.
Et know that this fracture heals in XXX days or XXXV, and perhaps even in XX days, depending on the combinations and constitutions of virtues.
On la breche de la main, tu la frotteras tant qu'elle soit chaude et moult roide; car souvent est elle si roide que tu ne puisses la froter a nul chastez; adonques la laisseras desiester par le temp, et tu l'oigneras comme nous avons dit. Et tu la frotteras XX jors ou XXX jors ou XL jors selonc qu'elle soit plus roide ou moins roide, jusqu'a ce que le os se joignent a son chastez; et si elle est de telle nature que les osses ne puissent estre a leur chastez par frottement ni par oignement, adonques covient il que tu les remettes en leur place.
Know that on the back of the hand and the knuckles there are few fractures, but more often sprains occur.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should have their arms crossed and sit upright in front of them evenly.
Then place their hand on the extended cloth, and let the assistants extend the broken bones, aligning them with the mirror until they are properly joined.
And apply the plaster and bandages, unless an abscess forms, then insert a small stick according to the size of the place. And wrap it in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the front of the foot near the sole, make a pad of linen cloths and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken foot. Bind it with a long strip of cloth and provide a soft heart-shaped cushion as big as the sole of their hand; hold it tight as is required.
And if the fracture is on the outside, you must place a splint above it and another below, in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it all around with bandages, tightening them between the fingers.
If the fracture affects one of our fingers or thumbs, make it even as is required. Bind it with the foot and if you wish to place a small straight splint to raise the fracture and prevent movement, do so.
If the fracture affects any other fingers such as the index finger or one of the others, make it even and bind it with the healthy finger next to it. or you bind them all together with a bandage, holding it in place so that it may move better, or you put on a splint as for a fracture.
and take care during the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to you with it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often broken, and you can see this clearly when the leg turns forward or backward.
and its restoration is such that you bind the ligament above the fracture, and another below it. And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches their bandage to its limit equally;
and that is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the wrist, and the other bandages below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the binding be beside the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
Then place the mirrors so that the bone is aligned with both hands, ensuring it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if no abscesses arise.
And if there is a hot abscess present, let it cool down before returning to your work and treatment. The binding is done in the following way.
You must wrap the fracture with one thick or two to three thin bandages, leaving some extra length, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, bringing the end of the thread over it.
Then return to the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly tighten it, then start binding firmly in figure-of-eight turns three or four times over the splint. And as you go upwards beyond the fracture, tighten it less.
Then take the two ends of the thread you passed between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints that are above it, then return to the bottom on the underside along the length of the foot.
And tighten it so that it cannot move from its place, then leave it like this, and ensure no abscess or swelling develops there nor any other similar thing. And if it happens, then release it, and address what is coming, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone caught in it, then one must remove them if possible; and if that cannot be done, then one must split the site open, and pull with force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm;
however, in this kind of restoration, the patient is not harmed.
And understand that the thigh is restored in L days, or perhaps a little less or more, according to the variations of constitutions [i.e., different patients].
Know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and this occurs with all wounds, whether felt as pain or not, and one feels well.
And the restoration is such that one straightens what is bent to its proper place, as much as it can be assembled and moved.
Then apply the plaster, and insert a round stent if necessary, holding it in place as required, then follow all the arrangements we mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions. Apply to each condition what is appropriate for its healing.
On the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "muscle", and the other is called "tibia".
All other fractures of the leg happen just as they do in the arm, and for this, the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work involved is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg becomes twisted on all sides.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible. and comes underneath.
Then provide an extension, make it level, and bind the rods equally.
However, if the break is severe and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be shorter and lighter. lighten it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that are as long as the leg from knee to ankle and bind them to either side.
Then wrap in two places with one bandage above and below, binding it tightly in the middle as well, so that at this time the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is sound.
And some administer two splints along the length of the leg, whether of wood or another material, and they put the leg in it to prevent movement, making this properly at the site of fracture or wound.
And move the leg each day to check for abscess or other mishap. Cure it until it is healed.
Of broken bones in the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but in the bones of the foot a break can occur and at the toes sometimes only cracking takes place in various situations.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, then have the patient place their foot on the ground as though they were about to walk, and now put your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
Then apply the plaster and some padding on top, place beneath the patient's foot a small board with two feet in length, then gently restrain their foot, once you have wrapped it in bandages, along with any other necessary materials.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there be any broken bones therein, restore them in the same way we have said for fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length and slightly wider, then put under the foot that small board I mentioned earlier, and restrain it gently.
And if there be two or three, or more, broken toes, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and restrain the board beneath the foot. And so keep them resting on top of the head of the table, removing their belly from the foot, so that they hold it well.
And make sure you do not forget the other things I have said to the other bone setters, since we spoke of them earlier; and treat each accident as it is required.
Of the broken bone of the wrist
When the woman's bone is broken by nature, make her sit spread out and then lean her towards her back part, to be held from behind;
Then fill the woman's broken area with cotton to the level of her natural shape;
Then help the woman stand up with her back lifted gently and slowly until the cotton comes out at the entrance of her body, allowing the bones to realign themselves;
When she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she is done, put it back in. Do this for seven days or so. If the fracture will be restored, and if you wish to see this, take a sheep's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the wound. Then blow strongly through the tube so that the bladder is fully inflated inside. The wound will be restored as the fracture returns to its natural place.
It should then be filled with cotton and left like this for several days until it is healed.
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone.
And these dislocations are not hidden from him who applies his study and practice to them, and reads my book.
For the fracture indicates in many ways the correct path for restoration: Understand it then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis inside it; Then wrap it in fine linen, and leave for three days, and it will be healed quickly.
For break with wound:
He who has a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, must be treated now as we have described for treatment of wounds.
And if the wound heals, treat it with vitriol poultice, if you have nothing else, then repeat the treatment to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless hot abscesses arise.
If hot abscesses appear, leave the treatment until the ninth day, until the abscess has calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
If the broken bone is apparent on an exposed heart, you must set it gently with your hands in a small extension.
And if the extension does not seem sufficient to align with your hands, use this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the surgeon to use three or four of these, according to what he needs in each treatment for fractures.
and let them be round and slightly thicker so that they do not bend when compressed against the limb during your treatment, and pointed at one end, thickening towards the middle like this;
And it is called a "splint", which means the curved piece must be placed over the head of the visible bone; and strike it once until it returns to its place, and let them be even with each other. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has enough power to do so.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use a suitable instrument for this purpose, either a chisel or a knife according to your ability.
Then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small bark.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth with black astringent wine, and properly so if it was on bone. And do not put any ointment or other greasy substance on the wound for it may cause inflammation and decay.
Then apply stitches once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not bound tightly with the fracture.
And many times these foolish surgeons have done this, causing death or corrosion to the patient at times. And the ligatures are softer and gentler than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear bad complications may arise, as we have said, and find pain at the site, it should not be treated with stars. But wrap around, instead of using stars, use hard rags, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is inflamed, remove what you have applied to it entirely, and put on a healing ointment such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bowstring runs downward slightly.
And if after many days it does not heal but becomes inflamed again, know that there are small pieces of bone present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle and remove all these loose pieces that cause such pain.
And if a fistula develops at the site or any other form of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter beforehand.
And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not extract it, for many die due to this procedure, but leave it until it rots.
Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall off by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to do so.
And if you cannot, then leave it be.
We often come across the healing of fractures, especially when they are close to the joints, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the affected limb. And at times, the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Take heed if it is fresh for us: If the physician administers styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, or substances like sarcocolla, aloeswood, and others of a similar nature, so that you take any of these things, or all together, then prepare them with a styptic wine, or with egg white, or with isinglass. and place them on the night over cotton wool, and hold it tight, and do not untie for two days.
and place them on the night over cotton wool, and hold it tight, and do not untie for two days. then untie it, and start again with another one until the knots are removed;
or you may hold it tight on a well-made wooden block; for the property of wood is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the knot has already turned hard like stone and must be removed, then cut it out, and split open the excess; or you may take it to a barber so that he removes it, and treat the wound until it is clean.
Of the member which is weak after treatment
When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: because one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive drainage; or from too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in their body, thus they are weak.
And the treatment is to have the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that blood multiplies within them; and administer well, and give joy and permission;
then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great discharge, and moisten it often with warm water until the discharge reaches the limb; and restore it to its natural form.
A joint twisted after the injury. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone appears broken, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these practices are to be blamed, as they lead to great harm, and even death;
However, if the nodules and pain are fresh, they must be soaked in warm water, or softening herbs should be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, honeysuckle, and similar things.
And make a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, mixing it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply this ointment.
Alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with coltsfoot meal, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by continually and thoroughly rubbing with wet hands. Make gentle movements to the limb every hour.
If the tendon is old and hardened like stone, and must be removed with an iron tool, then it should be cut right up to the bone using a delicate and light incision instrument. and apply a compress; focus diligently on treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to anyone, you must now reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the joint swells, and it may be reset painfully in place.
since one should not move it while swollen; often causing spasms and other pains.
however, when it happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them be until the abscess is quietened.
immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it; treat each member as it returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to foot.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: where they are slightly out of place, and somewhat softened; where they are completely dislocated, and hanging towards the worse, and saliva falls from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can close his mouth, and it affects his speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
And if it is complete and fully dislocated, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and presses their thumb from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides; and let the other two fingers of their hands be outside to keep it level;
And instruct the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides. The mirror is placed evenly until it returns to its place.
And if it is severely dislocated, especially if both jaws are involved, bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently reset.
Do not delay the resetting process as we have mentioned before.
Once the jaws are realigned evenly and the patient's mouth feels well-lubricated, apply damp cloth dressings infused with a mixture of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind them with soft bandages.
Let the patient sleep on their back with their jaws resting between two cushions to prevent any movement to the right or left, and refrain from exerting themselves by chewing. Instead, consume light meals until the pain subsides and the jaws are fully healed.
And then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well-nurtured and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset at once and fail to return to their original position, then fevers and sweating may follow, possibly accompanied by a loosening of the bowels or even vomiting up clear fluid.
And when you see that, know that it is fatal. and many times the one it befalls dies within nine days.
The fork cannot be reset from the sides within its limits; sometimes it is dislocated externally and this can be easily felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and stretches out their arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then apply the plaster and bind it up, and hold it firmly.
and the head which faces towards the cut cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at all, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then apply the poultice and bandage it tightly, holding it firmly in place, and instruct the patient to rest until healed;
and thus also reset the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways:
one is when it dislocates to the lower part behind; and the second one is at the part of the shoulder; and sometimes dislocates in the upper part, which happens often;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh, as it falls easily without support;
in those who have enough flesh, it falls slightly, and returns slightly.
And perhaps it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and one thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
You must therefore test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it falls toward the axilla, creating a noticeable distinction between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will observe an evident disparity between them. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the axilla up to the acromion process of the scapula, resembling an egg. And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move any of its joints.
And if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the acromion process.
And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new or if the patient is an infant.
And the method is that the assistants lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the armpit, and raise the joint forcefully to its correct position; and the assistants lift the hand, extend it upwards, then place it underneath; there will be dislocation.
And if it does not work as we have said with hands outside afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the assistants apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be administered;
then the patient should be reminded on their back, and a pad of equal woollen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the armpit. The heel of the patient's other foot is placed onto this pad, then they lift up the affected shoulder with care. They draw their hand;
and another assistant holds the patient's head so it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see that it dislocates again according to this method:
and have a stronger man present than the patient; and stand upright facing the patient's side, and push their shoulder beneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; and another assistant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is also reset in another way:
And one should insert a long peg into the ground, so that the shoulder is as round as an apple seed, and it should not be too thick nor too thin. Then one should be placed beneath the patient, but ensure they have soft blankets on top, and the patient should lie along the length of the peg.
Afterward, extend their arm from the other side in this way, and the joint will return to its place gently.
And if it does not want to come back due to all the aforementioned things, then do this treatment: Take a peg of two arms' length and four fingers in width, which has an end rounded for insertion perfectly beneath the shoulder joint, according to this form:
Then place over his head a soft cloth cushion, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then put it under the patient's armpit;
and extend his arm over the long side of the wood, and tie the shoulder to the wood, and the arm to the head of the patient, then place the arm on a stool with a wide base, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang loose on the other side: the joint returns now.
And when it is in place, no matter how it was done, you must put under the arm a wad of equal wool then apply the plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white over all shoulder and around, then tighten the strap under the arm accordingly, return the binding on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to his neck, and leave hands in that position.
And make sure he moves little, so that the limb is comfortable, for it will heal sooner;
and then move more after five or seven days, and change his position; If it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or for any other reason, you must apply cauterization to three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all that and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and they cannot lift their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the armpit, breasts, or behind is caused by a push and stretching of hands, and another place must be treated.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if after the healing process, there is cracking in the limb, and delayed movement, let the patient bathe frequently until this cracking eases, and returns to its original state.
Of shoulder dislocation:
Know that the jaw joint is often dislocated and returns with difficulty;
And if it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for it can be seen and felt clearly; and dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the sick person's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it, even if abscesses appear afterward, because if abscesses were to develop, it would be difficult to reduce.
and perhaps it cannot be reduced completely in all directions, especially when it is at the back. it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even greater pain; moreover, death may occur as a result.
And the restoration is such that when it is possible to reduce it, you should extend your hand with both hands to them; And let his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above, and below, and push the joint towards their armpits together, or at the root of their palms, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press against the root of the palm the bone which has come out of joint.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong traction.
and let two people administer the extension of the arm, and the other two hold it, so that it does not move in the traction.
then turn the arm on both sides, after you have wrapped it with a long and wide piece of doubled cloth.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is in place, apply dry poultice with raw egg white on top, strap it tightly and tie the arm to the neck of the patient for a few days, then remove the binding.
and if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage, and leave it be.
and if you see that the joint is not held firmly, reapply the poultice and bandage, and leave it there for a few days until it is securely in place. then untie the binding.
And if he feels soreness after resetting the joint and it moves again, bathe him and massage gently, pressing until the pain is soothed. Tu places sur la jointure un emplâtre de graisse de mouton, puis le laisse pendant un jour et une nuit, ensuite tu l'enlèves, et il doit aller dans le bain ; Et quand il sue, s'il frotte la jointure doucement, ensuite remet l'emplâtre dessus, et retourne dans le bain ; Et ainsi fais cela deux ou trois fois, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri ;
Et s'il y a une plaie, applique du foin de vache humide chauffé au beurre, ensuite recouvre ;
Cela reviendra à sa position d'origine.
The dislocation of the hand
La jointure de la main disloquée, et son retour en place est léger, plus facile que pour les autres articulations. Nevertheless, it must be repositioned immediately to its place of origin, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the area becomes swollen or an abscess forms there, which causes heat.
And the process of repositioning is as follows: place the patient's hand on a table and have your assistants stretch out their arm, aligning it with the patient's; then match the appearance of the dislocated joint to the palm of their hand and push until it returns into place.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly aligned. Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient lay the back of their hand on the table and have the assistants place their hand above that joint's position.
If it returns to its position now, that is good. If this is not the case, if the extract of healing plasters soothes hot abscesses, and you leave it thus without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains deformed.
and it neither harms nor hurts the patient to keep the hand soft as long as possible, and he is unable to grip anything at all. then know that the nerve or artery has been severed.
if there is any other method to treat it except by the application of a caustic near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will be beneficial.
And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we mentioned, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it properly, and there is any tearing, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times the finger of the hand is dislocated towards each side, at times on the back of the palm or on the belly.
Then stretch out the finger, and push on the dislocation with your thumb until it returns, then support the head of the finger, bending it towards the part where it is disjoined.
Leave it for two days, then straighten it that day;
And bind it at night as we have said, unbind it during the day, make it move, and re-bind it at night.
Do this frequently until it becomes narrow. Do the same if dislocated at the palm of the hand, act in the way you have done before, until it is healed.
And do likewise when dislocated elsewhere.
Of dislocation of the spine from the back
When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death hurries the patient.
The signs are that involuntary excretion occurs without his will, he cannot control it, and often one or more limbs become weakened, whether the two thighs, both arms, or one of them.
And often the spine bends into four parts.
Those who bend backwards are called "hunchbacks.
The treatment is to turn back if the hunchback developed in childhood: There is no cure or healing for it at all.
And for those who develop it from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with big words have little real benefit according to them.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have crafted instruments in various ways.
I say that with regard to the humpback disease which presents in front, no one knows its cause nor cure;
And also the one that develops directly in two sides, and it cannot be cured except for that which specifically presents at the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient must be stretched out on their face in an equal place, and have a restraint underneath them so they do not injure themselves.
Then fix one iron rod firmly into the ground at their head and another at their feet, and tie a cord across the shoulder blades of the patient, and another to their hips, knees, and ankles.
and two assistants will hold the bindings, one at the head and another at the feet, between the two fire irons.
and they should be well secured, the fire iron as we have said, and the patient's palms placed on their spine so that it straightens.
And if it does not straighten with this treatment, take a board three feet long and insert its head under the wall, then have the patient lie on their side, push the board's end under the wall, placing the middle of the board onto the spine. and have the patient place their feet on the other end of the board, pressing hard until it returns to its original position.
And if you see this, have him turn his hand around. And insert two red-hot iron rods into the head of the patient's affected arm, and place two more near their feet, with each rod a palm's length apart vertically.
And ensure there is one hole in each iron rod for the turner's hand to fit through, and make sure these rods are firmly embedded into the ground so they do not move.
And between the two larger iron rods place a turning rod, which causes the ties to turn, and have two smaller turning rods, each one palm length long, to rotate this handle.
Then tie the tie that is among the holes to the handle towards the head, and another tie of the other end to the other handle, nearest to their feet, and have each minister turn their handle with all his strength, while the master inserts a needle as described before.
And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, then pack it with swabs, and add a splint made from a tablet three fingers long to support the place of curvature and the healthy part of the spine. Then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until healed;
and if anything happens at the end of the treatment, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications along with the splint we mentioned earlier. and sometimes we administer a piece of lead, and the appearance presents itself behind the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation. and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one must not have presumptuousness may cause death to come upon you.
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder are prone only to dislocations, not like other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and in front and behind.
and mostly within it is dislocated, for which it comes out both in the front and back.
And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is this: when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the floor. And it is the place near which swells from a hot abscess, because the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes out of order is such that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the sign for one who experiences this beforehand is that he stretches his leg according to its completion. However, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot first, and he retains his urine, and the throat swells, and when he goes, it passes over his heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens behind are such that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in place beneath the ribs.
The treatment of this similar dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, there is no other option. And one should not be presumptuous about it.
And in the case of a fresh dislocation, which has four types, hasten to return the joint, stretch it both inwardly and outwardly, and move it from right to left. Perhaps it will return there, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg forcefully with two hands or with a rope tied above the knee. Another assistant stretches their hand above in such a way that they push their hands under the patient's armpits, then tighten another rope around the thigh. Another holds the head of the rope.
They extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then one must apply treatment in a similar manner.
When dislocation is on the inside, you must lay the patient onto their healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh and the area below the groin, stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin and towards the genitals.
Then have another assistant take his arms, embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it outwards in this way. It will return to its place immediately.
This manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in the way we have said, then you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong soft bandage over both heels and knees, with the injured leg extended twice as much as the other.
Then hang it from a pole above their head so that the pole is two arms-lengths above the ground;
Direct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and another assistant to hang with the patient, firmly embracing the thigh, as the joint now returns swiftly.
And when the dislocation is outward, have the patient lie down as we said for someone with curvature of the spine, and tightly bind their bandage around the injured leg and foot.
Then place two red-hot irons, one on the head and another at the feet, then insert a red-hot iron between the thighs of the patient inside the hollow. And have wet cloths planted around (them), so they do not burn the patient, then stretch each attendant towards him, and let the mirror be placed equal to his hand at the site of the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good.
If not, place him on the table, and press as we have said for curvature of the spine, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the afflicted leg patiently, and according to what I have said; And let the mirror be placed on the affected limb to be above it, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the outside, it should not be stretched downwards nor lifted up off the ground, but rather it must remain as if the hip were dislocated to the outside, just like we have said about laying on both hips. And it is placed on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint with the board. And it will be effective when the patient stretches out their legs, and they are even. Then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and use a bandage to strain it so that the hip does not move. And let him rest for three or four days, then release the bandage, and put the plaster on top of it.
And if you see that they are even, strain it as before, and leave it for three days.
Then release the bandage, and make him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
Of knee dislocation
The knee is dislocated according to three methods: That is to say, from within and without, and behind.
It does not dislocate forwards.
And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not touch their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
And the method of restoration for all three is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch out their leg if they can, then place your back against their face, and put their foot on top of your feet.
Then take their knee in your palms, and grasp it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the joint firmly. and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he slightly bends his leg at the hip.
put the plaster on it, and let the leg bend at the hip, keep them together strongly for three or four days, then you can untie.
and the patient must not exert himself to walk, until the limb is strong.
And if the limb is not broken, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Of heel dislocation:
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
and the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, more so on the part where it is dislocated:
the reset should be gentle, and it must be gently extended by hand when the patient is relaxed only.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold them by the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice to the left, extend it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards.
Do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot each time.
If it remains in place, that is good.
But if not, begin the process again, as it will return.
If it cannot be done this way, have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly drive a peg into the earth between their thighs, tying cloth around it so as not to injure the patient.
Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot to their hands or to them with a rope, which is tied above the ankle of the foot. Then each minister should extend equally, and the pole should be placed between the patient's thighs to hold them as they are extended.
Then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation with your hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return promptly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and lint on top of it, then strap it tightly, and bind the foot to the leg, taking care not to tie the cords too tight over the tendon behind the ankle.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds loosen, pull it out.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and instruct the patient not to move for four days; And if they move before this time is up, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if hot abscesses arise there, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
twice. When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without exertion, which is an easy task.
If the dislocation is in any of the small joints of the foot or back, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or an upright table, and place your foot on what appears to be the joint, then press hard with your foot until it returns.
And when it is equalized and nothing appears to be wrong, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then pull strongly, and leave it for three days before untieing. And make him rest until it is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound occurs with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not dare.
And apply soothing, anti-inflammatory remedies at the beginning for abscesses and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery. And when you see hope of recovery, reset the limb now even if it causes warm inflammation.
and when the limb is replaced, apply soothing things for the inflamed wound with hot cauterization and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do as we have said for simple diseases;
and beware of entering a state of fear, as I have said, for it will cause you harm according to your Creator, and it endangers both your arm and your body.
