O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last in the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it for you with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been lost to all, so its knowledge is depleted and cut off, and nothing remains from it but small descriptions in ancient books that have come down to us. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions have been clouded over and knowledge pushed away.
Now it seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, explanation and abbreviation. and will come with the forms of the cautery irons and other instruments for the work along with their adjustment, explanation and preparation as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And it is necessary for anyone who wishes to undertake this to overcome the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members and their forms and conjunctions and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, brains, and the number of them, also movement and moving veins and resting ones, and where they emerge.
And for this Hippocrates said that word with the name is much, and with the deed is little; especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand should be careful not to fall into error and cause harm to others.
So I have often seen many who attempt this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a mad surgeon who cut into the abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut her carotid arteries. which is why so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated the bladder stone of an old man, and the stone was large; he took away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out, he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound;
and the ignorant physician binds the fracture over the wound with tight bandages, leaving no room for drainage, and thus it ends.
and he instructs them not to untie it.
and as a result, the leg became completely swollen, the foot was affected too, and it led to ruin.
I am called upon to treat him, and I hasten to come and untie the leg. and when I unbind it, he is at peace and feels no pain.
But nonetheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and I could not heal it.
And the corruption did not cease to travel through the member until the limb was completely lost.
And there was another evil physician who would burst an abscess open and then inflame it with the malignancy of his power.
For a cancer, when it is caused by melancholic humour, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can remove all the corrupted tissue.
And for this, my dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two categories: That is to say, works where there is danger in many situations;
and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
This is why you must be cautious so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Take up your tools with prudence, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best method so that by God's grace you may succeed in healing them and be praised.
And leave behind terrifying illnesses of severe unhealthiness;
And remove your weapons from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may travel from this world to the other with glory.
Galen says in some of his admonishments: Do not treat any illness badly, or you will be called a foolish physician.
I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical incisions, and the chapters are organized from head to toe.
And about the shapes of instruments, the preparation for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the procedure.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar things.
And it describes the order of chapters and the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things.
And it is ordered from head to foot, and the shapes of instruments.
Before we recall the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of aid and harm of each humour.
I say that the qualities of treatment, and their harm, is a long discourse and subtle science, and hidden secrets.
And many wise men have spoken of this, and they agree on it.
And their words suffice for me, for I fear lengthening it.
I say that cautery aids universally all constitutions where there is cause, except two constitutions: That is to say hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
In the combination of hot and dry constitution with matter, some debated and said that cautery is a great help; And others said the opposite: That cautery is of no use in illnesses arising from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases caused by heat or dryness;
And he who says the opposite claims that cauterization provides great relief to hot and dry illnesses that afflict men's bodies. When you compare the body of man with its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the former cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it by experience once.
And in any case, let no one interfere unless it is he who has experienced it and knows the chapter on cauterization well through long practice, understanding the diversity of human temperaments, their dispositions, the causes of their illnesses, their symptoms, and the passing of time.
Of other temperaments we have no fear, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the doctors agreed and consented to the cautery.
And know, my child, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of healing and is of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and it does not arise except on the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member unless touched.
Burning medicinal agents spread from one member to another by contact, causing illnesses that heal quickly. And occasionally the patient dies.
The fires for their height and for the goodness of their substance do not make coals, unless there is superfluity.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose carefully.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for the harm which arises can be removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is necessary for pain that requires immediate treatment, lest a greater evil come to the limb.
And never think of it, dear son, as some foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no relapse; and they say it like this;
and they say it like this; but it is not as they believe, for cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion, and dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and is better than medicines due to its quick action, and because of the virtue of its work and control.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the illness and its strength;
and are gathered in him the excesses due to acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and this kind of pain does not return. but it happens rarely.
And many do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are better than medicines, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they fail, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Then it is evident that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient ones said that cauterizations with golden instruments are more beneficial than those with iron, and they attributed this to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not always true as I have tested it, and found that it is indeed so in some people.
And gold cauterizations are more valuable than those of iron, just as they said. However, when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the colour of the gold, and it cools down quickly.
and if you overheat it. They do it with fire. and thus there is enough hindrance.
Here you have been ordered this chapter of the head to feet, so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is beneficial for moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two that are made due to a disease called 'soda', and because of many humours that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and due to numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine altering the brain for three or four nights, according to what their condition and constitution can bear; and then let the patient rest his head.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, placing his hands on top of yours.
After that, place the root of your palm onto the root of his nose between his two eyes. And let your two fingers be the ones that bleed; then heat up the cautery called 'olivare', and this is its form: And place it on the inked spot, then gently pull and squeeze your hand back and forth while twisting. Then lift your hand slightly, and feel the area if you see any bone at all, even a small one; And if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you do see the bone as I've instructed;
After, take a little bit of silk, put soft cotton inside it, and place it on the spot, leaving it there for three days.
Then put moistened cotton mixed with butter on top of it. Leave it there until the scalding sensation has passed. After treating the wound, heal it with 'tetrafarmacon' until it is fully healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself. and for this reason, healing is aided.
And some said that one should let the cautery burn until a part of the bone is charred, then remove what has been burned from the bone and it shall be healed.
And others say that the cauterization should be left on top, and pressed so hard that it dents the bone as wide as a needle that women use in their sewing, for this reason, the humours flow out more easily.
And one should leave the wound open for a longer period of time. Afterwards, one must treat it and seal it closed.
And these two types of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in certain people where there is a way of fear.
and I think I should leave it alone.
because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other body parts.
And even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, and the first method of cauterization seems more effective to me, I use it with great success.
When the entire head is affected by chronic pain that persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called 'cockroach', as well as purgatives, oils, and plasters. And if you perform the cautery as we described before, it is ineffective. Take note if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold; Then cauterize underneath that cautery, slightly different from what we said before. Afterwards, perform a cautery on each corner of the head down to the bone, as we described earlier, and then cauterize the place called "vasselz". And it is red where cups are applied; Lighten your hand so that you do not break down to the bone: The sick person feels even greater pain during this cauterization than with others, and I will speak of it later.
and it is fitting that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those for the middle part of the head, and this is the method:
For the head cautery. When pain suddenly arises in one part of the head and extends to the eye, with the skull being purged by cleansing medications, and other treatments I mentioned for various diseases have been performed but are ineffective: then you must cauterize it in two ways, namely with cold medicine and by using fire.
The cold medicine cauterization is done by taking a piece of aloes wood, removing the bark and cutting it into two pieces for the temples where the pain lies in such a way that you can place the aloes wood under the skin.
and when it is answered, bind it well and hold it like this for twelve hours. then untie it and treat vigorously with garlic juice, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until healing takes place.
After the treatment, let it heal completely.
And if you want to use any of the caustic medications, refer back to my previous treatise on caustic medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
It is called a "close" wound because the head has the shape of a clover or a three-leafed plant with one pocket of curvature and in the middle there is a small appearance.
and place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and slightly turn it over, so that half of the heart's sword is burned.
lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and a large amount of blood flows out.
Afterwards, place cotton in front of the wound, and leave it on for three days. then put moist cotton in butter, and then clean the wound until it is healed.
and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "knife-like", on all sides of the tip, be careful not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
of a migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have previously stated in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white;
and incise there instead, over the painful spot, a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, but be careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone;
and take care of the jaw movement when chewing, making sure it does not become stuck and that no spasm comes to the patient, and beware of the arterial blood loss when cutting into the artery, for this cut has great danger and especially so in those who are inexperienced and untested; and leave the work halfway through;
but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is severed, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
and if you see this, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery. and this cauterization is better and more helpful than that one.
From ear pain due to coldness
When there is ear pain due to coldness, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before in the division of this book, but the pain does not subside, then heat up this cautery tool called a "point". This is how it looks like:
After piercing around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and remove a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the site for incision. and make X incisions around each ear;
after treat the site until it is healed.
Upon the torture of the mouth:
Wounds that should be treated with cauterization are only those that discharge fluid, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
and do not apply cauterization to similar conditions that come from drying out and of nerve spasms.
When you treat this type of wound that discharges fluid from ulcers and purgings of the head and gargling, and it is not successful, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: One at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third where the two lips meet.
Place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cauterization spot above the ear, slightly below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb. Leave the cautery until half of the heart is burned.
And this is the shape of the cauterization mark:
It is similar to the shape of the knife we mentioned earlier, but it is slightly more delicate and requires a slightly thicker blade.
After treatment, leave it to heal as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations. Two above the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the spot called "vessel" as we said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
And treat it as we have said before.
Of lethargy.
For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that calm the brain.
After treating his head entirely, place the patient's occiput on a mustard poultice as described in the treatise on plasters.
And this is how to apply a cautery: If you do it as I have said.
If the incision is done this way, it is good. And if it is not, perform three cauterizations on the head descending to the neck with a two-finger space between each cautery.
Treat it as the others, and if you see that it needs adjustment, and the patient is suffering, perform one cautery in the middle. and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it is healed.
and let the cauterization be that which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
The head must be cleansed of hairs and any other matter, as we have said before;
after clean the head of the patient, then cauterize it in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind it, three times along the spine of the neck;
and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back; And leave it until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, then lift your hand. After the wound is treated, let it heal completely, and use the cautery called 'olive oil', as we mentioned earlier.
from epilepsy
The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have mentioned in the section for adults who are suffering greatly.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, have them do gargles and chew softened meat to nourish the brain frequently.
After the king's face is in the middle, make a cautery there as we said before, and another on the vessel, and one on each corner. And if the patient is strong and suffering, apply cauterization as I said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine from neck to back, and use olive oil cautery as described earlier.
If the patient is a child, perform this delicate cautery as follows:
When due to melancholia the superfluities or corrupt humours and thick phlegm prevail, then cauterize with three cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholia the superfluities decline towards it, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink by which their brain may be cleansed, as was said before in the classification.
After rising, let the patient rest their head. After that, make a well-crafted flaxen pad, like a circle, and place it in the middle of their head.
Let the patient lie down with crossed legs, ensuring they are well-supported on all sides.
Next, present the flaxen pad and apply some old goat butter to it. Heat the pad with gentle fire so that the patient's skin can bear it comfortably. Empty the circle from within their head and let it cool down.
Do this for the patient once a week along with other good treatments until they are healed.
If you see scabs form during the cautery, make multiple punctures across the entire cautery site.
This manner of cauterization moistens the brain equally.
And then place on it cotton moistened with butter and chicken fat.
from eye ache When eye ache first arises from the signs I mentioned earlier in this section, you should begin by giving the patient things that clean out their head and guard against moisture while they sweat it out in the bath multiple times on an empty stomach.
After, instruct him to lower his head, and cauterize him between the temples, performing two cauterizations if the descent of the weakness is towards both eyes together, or one if it is in one.
And cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart during any cauterization, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple.
Be mindful of the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, how to cauterize it and stop the bleeding.
and sometimes you make a cautery or hot iron underneath the two hind bones.
and you see that they are cold and phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning, descending to the eyes. A cautery in the middle of the head, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons underneath the two hind bones. And if more is needed, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the classification, and he does not benefit, then give the patient three nights of cuckoos to drink. After the king's head, apply cauterization to his forehead in the middle of the olive-shaped area. And apply two 'clavilis' cauterizations above the two temples, slightly below the hairline.
Be mindful of the artery to avoid cutting it.
And this is the shape of the 'clavilis' cautery instrument:
When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery instrument called 'olivare'. Of which this is the form:
And if you wish, make two additional cauterizations above the temples as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not let go of it [the cautery] until a third part of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have said.
on the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, and for this, cauterization is done in two ways: That is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they [the eyelashes] have grown evenly, then put the patient into your care. After, sir, on the paper of the eyes, draw a shape that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be beside the hairs.
Then put moist cotton with egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Afterwards, cauterize on the shape you have drawn many times until the heart of the area is burned.
And the sign of success for this operation is that you see the paper shrivel up and the hairs stand on end at the tip of the eye.
Then lift your hand away and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the scald is removed. After the treatment of dressing until it is healed.
And if after these hairs grow, and the paper is softened then restart the cauterization on that same spot as you did initially.
If the hair has fallen out, cauterize it until the paper lifts to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The burning medical cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one 3 ounces, and grind them together well. And make a poultice with it to prevent cooling, then spread it on the form you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and place eyes of paper over it. If the illness is only in one eye, you must operate on that one, and if it affects both eyes as well; And place under the eye damp cotton soaked in egg white.
And let the patient's head be in your hands and put an index finger on the medicine, and press it gently and move it every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, because they will feel a burning sensation as well.
When you have done this for some time, remove the medication with your hand. And when the stinging passes, remove the egg white and observe if you see the paper lifting as well as it would be lifted by a hot iron or an incision. and if it is so, then it is well.
If not, apply more medicine to the place where the treatment was done, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp.
Then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is cooled, afterwards treat the area with ointment called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary, ensure you are careful with your work through great vigilance so that none of the medication reaches the eyes.
If the paper becomes soft afterward and hairs prick in the eye, restart the treatment on that softened area from the paper, just as you did before. Afterward, treat it until it is healed.
and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
and know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and according to this are your limitations;
and let not the true way be denied to him who has studied this art.
on the treatment of fistula with cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in this manner.
instruct the patient to place their head on a healthy tone. hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn.
afterwards, place moist cotton soaked in egg white or parsley juice on the eye.
after that, heat the cautery which is as follows:
and it is fixed at the top of the head like the shape of a vaulted ceiling, together with where the cautery is.
if you see it [the head], it should be pointed from one side to the other, and if you see it, it should also look like a tent.
however, this one who is beheaded will not move for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it [the wound]. and if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels [the pus].
afterwards apply the hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand over the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not wander. and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you cauterize down to the bone, it would be beneficial. If not, start the cautery again one more time, or another if you need it, and leave it for three days.
After that, put moist cotton in butter on top, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. and treat it according to what comes up in this chapter.
There is also a method for cauterizing fistulas, which none of the ancients mentioned. Understand the fistula, and split the site open. After that, put into the incision one subtle probe of what this is made from: et they make it to the quantity of one 3 of plumb; et hold your hand or hammer firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye moist cotton dipped in egg white or honey;
the lead enters the place of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we mentioned, it is good. If not, you must administer an opening in the nail, and lead the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is necessary in its proper place.
cracks in lips Very often cracks occur on lips which are called "hair", especially those of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the section above, and the treatment does not work, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this method:
And he places them in the crevices until they reach the bottom.
afterward treat the place of cauterization until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and swelling and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the section on treatment, but it does not heal: then you must apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after the hole or opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and behind it;
and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in the section on treatment, until it is healed;
and if he is cured thus, it is good. and if not, it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head on your lap. after, heat the cautery which will come after in this way: you place a rod over the tooth.
and put the hot cautery inside until your hand feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
After lifting your hand, begin the cauterization according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with salty water, hold it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the softened gum restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
Of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether from within or without, and medical treatments are ineffective, it requires cauterization in two ways: Cauterization with butter and fire.
Cauterization with butter is performed by taking cow's butter and melting it in a small iron or brass spoon. Afterward, take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in the melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools.
And thus it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
The cautery of fire is such that you take a rod made of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery has cooled down.
Do this often because the pain will be relieved on that very day or the following day.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then let the fire cool.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And make the cautery for whatever part of the head you wish, and according to your ability;
And this is the form of the cane:
Of scrofula When scrofula is caused by cold and damp humours, and it does not respond to digestion-based medicines, then heat the cautery with what follows here in this form, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery;
And place a hot cautery on the abscess once, or as often as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it in place for three days. Place damp cotton soaked in butter on top until the burn is healed.
Afterwards, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails in the body's channels, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, it is necessary that the patient first be drained through solvent medications.
After performing the cautery at the base of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat and burn no more than a little of the heart.
After performing another cautery at the junction of the neck and skull on top of the spine, let the 'clavile' cauteries be as shown before.
Treat the site just as we mentioned earlier until it heals.
When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, perform two cauteries on their ribs. And another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts.
And let the cauterization, which is called 'clavicle', follow the form as described before.
And if you see it, apply cauterization by pricking the entire area that is called 'pin' as described before in the treatment of ear diseases;
and let the pricking be up to XXX or thereabouts.
After treatment of the place according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cauterization following this pattern:
And because these cauterizations are lighter, you do three at a time.
On the shoulder's dislocation:
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, remind the patient of their back and sides. Then lift the heart which is within the thistle with two fingers of your left hand.
And if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cauterization iron which has two handles, as shown here.
And cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the ribs, which would create a figure like that of four cauteries.
And for this reason the cautery is made with a cauterizer that has three blades, thus creating a pattern of six cauteries.
And the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the cauterizer with three blades.
and sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, thus there are eight cauteries.
After this place on the cautery some ground ivy leaves. Then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well supported.
And if it is dislocated again soon after, then quickly perform a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in succession.
For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and excess moisture arise in the stomach to such an extent that they disrupt its natural balance, and catarrh is multiplied within it, and with customary treatments it does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient be recalled onto their back, extending their legs and hands. After this perform three more cauterizations - one below the heel of the foot equal in quantity to two thumbs, on each side of the cautery as long as the pattern of the cauteries forms a triangle, and ensure there is enough space between them so they are not joined together when laying down.
and let the cauterization be so thorough that it purifies the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and making an incision on the stomach instead. Puncture according to the quantity you wish to introduce. then cauterize with all the "point" cautery.
After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it is healed.
When the liver experiences pain from cold, moisture, and excessive gas, indicating it has moved away from its natural state due to excesses; and the patients are cured of what we have said before in sections, and it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded about their belongings; and the sign of the third cautery is applied according to this form and this shape with this amount on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the ribs of a man are located;
and leave a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of one finger; and let the length of the cautery be proportional to that of the body, and do not apply too much pressure with your hand throughout the entire cautery process;
and let only half of the heart be burned, and keep the patient upright on their feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cautery wounds with the knife, provided that you are skilled and wise in this art, and be careful not to burn all of it, for you would make his whole body dry. and that it does not come close to the mouth, because the heart is very delicate there, and you would make him dry for no reason.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to determine whether it is within the flesh of the liver or in its membrane: If it is within the flesh, the patient feels pain but not excessively strong.
And if it is in the skin, they feel unbearable pain.
And thus when these treatments require it, the patient must be reminded of their head;
Then drain blood from the area where the abscess is located, then heat up the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the shape: Cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and go on to such an extent that the pores are all closed.
After the treatment according to the type of dressing until it is healed.
And it is not suitable for anyone other than those who have studied the art of medicine at length to use this cauterization technique, through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Then he may operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that one is better off leaving them alone.
sinew cautery.
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb; Oil the root and place it in the fire. Cauterize with one cautery between the nape of the neck and the collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower on the part below the beard.
et two cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, inclining slightly towards the back. and the first cauterization on the chest, and another one above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two at the sides of the chest outside the cauterization which is between the two shoulders;
and do not squeeze your hand, rather apply pressure gently as in smelling.
And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire-cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess. and if it relieves pain, as we have said for the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now or develop a fistula which cannot be cured.
From the nose.
When you treat the disease from the nose as we have said in the treatment sections, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Of which one method is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the muscle, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
And do not press your hand over the entire cautery site, let the patient lean back on their shoulders.
And another method of cautery is that you heat the cauterization site which has two nerves, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation.
And lift the heart which is at the center of the muscle, where the patient's pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to its height, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterization site be according to the width of the body.
After placing two inflamed needles so that the heart is pierced on the other side, then apply a strong cauterization, and thus there will be four of them.
And if you see it, cauterize with all the cautery using three needles.
After the treatment when it has gotten rid of pus over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
Cauterization is not useful for dropsy, except for the method called 'ascites'.
When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in our discussion and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary for you to apply four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the hip; and let the cauterizations be close to the heart's base.
After leave the open cautery for a long time to expel the pus, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the template we showed before; And that one for the back is an olive-shape, as shown previously.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not enter too deeply, so as not to pierce the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make on two legs, two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the calf muscle. And let the length of the cautery be such that one is below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg.
And leave the cauteries open for some time without cleaning them, let pus form within them.
After that, clean other wounds as we have said before.
When belly ache comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digesting virtues which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cauteries. And if you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before about the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery. et four cauterizations around the neck delicate for all one cauterization clavicle delicate, and two cauterizations above the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large [one], for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and they are ancient, made of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not help, then make cauterizations: Three above the spine of the back, which is entirely outside below the shoulder, and two in a triangle under the chin.
and if you think their stomach is chilled, and the flesh is not cooking, and one sees swelling in the face, then make a large cauterization on the stomach as it was said before, and another on the liver, and yet another on the chin with all the clavicle cauterizations; And leave the open cautery for a long time. After treatment, let the site heal until it is completely healthy.
When you treat an abscess, heat up the cautery that looks like a razor, and then place it fully heated onto the opened abscess; And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the wound, from which the blood flows out;
Do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each part as we have said; After the curative treatments with ointments, continue until they are healed;
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will provide greater aid.
When a patient cannot bear the scalpel or incision, as we will describe in its place, such illness arises that can only be healed through cauterization.
When a fistula develops and emits purulent matter along with foul-smelling moisture, you must first examine it carefully using an appropriate probe, taking care to know the entire length of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur,
And beware of burning the nerves which are sensitive, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and to the intestine, avoid these places, and do not cauterize over flesh, for it is not deep.
After treatment, wait until the place is healed, and if the area is salty, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed.
And if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still open, and the bone at its base is corrupted. And so with one of these that we will say in their place.
When pain from cold comes to the loins, and there is excessive flatulence, and it does not affect a woman's condition, then you must perform a cauterization on one side of the loins and on the other with the clavicle cautery as we previously mentioned;
and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then cauterize above the bladder in the area where the arm hairs begin, on both the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
and make one or two cauterizations on the back, depending on your need;
And let the clavi cautery be performed according to the form previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; and when they come, she experiences great pain: then it is necessary that we apply three cauteries around the navel, as we have mentioned for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries outside the back;
and let the clavi cautery be performed as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket and causes it to displace from its position, with the sign being that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
And you will find the location of the hip joint, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the side of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and bleed in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone remains within the circle;
and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts;
and treat [the patient] until they are healed.
Of the hip's pain. When pain comes to the hip bone, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the previous section but the treatment is not effective, and the illness is chronic: So it is necessary for you to purge the patient of gross humours with foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills. After doing the cautery procedure;
And the manner of performing the cautery is according to two methods: That is to say, altogether burning medicines, and cauterisation by fire.
Caeterisation by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
You should cauterise above the hip with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form, making a good deep mark and large in size, leaving space between each cautery equal to the width of your thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-oil coloured.
Sometimes a cauterization is performed in the middle above the hip joint, for which there are four methods according to this form:
And if you see it, cauterize with the circular cautery we mentioned before for the hip dislocation;
But make sure that the circles cover the entire hip joint, and all parts of the heart are burned.
This is the method employed for sciatica when pain is localized in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, do two cauterizations where the patient feels the pain is located, and four above the ankle on the left side.
The cauterizations should be made with a knife-like instrument, and the thickness of the heart tissue should be burned.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to their toes or close to them, cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four points using a tool called 'points'. And if it is necessary, do more of this to them;
And if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, use a chisel or circular cautery on them, and be very careful with all your cauterizations so as not to leave the tool for too long, lest you burn their nerves and large arteries, and cause even more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who underwent cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that their leg became completely swollen, as well as their feet, and their feet were pierced and corrupted throughout. After the abdominal operation which resulted in death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize both one and the other, according to this method.
And the wise ones say regarding hip cauterization, this is how it's done: make a tool that has one end like an inch-wide knuckle bone or slightly smaller, and perforate it with holes at regular intervals, each hole spaced about as wide as your thumb.
and let there be two interlocking parts [of the instrument], also like nuts, and have one iron screw well-made;
and this is its form:
Heat it until it is red hot and throw away the coals, then place it onto the diseased hip bone, turning it towards the healthy side of the body.
Cauterise once with one cautery, then leave for three days. Then make an ointment of butter and leave the wound open for a long time. After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we rarely use this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and we see few who do.
And nonetheless, it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be tolerated if applied correctly and slowly.
The burning cauterizations of medicine are such that you make an instrument with crossed bars into which descends the edge of the port, and it is made of brass or iron on one side, and at a height of two fingers, with each section as thick as a thumb. And it should be open on top and bottom, and the parts join together in this form:
Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly onto the box. After placing between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over one fire pot, leave it for an hour's time and let the patient bear its heat and burning.
For there is also a biting sensation as of fire found therein;
And once the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of tepid water, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by scalding is removed. And you let it rest there for three days so as to draw out the corruption of humours.
And this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or down to the leg, make him a poultice that holds back according to what you have done for the hip similarly.
and this is the method of the hot poultice, which I have described in the treatise on medical correction. Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening for it, so that the tip of a lancet can enter.
where there is a small opening for it, so that the tip of a lancet can enter. and place over it another well-sealed pot, and put on alkali and heat, and gentle steam above, until there is two fingers of steam above the powders when you have properly gripped with your hand.
leave it this way until steam condenses and drips water into the sealed pot, then take all that steam, pour it over heat and alkali as before.
And then there will be great pain, administered through many medical procedures and cauterizations of other body parts.
For it causes the same effect as fire, and there are other treatments such as those in which one cauterizes the hip well with iron, and mixtures of honey, nuts, and hot soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was healed immediately after this cure was performed, and he took a bath as he instructs below.
And he describes it in this way: take fresh and dry green litharge, grind it very well with a pound of grease, apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is felt, and bind it.
and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn caused by this treatment.
And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and place him in bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he shall be cured.
And know that no one should use such medicines of cauterization without first evacuating the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it provides much relief;
et must be done with the cauterization in such a manner. Take linen and cover it with old oil-based grease, and place it on the depression which is between the big toe and the one next to it, called the fossa.
After take dry goat fat, and heat it to embers, place on the wool, and leave until it is extinguished.
then repeat again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you feel it has reached the hip, and that the pain has ceased.
And this method of cauterization is called "goat cautery".
From the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or due to impact or excessive loss, or because of similar spread matter that is cold, in none of these cases are caustic remedies good except for those caused by an influx of cold material.
The patient must be made to void themselves of foul pills or other such things that are on their back, where the pain is located, three lines signed with ink, and in each line there should be V cauterizations or more depending on their condition and how much they can withstand.
and perform the caustics according to a caustic called "point
and if you see [something], make three or four caustics on the clavicle in this manner:
This illness often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they rise up, and fear. and you find on the last vertebra of the spine, in us, an appearance that arises on other vertebrae.
When you see this, and treat it, cauterize it with the cold cautery according to this form. So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see fit, cauterize around the spine with the sharp cautery using two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be wary of applying cautery to a swollen area with nerve damage.
Of the pain of joints
When joint pain arises from moisture that spreads to every limb of the body, and when foot pain comes about, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, then treat it with caustics in this manner:
Do a series of fire cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form.
And if it is necessary to act upon the front of the foot, make a single cauterization that we call a "dot. And if the pain extends to the knees and other joints, which happens frequently, apply three or four cauterizations on each knee in every part, with each cauterization being olive-shaped.
And if you need to do more, proceed with additional cauterizations, but don't hold your hand close for longer than it takes the heart-shaped tip of the cautery iron to become red hot.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands, make two lines of punctures around the wrist.
And if there remains no pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and also above the hair of the hand.
And if the pains reach up to the neck or shoulders, cauterize each affected area and ensure good care for the patient with proper medication.
For if you provide good care and remove the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When a rupture occurs in the groin area and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is a recent development, one must ensure that on the day of treatment, the patient does not eat. And have him consume things that relax the belly, so that the stool may descend from his abdomen.
Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the testicles are retracted, then pull them with your fingers, and cauterize below the rupture onto the bone of the hip joint, marking it entirely in a semi-circle shape above the body.
Then heat the cautery with this is its shape:
Until it becomes white and emits no smell. Then replace the balls back to their place; And the attendant should hold his hand so that it does not go backwards;
Spread the patient's legs well, and place a cushion beneath them with a bandage on their thighs, and another on their feet to hold their hands;
Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and firmly until you reach the bone. If you do not reach the bone in one go, repeat this process again until you hit the bone; Be careful that the eye does not pop out when you apply the cautery; That you do not burn him/it; and that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work is worth nothing.
And it is appropriate that the cauterization for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their measure;
after three days treat the site of the butter cautery until the burning sensation is gone;
after the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well-fused;
and it is necessary that his nourishment be sufficient for a long time, so that the wound does not protrude when he tries to go into a room.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days.
Let him have good rest, avoid excessive exertion, and guard against too much overindulgence in drinking or eating, as well as shouting at high volume.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
And I shall now speak of the treatment for amputation, in its own chapter.
When tumors spread to other organs and are known to be malignant, and you see that they no longer grow, apply a cauterization treatment according to its size, burning off one third of the heart. After the treatment, follow up as we have instructed.
And some of the ancients have said that one must cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form.
But first mark the spot with an X and draw one line across the width above the rupture, then another perpendicular to it, and hold your hand over the entire cautery instrument.
But the initial cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
of old pain in any limb When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it is necessary that the patient be cauterized with a tool called a "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its thickness, weakness, strength, and location of twists and pains.
If it is blistered by the first cautery, that is good.
If this is not the case, perform another cautery on top of it, for such a practice should change in the member closest to it; therefore, you must carry out cauteries until the patient blisters.
The months are aided sometimes by cauterization for great relief, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Once you have seen the patient cauterized, observe if the illness is at its beginning and has been treated according to what we've said in the division; it does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then apply five cauteries on top of each other. On my head at nine o'clock, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. and two above the horns, and one behind on the nape.
and I leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and also so that scabs form and the vapors of thick humors can escape.
and cauterize it on the wound according to what is necessary.
And if the injury is spread everywhere, and it is clearly discharging pus, then you must cauterize it with these types of cauterization we have mentioned for the head, and one cauterization on top of the nape, two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, six cauterizations on the spine of the back, one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder. II on the ribs, II on the knuckles of the toes, I on each joint of hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
and beware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel, lest you burn them.
and never make a cauterization on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the bone of the abdomen, and yet another one on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations you make, the more help you provide, and it benefits him.
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization as a healthy person would, because his body is already corrupted.
The cautery should be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find appropriate for the tools at hand.
After treatment, apply flour paste with honey to the wound and use other treatments until it is healthy.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters but it does not heal, then perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and proportion.
and let the cautery be slightly beyond the depth of the heart's point; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
One may also apply cauterization to the hand, foot, or back at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus remove the swelling.
however, one should not intervene without knowledge of the limbs and the paths of the nerves that move the body.
When the illness known as "albaras" has persisted and medical treatments prove ineffective, then apply a perfect cautery to it slightly, according to the depth of the heart's species until the whiteness is removed, and its colour is changed.
Then treat it with a remedy made of flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and one part each of pigeon blood and sparrow blood. Mix everything together well, wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
The treatment of cancer with cauterization
When cancer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop its growth, cauterize it with a circular cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous area.
And yet the wise ones say that one should also apply a cautery to the middle of the cancerous growth.
and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen before.
and moreover the most appropriate thing is to cauterize around it with the circular cautery, as we have said before about various cauteries.
When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and they are slow to die either due to the excess of matter it produces or because of the patient's condition when they are decrepit (that is, very old) with little blood left in them, or perhaps due to the season; and you want to see it hasten their death: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, touching only slightly; After leaving it like this. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery with what it is formed from:
And place your hand in the middle of that illness which is called 'adubelati' until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let it be such a cautery that the patient feels it from outside in such a way that the course of decay is lessened.
Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healed.
There is another kind of illness which is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing but a wasting away of the limbs, for it withers the limbs just as fire withers dry branches.
If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the small and large claw-shaped cauteries, according to what is suitable for the location or where the illness is;
After that, cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, leaving nothing of it behind, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized areas an ointment ground up with oil so that the scaldings from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Afterward treat it with ointments producing flesh.
And if you see no new scab form after three days, that is good;
If not, begin the cauterization again on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And this disease is sometimes cured with medication rather than fire cauterization;
but nevertheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already mentioned the treatment for quartan fever in the section on remedies: take it when you need it.
inflamed blisters that come on the feet Often the feet become afflicted with a disease we call "claws," which are faulty growths that wound the foot.
And there are two ways of cauterizing this disease. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Fire cauterization is when you heat an iron cautery as well as a lanceolate-shaped spatula, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can grasp the nail from all sides, and that it has fine edges.
After that, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail so that it reaches the bottom of the nail. Leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight; the nail will come out and be uprooted from its root.
Then treat the place of injury by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by force within the body, and occur frequently in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them. and it is done in this way: Take a rod of brass or iron, or the quill of an inkwell, and place it on top of the nail and its counterpart, which are the warts; And place the rod so that it covers all around, then put a drop of hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply into the root.
and let the patient endure a little the bite of hot water for an hour. then leave it like this, and it will pull out all at its roots.
Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When some tremble from coldness of nerves, or quartan fever, or any other, you must make four cauterizations on the back's spine, one between each vertebra. and one cauterization on the foot, and one olive-oil cauterization on the stomach.
let him shiver, and hasten his recovery from the cold illness.
Sometimes the body breaks out in baths/sores or stinking blisters which come from gross corrupt matter.
for the first, when they appear, it is fitting to make a cauterization on each head of the pimple. A subtle cautery with myrtle wood, for which the tip is taken by fire, or long aristoloche root, or lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize in the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it prevents them from growing forward, but breaks the excess that comes forth, and they are healed.
but it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
There are often great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound or incision of an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb and similar things. And it is very difficult to staunch (stop the flow).
And yet when this happens to someone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound's injury, pressing firmly until blood ceases to flow beneath your finger and not a drop more escapes.
then apply multiple small and large olive-oil cauterizers to the fire until they all turn red;
take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the location of the artery, place the cauterizer on that vessel where you are holding your finger, and keep it there until the blood flow stops.
And if there is a spark when you lift your finger above the wound, and the cauterization has ended, then take another of the hot cauteries immediately.
Do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is completely extinguished.
Be careful not to burn the nerve nearby and avoid any other mischief that may befall the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be properly staunched especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned. By cauterization or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to staunch blood. And be bound tightly as necessary.
What will bring about staunching is binding tightly with linen cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar methods, and nothing else profits therefrom.
And if it happens to someone and they have neither thread nor medicine available, they must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press down firmly until it is staunched over the wound and over the vein. And do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched.
and make incisions beforehand on those parts where it is necessary for cauterization and medication.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases which require fire cauterization or burning medications, and their symptoms, causes, instruments, and methods of cauterization.
and placed this chapter on the head to feet, and I will go in this same manner in this chapter so that what is desired can be found more easily.
And so, as I begin this work, dear child, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterization, and thus it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many types of people come seeking treatment. If they die from such [illnesses] that afflict them so much alongside their illness that they faint easily due to the shock they experience from their condition and the severity of their ailment. And these we ought to fear.
From such there are those who will give you their insight, and say: Wait, I am healed". But the illness is obstinate.
You must not consent to those who approach you with such mannerisms, but place greater emphasis on your honour than on your greed, and do not act hastily but wisely in matters of which you are certain and can claim credit for.
And use prognostics and indicators in treating your patients for their healing.
And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a memorable legacy.
My dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wills to inspire you with his holy breath, so be it.
Now I have ordered this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what is presented in the previous chapter on cauterization, which I explained from head to toe so that you may find more easily what you need.
Know that this illness often comes to children during birth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
I have never seen this illness occur outside of children, and in all cases I've witnessed, the child died. And for this reason, it seems best to leave the treatment of such cases to others.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was filled with fluid, and the head swelled each day to the point that he could not bear it.
The moisture grew so much that he died, and this fluid had gathered beneath the bone on the shoulder blade, between the heart and the bone.
And the work is such if the fluid is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, that you should make a wide incision in the middle of the shoulder.
And it should be as long as two fingers, so that the fluid runs out.
And you will see here the shape of the spatula.
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs of the comminution of the skull with the sutures open on all sides, and there is fluid that spurts forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to treatment. you must cut into the head with three incisions in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture quickly. After treating the incisions with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days.
Then release the head and treat the wound with tented bandages and ointments, leaving it compressed equally, and feed the patient dry meat to absorb moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to look at where the swelling of the abscess appears, and its collection of pus.
because sometimes it comes before. sometimes behind. sometimes on the right. and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore at the place where the abscess appears, and its filling with pus, and make an incision according to your ability.
and be careful not to cut the artery. and if veins of blood flow, so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with cutting of the two arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you cut his eyes, that the patient turn their head back; After rubbing the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient stretch their neck away from the cloth; Then look where the vein beats, and its courses are after the ears, and they are ready to be pierced;
Then mark the courses of blood with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula that is two fingers wide, so that the blade reaches down to the bone, but not into the brain.
And if you see it, push the spatula beneath the artery and the cup above, cutting also as II must across.
And when the vein is cut, blood will continually spurt upwards forcefully.
And if the artery does not appear by feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut down to the bone;
and for this, it is necessary to let out six ounces of blood, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
then examine the wound. if there is no bone sticking out of the wound, ensure that a hot abscess does not develop, then clean the wound and bind it, treating it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When an old migraine comes, with a thick discharge due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old, persistent headache with similar symptoms, and no medical treatment helps, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.
And the method of extracting them is for the patient to pull back the hairs on their temples, and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, as it can be easily seen by its pulsation, although it may not appear prominently in some people who are too cold.
and if it is dislocated, the patient should have their neck held by some cloth, then rub the area with a rough fabric, and pour warm water over the location until the artery appears clearly. then take the spatula of which this is the shape: [insert shape] then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and carefully remove the membranes that are underneath on each side;
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the hook, then cut it from that side according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out completely everywhere.
and draw out blood from six cents, until you reach three.
and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that gangrene does not come before the wound heals, and blood flows out continuously.
then remove the excess flesh between the two lines at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-cautery down to the bone until the head of the shoulder is cut off.
and this is a delicate operation if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion. For cauterization helps to dry up moisture. for it is of greater help for moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages over it.
and when you remove them, ensure to apply dry medicinal herbs that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed.
and if blood escapes from the artery while you work on it, quickly cut and cauterize with a hot iron, or use vitriol and squeeze by hand to stop the bleeding. and if you don't have the aforementioned items available, place your hand directly on it to freeze the blood, pour cold water over until bleeding stops, and apply pressure as necessary.
And there must be a thickness of space between the two knives, and then when you have secured both places, place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts. and be separated between the two shoulders as they are not fully fused from this cautery on all sides.
and here is the shape of the cautery:
what is more efficient and lightweight in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting-edge hot iron divided into two parts, but ensure the divisions are thick enough to maintain heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
tears When the tears from the eyes flow down along the veins that are on top of the skull and it is not beneficial to apply any medical treatment here, you will see the patient's face turn red and feel a pulsation or tremor in their forehead. and if their eyes are swollen and moist so that the hair around them falls out, and the eyelids become hot and scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to apply this treatment. And the ancients called it "healing of contusions," and for the patient suffering from this ailment, make sure they have hair on their forehead, then give them three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
And the ancients called it "healing of contusions," and for the patient suffering from this ailment, make sure they have hair on their forehead, then give them three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. Let one incision be made in the middle of the forehead towards the nose, and the others at both sides above the eyebrows, taking care to avoid cutting into the arteries located at these sides above the eyebrows.
Keep your hand away from the line connecting both jaws, and let each wound be three fingers in length across its width.
Have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloth to wipe away the blood, then take a spatula with two sharp edges, which is shaped like this:
From the incision which is above the temple to the second incision And scrape all the heart which is between the two fissures to all the soft part that is above the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatule. Insert into the first incision the instrument that is called a "cultellaire," which is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and it has this form:
Place the sharp side of the instrument towards the flesh above the scalp and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up until those which appear of the heart, and then do likewise in the middle fissure up until the other exterior one.
And then extract an equal amount of blood, and press the place for the captured blood.
Then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moistened bandages with wine and oil and eggs, and make sure no hot abscesses come.
On the third day, undo the binding, and apply a large poultice of warm water, then treat it with an ointment of basilicon mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
When someone presents with acute cataracts as a habit, and you see their eyes turned and small, and weakened vision, and the corneas burned; and their hair falls out, and there is pain at the top of the head, and the patient sneezes; then you will know that these symptoms and this catarrh come from many sources, and the only true cure is as follows:
And so you instruct the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the wide eye socket. Begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple, going down as deep as the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which cause eating.
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the wound and place old cotton, and line with linen bandages. Then bind moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses.
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying agents that promote healing.
In this manner: Take two parts wheat flour, and four parts colophony, and make a plaster. And administer to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
Of the stuffing of ears
All that falls in the ears is one of four things: Or grain, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing such as iron; Or seed, like oats, beans, peas; Or flowing substance such as water, oil, and similar things.
When stone or other matter that does not fit nor grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to sunlight.
If you see the stone, apply a drop of purple oil or oil of cypress, then administer its removal. And make him sneeze with a condy, and plug the nose when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. And lift the ear upwards.
Often, pus comes out through this treatment.
And if it does not come out with pus, apply subtle pincers for its extraction, which are shaped like this:
If it comes out with the pincers, that is good.
If not, apply an equally subtle small double-edged hook for its extraction.
And if it does not come out with the hook, make a flaxen wick and insert its head into the hole of the ear very firmly, and stuff what is around the wick with soft wax so that no air can enter along with the wick. Then treat the wound thoroughly, for often fire is necessary as we have said.
And if fire does not come in this way, take glue of which birds are caught, and place some on an instrument that is sharp for the purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it. Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and treat with fire.
And if it cannot be treated by any of these methods we have said, then quickly cut the ear rather than an abscess, before heat and spasm occur.
The method of incision is as follows: first, bind the patient's head with a headband, and extract blood according to his condition, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat depending on it. and let the fissure be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone. Then remove it according to your ability and suck rapidly toward your mouth
until the treatment is complete and it has healed.
and if there is grain inside and it swells, administer removal.
and if it cannot be expelled, use the spatula very gently in this shape: And prepare an incision for that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is soft due to the moisture in the ear until you have made several incisions.
Then extract it with fine forceps and by sucking it out, as we have said before so that the extraction is eased.
In the water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing remedies and fill the ear with old cotton. And lie on that same ear where the water is. If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, slender and light, and warm them a little in the fire; And place the patient's ear over a hole, and let them lean out with their feet from the other side, and strike an additional stone upon the stone that is in the ear; And do not stop striking stone with stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out;
And if you see this, take a reed and insert one end into the ear, and apply fire to the other end until the better part of the reed is burnt.
Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about stones.
In extracting the beast, if it has a small body like that of a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on divisions.
but if it has a large body that one can feel, then arrange for the extraction of pin-holes. and this is the lightest thing to remove that there is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms entangled in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on divisions and treating secretions, and the treatment does not work, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight. if no worms appear, take some fine pincers and treat them; if none appear, then use the instrument that has their shape.
And [the ear] is narrow underneath but wide above. And thrust the most subtle tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then thoroughly suck out all the contents. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, stuff the canal with cotton around it as I have said for stones.
and if they do not emerge as we have said, apply the distillations that ancient doctors have proven effective in expelling worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which this is the form as you see it: And whether it is made of silver or brass, narrow below at small openings, and broad above to pour out (the distillation);
to compress within the distillation with an instrument of brass made well for this purpose, and if you wish to use a razor, wrap it around the point, lined with cotton. then pour in your oil or juice, whatever medicine you wish from among those inside the cane, and let the cane be placed within the ear;
then push in the razor along with all of the cotton, and press your hand gradually until the oil is distilled or reaches the end of the ear. and the patient should feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warm from the fire, unless one is distilling into the ear. And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born without an opening in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound or wax inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes pierce through the ear, so it cannot be seen.
and at times the hole appears outside the opening, and you can see it well.
Therefore, the one that pierces through and cannot be seen is quickly healed in many cases, and for this, when it can be seen, you must place the patient's ear in the sun. and look inside: if you see the inflammation evident, operate on this entire area of which it consists:
And be sharp and cutting in front and behind, completely smooth so it does not harm the ear;
if the inflammation is of newborn flesh or within the ear itself, hold it with fine pincers and cut away lightly, until all this flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is complete in the ear, take a subtle light razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
If you feel inflammation causing the patient itching when heard, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the ear nerves;
then insert in the ear an ointment tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this on any day when the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and dampen it with pink water, then powder it with ground vitriol.
And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the cloth and apply another damp cloth made of wax mixed with rose oil until the swelling is gone. Then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the bleeding as described in the section on distillations.
These eyelids that become moist on paper and are dry, it is necessary to separate them with tongs and pincers, and cut off a piece of the root with a small spade. Then place on it ground vitriol.
And if it cannot be peeled away, then perform a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer moves after the incision.
and they often return when something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
Of the hail Often come into the eyes things that appear like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "grandine," an assembly of thick moisture within the cornea above and below. The treatments are as follows:
The treatments are as follows: Take note if the "grandine" moves from one side to another, as this is something that should be known easily.
Making a wide incision, then flay each part lightly, taking it with forceps, and cutting it.
If you cannot cut without piercing the membrane slightly, it causes no harm to the patient;
And if the tear is large, you should sew it together with a stitch, healing it until it is sound;
And if it is small, do not apply force, for the ointments will restore it quickly, promoting flesh growth.
If the clot descends into the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the membrane and stretch out the clot with forceps, cutting it and pressing from both sides;
And if the membrane is separated by incision, it causes no harm.
And when the cataract is removed, irrigate the eye with salt water, and treat the place where pus arises until the patient is healed.
From the fat of eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the membranes of children's eyes more than adults', and it greatly harms their eyes, causing them to have cataracts in the morning, and they cannot bear the sunlight due to tears rushing to their eyes;
And because of this they sleep on their faces, and rest above, with their membranes below their eyebrows moist, which swells and covers the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers, feel the dislocation between them.
And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places their head on your lap.
then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like covering in the shape of a circle according to the size that exceeds each part, then place it on top. and press with your two hands from either side so that the excess is gathered within the circle.
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit which is not wider than the wound made when opening the vein.
and make an incision in the skin precisely until you reach the excess tissue. And in many cases, discharge emerges from the opening, resembling a fragment of white fat.
Then extract it entirely with a piece of cloth held between your two fingers at the exit, and turn your hand right and left until it is dispersed.
Be careful not to reach into the opening with your spatula until you strike the eyeball and injure it.
And if the discharge does not appear at the beginning of the opening, gently widen the fissure slightly until it becomes visible.
Then extract it as we have described, moistening the cloths with oil and water, place them on the spot, and strain them out of bandages.
And for those people who grind willow and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if it reaches the warm abscess place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
The hairs of paper. When hairs grow on the eyelids contrary to nature and are left unchecked, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as habitual tears, softening of the eyelids, and discharge, ultimately leading to eye damage.
and treatment is done in four ways: by fire cauterization together with other medical procedures according to what was discussed in the chapter on cauterization or by medication depending on the case; it is done either through incision and stitching or through canes as I will explain further.
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn their affected eyelid towards your left hand;
If it is turned inward, that is good; If not, insert a needle through it with a thread attached; And be it near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow beside them, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
Then make an incision below the paper beneath the hairs aligned there, cutting all the length with the wide blade from the large hinge to the small one;
Then extract the thread and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper an image of an anchor, like the myrtle leaf, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the paper which is divided everywhere.
Et if has such who need it cut large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened;
then make all the spatula on these two lines that you have marked, and start from the large gash until small; and let one of the fissure be near natural hairs in thickness of a root, then insert unicorn's horn into one of two angle of heart, and then scrape away everything;
then join the two lips with one seam of needle and all the fine thread of wool, wipe away blood, and remove excess hair on both eyebrows with any adhesive substance, if you wish to do this.
And if not, then take no care of it, just leave the stitches and threads for three or four days.
Then treat the wound without stitches using drying and binding agents, for paper adheres to the healing of the wound and its reunion, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear. And there is another way:
And there is another way: And cut the paper into a shape that resembles the myrtle leaf, as we have described, to three ounces apart according to the form shown here:
Then cut this top part with small equal forces according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the middle of the shape. and pull another thread towards the large armpit, and the second thread towards the small [armpit], and gather between your two fingers the threads evenly.
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin onto which you have sewn, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
and sometimes the hairs of the papule turn white:
then you must use what we have said about incision;
But the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of fractures follows this form: And make paper and cut it into this according to what I said, then make two fractures per page, and also two fine threads as long as the width of the paper, which is the size of a spatula. And cut two heads at either end where you hold the threads.
Then carefully attach one to the other on top of the paper's eyelet, and pull the two threads from each part. Leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that was constricted will die, blacken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If he delays, strike it with force, then treat it until it is healed.
And when the wound is closed, if the scab has risen, they will no longer prick the hair;
And this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and with this measure of length and width:
The works are such that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a thread of soft and delicate silk; Then join the heads and tie each one finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width.
Then pass through the shaft another fine silk thread quickly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
Then place the patient's head on your lap;
and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is delicate and precise work, then insert the needle into the base of the hair follicle, pierce through the skin until you draw it out above the natural hair;
then extract the hair up to its base, and insert that hair back into the follicle, whether there is one or two or three or more;
then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out along with the natural hair follicle.
And if the follicle is damaged and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull on the hair below to extract the entire follicle through the opening above so that you can see it with your eye;
Thus, you will draw out the dart and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair withers in its place and flesh grows back over it.
And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with those of natural growth, and let it be raised along with them until they grow longer and then remove it.
Of the corruption of the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or scrofula comes to the eye, there are two ways it may arise.
One is natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs suddenly due to wounds or incisions, from cauterization, and similar procedures.
The way of working on it is that you split the abscess and separate its lips, putting in linen pads, binding them until it is healed.
And you must not use anything that dries or tightens in their treatment. For if you do so, the illness will return worse than before.
but work with softening agents such as fenugreek. and rose water or another [liquid] and flax seeds are boiled, and diaqilun ointments melted in any oil, and a poultice is prepared, and treat it with this.
And the secret of your treatment is that you must be careful not to restore it exactly as it was before.
and these treatments we have mentioned are only temporary solutions to this illness so that it does not return as it was before.
This disease that is inflammation, truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds, tears, cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of work is as follows: take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, piercing from left armpit to right, so that the thread emerges at two points in the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh above completely over the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. And if the shape on the paper returns as it should be, that is good.
If not, take a razor and place it in the gap, turn the paper over, and make two incisions on either side inside the paper.
And let the two sides of the two incisions in the corners that you have cut be joined together, forming an angle so that when they are assembled, it resembles the shape of the Greek letter I.
Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its edges extend below, from what follows under the paper, then join together the two separated parts and sew them up with a woolen thread.
Then treat it with the softening medications we mentioned before, and apply dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound resulted from a tear or suture or cauterization, you should make an incision directly below the hairline of the skin, according to what was mentioned earlier. Then sever between the two lips of a wound, as I have said;
Then sever between the two lips of a wound, as I have said; and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the illness, as it is very diverse in form, and wise surgeons use all their power and skill to restore the body's shape to its natural state;
and the patients themselves, according to what is required for treatment and tools in various arrangements.
When this fusion occurs in the hands of men such that the film over the eye is stuck with the white part, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor underneath the film and lift it upwards.
And stretch them with pincers until you cut off that which is open to the subtle spatule, but make sure it's not too sharp nor too cutting so that the patient does not suffer from a spatula that's too sharp causing harm to the eye.
And make your incision such that you peel off the gathered assembly lightly so that the paper returns to its natural form;
And it is purified all that assembly, sometimes with salt water in the eye, and others with clean water, and collarbone.
Then place between the paper and eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye moist wool mixed with egg white. And after three days, make use of the collarbone and hot compresses until it is healed.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: She is nervous and resembles hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but appears like white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and thought to be hardened by pincers, cannot be done so.
And both appearances begin towards the large corner of the eye, and grow bit by bit until it covers all vision, all light, and the movement of the eye.
And for the manner of incision, the patient should put their head in a sound position, then open their eyes wide; And take the paper with your hand, then curl your nail around the small pincers, and extend it above [the eye]. Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread. Double the point of the needle slightly and insert it between the nail and flesh, then pierce through with the entire needle, tie the nail to a thread and pull it upward, remove all hair from the side of the nail that covers the affected area and strip its root along with the skin up to the cuticle; finally use a sharp knife and small forceps to cut away any remaining tissue at the base of the wound and leave the natural flesh around the armpit so as not to disturb the usual flow of lymphatic fluid.
And sometimes stretch the nail with only onion juice and thread, as we have said. Then scrape off all of the soft skin, which is how it appears:
And ensure that the soft skin does not touch or tear the fleshy membrane, and that the plumule is not pierced.
After the incision, put a pinch of ground silt into the eye, and apply some lead oxide ointment, leaving it on until the next day. Then treat it with whatever is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the probe cannot enter it, this similar appearance of a nail has often been treated by doctors.
and they grow as I have described in the section above, and if you see them cut, then work on the eye of the patient, and take a light spatule with a sharp point according to this form: And lift the eyelid carefully, and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason presses, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper, both crushed, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is contrary to the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same procedure until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of flesh in the eyelid damages the eye severely, then suspend it with an ointment, and cut off a part but not all, so that no liquid comes from tears.
Then distill red eye drops made of litharge into the eye.
Some men's eyes are sometimes born red, covering the pupil and spreading over the corneas, turning outwards, and looking like a rose of balsam.
And the work is that the patient puts their head into your lap, then you open their eyes and roll all that red flesh onto hooks suitable for it, holding it firmly in place.
Then cut off the first flesh with a scalpel, and continue cutting all of it with a razor until you reach the end, taking care not to harm the eye during your work.
And the incision should be like that of a spatoulum, as we have said in the chapter about nail incisions and small forceps which remove it, as its form after this chapter shows.
and when the incision is complete and all flesh is removed, fill it with melted beeswax or drip red copper sulphate on it and similar corrosive medicines, then cover the eye with cotton wool dipped in egg white so that abscess heat may be sure to leave.
if anything remains there, and hot blood overflows you, and abscess heat is doubted, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing medicines for hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do likewise whenever flesh has been adjusted in the eye by this similarity.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye in its natural way; And regarding accidental wounds, in metalworking;
Do not insert your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the limb is suitable for this treatment.
These red veins that are visible under the eye hinder vision and weaken the eye every day.
It is necessary that you first examine the eye to see if it is sound or diseased and whether there are other ailments aside from this. Therefore, proceed in the following manner:
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap and then apply pressure to the veins accordingly based on your understanding; ensure that those applying the pressure are also skilled, with this treatment being done twice as frequently.
And they are two inches apart by degrees inside the body according to this form:
Then bind those veins firmly but carefully, wiping away any blood that emerges after a short time until you see the veins receding from the eye.
And be sure to protect the eye from being wounded by the points of spatulas, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task such that you cut only those veins.
And when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red gallnuts to corrupt that which remains of the cataract.
If you are unable to collect all of these at that hour, make a plaster over the eye with things soothing for the pain, and leave it there for some days until the pain is soothed and the hot abscess assured, then recommence according to this manner which is before until it is healed.
And that is the form of cauterization:
The surgeon calls "arissati" a fistula:
When you treat it with cautery and medicine for a burning abscess as I have previously mentioned, and it is not healed, if there is pus inside that you must cut open over the abscess, there where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is present until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, remove all the instrument that formed it.
It is called an "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron to the form of a head, and be pointed like a file as it appears in its present form.
And place it on top of the location of the rotten bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the rot is gone.
Do this several times, then restore the location with drying medications.
If the location is welded together and nothing grows from it, if there is no damage to the body or the bowels, and they remain as such for forty days without renewal or further abscesses, and no bad accident occurs, know that it has healed.
If not, then there is another procedure to reconnect the fistula with the nail hole according to this method: And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an iron tool and sharp medicines. When it has been uncovered, take a drill of this form which should be three-sided at the top with a tapering handle like so: [insert image here]
Then place it on the bone near the armpit, and withdraw your hand from the eye by one inch. Then turn the drill around until it pierces through the bone. The patient will feel this as air passes into their fist if they hold their hand over their knuckles.
And then restore the place with dry medicine, as I have taught you. And when the flesh grows and hardens around the location, it goes down to the knuckles. This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
When the wound is open all around and there is no interference with the nerve or any narrowing, then you must bind the patient.
Then clean it, then place cups or a ventouse without hurting to suck out the air. Then apply to the eye an ointment made of aconite and aloe and incense and gum tragacanth, then strap on the eye, then plaster over with linen bandages.
and the method of the bandages is such that you take soft enough bandages and fold each into fourths, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount the eyes need.
then strain it from above with a hard bandage, and resume the cups to suck without hurting;
then remove the cups and keep the eye strained day and night, and if the binding loosens, you must strain it strongly.
then remove the binding after day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good.
if not; If it begins to peel, replace the poultice and cloths and the binding, as well as the cups until it is healed.
From rupture of dry skin When disruption occurs in the dark membrane, it then appears and escapes from the sheets like grains of resin, and it is terrible to behold.
Then if you see it severed, the treatment is such that you insert a needle into the root of one part below until you reach the other above, then thread another needle with a doubled length of string from the other side. And pierce it, leaving the first needle in place as per its arrangement.
Then cut the doubled string and bind one part of the membrane around it tightly, then remove the needle and place a moist linen cloth soaked in egg white over the eye.
And leave it until the hair grows back with the eyelid, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
and sometimes the wound is bound with cloth in a circle on each side until it is healed.
If the eye shows great inflammation, pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches right through the eye, and drain the white moisture and lower the eyelid, then enter immediately.
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease, called "alcunnati", is only a tumor that forms in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water.
and the way of appearance for the procedure is that you should have the patient sit on an equipped and straight chair, then take their head between both hands and move it until you see the bow coming above your eyes; then let it be fixed, do not go down and uncover the light, and let the patient see things as they should.
and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bow is not equipped as we have said.
have the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a hole in the corneal tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea, until the bow appears.
And when it is out, drip into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Water from the eyes. We have examined the similarities of waters in the process of division, and what is required to puncture [them]. so operate according to healthiness.
You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye shut very firmly.
Then place the paper of your eye to their left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or to their right hand if the eyes are on the right side.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand, if the eyes are right.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a mark as thin as a hair in that white part of the eye towards the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of "almagda's" path is exactly the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the dark part. and this is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and you can place the instrument up until where water is present, then express it below a voice after another.
If the water drains now, the patient sees before them and an instrument in their eye.
after replace it small and if the water rises again through another passageway place force with the instrument when it is fully inserted and does not rise then remove the balm slowly while turning your hand back and forth.
and then replace some water with a little bit of celandine and leave this in the eye inside. Then apply oil-soaked gauze or wet linen to the eye from outside, and bind it with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg on it.
And if the ointment cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument known as 'alberit', of which this is the form:
and therefore perforate the conjunctiva only, do not go too deep but make it a subtle place, then insert the balm as we have said.
And when finishing the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed where they can lie on their back in a dark place.
Remain still, avoiding all movement, eat light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left. They should be bound according to their condition until three days have passed.
Then untie them in the same dark room and test their vision. Show them some objects, then retie them again until the seventh day.
And you must not do this during the treatment or after an incision just now, but rather take care of it, as fluid may rapidly rise.
If an abscess becomes hot, you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and treat it as you would for an abscess.
And when it is calmed, uncover the eye and place a small piece of gold on its face to cover for one day, and remain in that dark room thereafter.
Then take them out of the house little by little, and if they relapse into their condition...
And know that no disciple should interfere in such cases. And one came to us from Iran, who told us that in his country they make pierced amulets, from which water is extracted, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them.
and let it be made of pure brass; And let the head of the ears be made from this same subtle material, while the back end is in three sharp corners.
Sometimes there arise from eggs different chariots joined together, some of which look like many-footed scorpions;
And if there be such that the chariot is ornamented with variegated hues, while its body is soft of good colour. Therefore in those chariots which are soft but not ornamented, it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun.
Therefore in those chariots which are soft but not ornamented, it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun. and work his nostrils, and apply the ointment to those parts, and treat them forcefully. then grasp what you may sustain with a thin, sharp spatula from one side, until you know that the tissue is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, open it entirely with the thin instruments gently, so that nothing is left behind. and if it overpowers you, cauterize the abscess as required;
and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the blood flow ceases and all tissues are removed, then apply cold vinegar or wine. If it doesn't work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healed.
And if the moisture doesn't pierce as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting.
Then you must insert a piece of linen thread slightly thicker, knotted at both ends by our hands, and with one or two fingers' width space between them. Have the patient take hold of the thread's head in his fist with all his strength and pull it while sniffing until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth.
Children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to try it.
Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and squeeze one after the other carefully, being mindful of the cord they are attached to.
Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the cord, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has eroded all that remains of the flesh;
Then place in the nose a plug of lime for several days until it is healed, and if they need any drying medicines, use them.
and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, for which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
and it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, just like a tube, and it leads there too.
and if you wish to see it, make an enclosed tube for yourself, and let the instrument be full so as to purge the head.
and hold it to the head with your hand when you heat the oil or any liquid.
From the flesh above the nose
Often there arises in the head of the nose an illness which is called 'telul', and it grows to become large over time, such that it becomes a visible thing.
and for this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all flesh, then place a hot iron or burning medicine on it.
and if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take note if it is hard, with a dark hue, and poor scent.
do not touch it with iron, for this is an abscess advanced, as when one cuts into it a great illness arises in the patient.
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in hue, and you see that it can be entirely cut away, then evacuate the patient and proceed with cutting without fear, treating the wound with drying and astringent substances.
Know that when the cartilage-related work of this chapter continues for a long time, it provides little benefit, except in some men.
It is necessary then when this happens to someone, one must consider if the wound is fresh and contains all its blood. And then sew the two lips together with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips are already torn apart on both sides, you must scrape away all the flesh of their hearts until they bleed, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and hold them in place, and apply powder of dragon's blood and ground incense. Put the powders on top with a strong poultice or another sealing plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The way of stitching is such that you bring together the ends: or with needles, as we have said in regards to sewing up the belly; or by thread, as I have informed you.
From the lips of apostems.
Men's hands within the lips develop hard abscesses, similar to corns, small and large;
Then it is necessary to turn back the lips, split open each abscess, take pincers and break them apart in every part;
Then wash the area after the incision with powdered glass until the blood is stemmed;
And then leave it exposed, treating the area with dry things until it is healed.
Many times there arises on the gums flesh grown close [to them], which the ancients call 'albulus'
Thus you must hold it with tongs, cut it at its root, and let out the pus or blood;
Then place on it ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders;
And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it. It will not return after the cautery.
Sometimes shells gather at the root of teeth inside the mouth between gums: hard, ugly things. and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, as decay reaches the gum, and their teeth stink;
you must make the patient sit between your hands, and their shoulder should be in yours, and pull out teeth or tartar that appears until nothing remains there; and do the same with blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolorations, until they are cleansed.
and if one removes what is at the first cause, it is good. if not, repeat on the second day and the third until you have removed all of it.
And know that the teeth require different shapes of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the work requires, because the rasp used to clean outside the teeth has a different shape than those used between the teeth. and these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
When treating tooth pain, it is necessary to delay the extraction as long as you can, for this should not be done lightly. because it is a very tall structure, until such time as there is no excuse to remove it.
Then when the patient is compelled to extract, you must be certain of the tooth causing pain. The pain often troubles the patient, who believes it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of good teeth. and yet the pain does not subside because of this, as long as the evil is present, for we have already witnessed it in these soldiers.
and when you are certain of the offending tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth thoroughly. Use a sharp spatula to protect the gum from all sides;
then loosen it with your fingers or with delicate pliers at the first notch and extract it until it is well dislodged, then firmly close the pliers; and have the patient's shoulder in your lap between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if there is no fracture, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, moving it like you did before.
And if the tooth is pierced and worn down, it is necessary to fill it with linen where the holes are. and if you hold it delicately with forceps, so it does not break when extracted;
and much bleeding work is required around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Take care not to break it during extraction, leaving any part behind, as this can cause the patient greater pain due to the root's cunning nature.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cartilage and fail to manage what we have described.
but sometimes cause great harm through their ignorance due to the roots that remain or the cartilage they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is extracted, clean the place with wine or oil and silk thread.
and if there is bleeding, which often happens, then fill the place with crushed green vitriol.
if that doesn't work, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you are extracting the tooth.
and these are their shapes: And they should have thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling (the tooth), and they should be well-made iron, and toothed in order to hold it firmly.
From the root of the teeth. When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place wet cotton soaked in butter on top for one or two days until the area softens, then you can insert the forceps known as "algefri", which resemble a stork's beak.
and are made inside like a file, which is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to emerge from all these tongs, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument known as "althali", which is a plainch, of which this is the form:
and it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
if not, use all the instruments, which come after forming these shapes:
And if one requires assistance from this tool with two prongs, of which this is the form: and other iron tools which are placed in front of the teeth, and from this tool resembling large tongs, of which this is the form:
and let this instrument be strong so that it does not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not listed here;
and wise masters find their own instruments themselves, according to the work they do and the illness presented, for there are such varied ailments that ancient teachers did not instruct on an instrument for each one; if a bone of the carriage or other bones is broken, seek out the appropriate instruments I have told you about, and use gestures, which are formed like this:
And they [the hairs] are thick and well-adhering to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed.
then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is bone rot, and it is small, so remove all these instruments:
When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is newly born and not in its rightful place, and it cannot be treated or filed:
then extract it. And if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument which has this form, and it resembles a small beak, being sharp iron at its tip:
And hit it repeatedly with a hammer many times to harden the tooth, and to avoid moving others, and if it is visible enough that you can file it, then use this kind of lime as shown here.
and it is like a file from which needles are made;
and with the file one sharpens the teeth little by little, gently, so that they do not move as it cuts;
then the whole flat surface at each edge is ground to a fine point by any sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed until smooth so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the front teeth loosen, either due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without their teeth coming loose, and you have treated them with constricting medicine, but it is not effective;
If they must be restrained, use a golden wire, for silver wire turns green and corrodes, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be neither too small nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you wish to guide the teeth back into place, take the wire and loop it double between two healthy teeth, then pass the ends through the gaps left by the missing teeth, until you come out near a sound tooth on the other side. Then repeat the procedure until you reach the starting point, then carefully and gently withdraw your hand until it is free.
And ensure the wire is secured at its base, so that it cannot slip off the root of the tooth.
Then cut the shoulder bone with a saw using pincers, and put it back together, placing it between two healthy teeth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
And then leave it like this as tight as possible so that it remains in place; and if it loosens or the threads become twisted, tighten it with another thread.
If it remains like this for a long time and serves its purpose, this is the shape of teeth and how to align two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you can see.
And when the tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said before.
And make sure only the wise and experienced are involved, sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is used to replace the missing one; it is placed where needed, secured as described earlier, and serves for many years.
Sometimes this ligament comes from underneath the tongue or is natural, depending on one's birth. or due to an injury of a healed wound;
and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, placing their head in your hand and lifting their tongue;
then cut the nerve of the tongue, until it is separated from its sheath, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to an immediate injury, then he must pull out the thorn and cut widely on that ligament;
and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies underneath;
and when you have done this, lift up the place with rosewater and oil, or cold water, then put a linen swab beneath the tongue.
and let the patient be bathed each night to prevent the place from becoming putrid.
And if there is discharge of blood, then apply powdered vitriol to the place; and if the blood returns, then cauterize with the small circular cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
and if you see it become discoloured or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
and if it is declining towards inflammation, and there is moisture present, then apply the unguent, and make an incision with a fine spatula, and release it from both sides. and if the blood threatens to overwhelm your work, then apply crushed vitriol until it is extinguished, and return to your work until everything is treated.
then apply a plaster of flax and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Abscesses of the throat At times, there are growths that form in the throat called "godaths," properly known as the two tonsils; when you treat them, as we have said before, and they do not heal, then take heed:
If this is a hard abscess of little sense and false colour, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also because of the loss of blood. But leave it until it is ripe, and then you shall open it, or else it would burst by itself.
And if it is of white colour around and the root is subtle, prepare your instruments to cut, but first make sure that the abscess calms down and is relieved.
Then let the patient sit before the sun, and their head be in your hand, and open their mouth and grasp the tongue between your hands, and press it down under all the instrument, from which this is formed.
and whether of silver or fine brass like a knife
Can you press the tongue with all these instruments, and see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the almond, then draw it out as much as you can;
and draw out any material with it from the wound, then cover the instrument with cotton, of which this is the shape, resembling forceps; and however the head is curved, and one side to another, and are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
And if you don't have this instrument available, shape it using the pliers, which also has a similar form: And be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.
And when you have treated one of the almonds, treat the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and vinegar, and if there is still bleeding, then gargle the patient with water or boiled pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops. Then treat it until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them just like the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small abscess;
And it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like this for even one or two days.
The abscess had risen to such an extent that two tubes were inserted through the nostrils.
I therefore made haste to insert a thin rod, and passed it through one nostril, then drew out a large portion of bowel.
Then refit it elsewhere through the other nostril, and the surgeon opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue.
After inserting the lancet into their abscesses, and cutting a part of it, only a little bit of blood came out. Thus were the pipes of her throat unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and she did not stop having this abscess cut over a long period.
And the abscess regrew again, filling up the space I had emptied so it became very large once more.
Then I tricked her, and cauterized the inside of her throat. Thus it remains without growth;
And separate from these parts, and be only as God made them after me.
Of the grape
When the kingdom descends to the egg, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is excessively thick and round, it is called an "egg".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the wound has healed but remains delicate, then you must cut it.
and one which is rounded, gathered together, and not elongated; and if it is bloody or false colored or black, you must avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned before. Then insert the lancet into the eye, draw it downwards, and cut at an angle of 45 degrees with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising both testicles.
And you must not cut beyond the natural limit, only removing the excess.
For if you cut more, it will harm their voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have mentioned for the incision of two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you should employ an engine for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
The manner of cautery is quick, sharp pain. And let the patient place their head in your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, moisten it with hot water that is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the tip of this instrument, which has the following shape:
And have a lock of hair on the head where one applies the medicine, like the bristles of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine onto the eye;
and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine inside, without it reaching the throat or hurting them;
Then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it blacken and the stinging from the medicine subsides;
And if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, then dampen the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton into the eye until the cotton rests on the eye;
And do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and fall out after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the medicine cautery, do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And immerse them in cold water, and treat with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take galangal and hyssop and oregano and chamomile and mugwort and similar herbs, combine all or any of them in a pot, add vinegar, and boil.
And the pot should be well-sealed with thick clay, and inside the pot place an instrument that has been hollowed out in this manner: It should be made of silver or copper, and one end of it is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises to the eye through the tear duct until the eye is cured.
After you start again often, until the wound dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's appearance when it is hot, because many things happen there. And do not treat this like an abscess which is declining in heat.
And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and put a piece of egg inside the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not get too hot. Because the egg piece will prevent the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with an overall benefit.
Often it happens that there is bone or fish spine stuck in the throat, or any other foreign object.
Thus, you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the palate with all your might so that you can observe movement.
And for that which does not reveal itself and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps thus the thing will be expelled by vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navew, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread. And tie to the sponge a thread, then swallow it. When it arrives at its place, it will be expelled, and then you must pull on the thread.
and if it does not come from what we have said, take a lead instrument of this shape:
and let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised upwards; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest choking occur, nor push against the bone within;
and it is better that the patient pushes in the instrument, for he knows where the obstruction lies; if it goes down, or he pulls out the entire instrument evenly, until it is fully withdrawn.
From within the throat.
Sometimes surgery is necessary, as I have said in the classification, through medicinal treatment; and when it does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument I mentioned to you.
And if you see the leech, draw it out with a small hook, or use delicate forceps that are fit for this purpose.
And if it is not effective, take a hairy caterpillar and thrust it into the patient's throat; then insert at the end of the caterpillar a hot iron, and do this often. And let the patient drink cold water all day long.
then take a full glass of cold water, open their mouth, pour it in as if they were swallowing, and move their hand often; and as soon as the blood meets the water, it will fall out.
And if it does not fall as we said, then smoke the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned in the eye fumigation.
Do this many times, for it will fall without fail.
And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, through which hole the head of the instrument should be placed.
Then I pour my fumigation into it, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes but instead goes up to the sinuses.
And now the sinuses will run, if they do not discharge then repeat the fumigation several times;
And let the patient suffer from thirst, eating salty or sour things but drinking no water;
Then they will need to be expelled by this regimen.
And the form of the instrument used to remove leeches, when it can be seen, resembles bent pliers for inserting them into the throat. and it resembles the beak of a bird, and has the roughness of a file, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
There are many types of abscesses, as described by different sources in this book, and they vary in their puncturing and cutting.
and it is in two ways that differ in appearance and what they hold.
And the second kind is for those on parts of the body where they are moist.
For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses on soft parts differ from those which occur in joints, each having its own treatment.
And for abscesses, one should not puncture them when the bowels are dead according to their fullness.
And for those of such that need piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, just like abscesses which appear near joints.
For when abscesses appear near joints, and it is left until it has rotted all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that limb.
Where an abscess is near the main member, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the main member.
Where it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies.
And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completing the digestion process, except for the one near the foundation, which will rot completely and become elongated from within, resulting in a fistula. And it cannot heal in a short time.
And you must know the work of perforating an abscess which is ready according to its development, and this happens when the pain subsides, and there is a reduction in feverish symptoms, and the lessening of pain and redness, and from swelling and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and other signs;
and you must make the perforation sit above where the abscess is more dependent, and where it appears to move;
and let the perforation be made along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints, nerves, and arteries, and all places equally where there is no bend. In those which bend, according to this member.
And when an abscess is in soft tissue, it's best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the poison from it would spread throughout the body, and it is full of much filth. And perhaps they harden the lips and its depths.
And if to someone an abscess is pierced according to the width of its body, according to this which the limb needs.
Then you must treat small abscesses, small openings. And in large abscesses, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess.
And if you encounter such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the heart, to remove it. When it has become like rags, and is dead, then you must proceed as with boils.
And if you encounter such cases that are split into three angles, and there are some from which one must also remove like the leaves of myrtle, just as with abscesses in the groin.
and if there are such people where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Those who have no head [referring to those with abscesses that do not yet have a visible 'head' or core], just like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them fully.
and when the abscess is large, and it has formed a great swelling, and you pierce it, do not extract all of the pus at once, but only part of it. then stop up the abscess until the next day, then extract any remaining pus promptly. Do this multiple times gradually until all of the swelling has subsided.
Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman with child, or small children, or elderly and infirm men. For sometimes the spirits twitch with the exit of the bile, which may cause the patient's death, and you would not perceive it.
Be very careful with this chapter, and once you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound dry, and look to see if the abscess wound is small. And if it's an open gash, then apply lint bandages or old cotton rags. And if it's a large abscess with many perforations, you must insert a bandage into each one so that they lie next to each other.
And if you have cut away a piece of the skin over the abscess and stretched it back, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen cloth without moisture, binding it tight until the third day.
Then remove it, and treat until healed.
And if hemorrhages occur in your work, bring cold and light water, and wet some cloths, and place them on the bleeding site multiple times.
And if the flow of blood persists, provide management and treatment, along with the powders I've mentioned in this book, especially during winter when the skin or abscess is very sensitive. In such cases, it's necessary to apply moistened tents and linen cloths soaked in warm wine and oil.
And if it's during summer when the skin is fleshy, use moistened linen cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil, leaving them on for up to three days as we've mentioned.
Then open the abscess, dry it, and treat it as necessary until it's healed.
And this must be universally known regarding abscess treatment:
For I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Where the brain of the head comes out small abscesses, and are made like nets, just like the breast of a hen, and there are many similar things.
There are some that are fatty and such where there is also moisture like blisters;
And if there are such cases that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt as the artery does not behave contrary.
And the work of incision is such that you must try every instrument which is called an "introducer", from where its shape comes afterwards, and what it contains.
For if there is moisture, they will push it from above with forceps.
And when the moisture is drained, it leaves the skin that contained said moisture bare and raw, for it returns when nothing is left there.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; If not, use water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day. And these will heal what has remained from the night.
And you may reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know for certain that nothing remains from the night.
Then treat the wound with an ointment that is suitable, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds in fat tissue, cut into it along this length. And throw out your thumbs, and peel it from all sides, and apply all of your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies.
and if the artery goes against you, do as I have told you afterwards.
And also of the abscess if it is hard, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the incision on the hard abscess and the moist one is lighter, for they have little blood. and if in any of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, like in this case of an abscess I cut open on an elderly woman's head;
and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had cut it with an iron, they would have made as much of a wound as with a stone.
In other abscesses that come on the head, especially those that appear on children's heads and at the roots of their ears, the opening should always be made as close to their base as possible, so as to remove the pus;
And treat them as required.
Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body, and they are very common, and grow intertwined with each other.
Each scrofula is properly within its area, just like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said. And there are many similar cases to these scrofulas.
And there are many similar cases to these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
In the one that you see with good positioning to touch, and it resembles the body's color, and moves in every direction without being attached to the neck veins or artery nor the channel, and is not deep;
You must cut it from above and peel off the skin on every side, then spread apart the two lips of the wound with tweezers if you need to, just as we have said for abscesses of the head.
and strike it here and there, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be sharp or cutting, lest your hand slip, and don't go too far ahead so as to avoid cutting what you shouldn't.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it won't let you work on it, then apply ground glass to the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind up the wound. leave it be until the abscess is healed, and the wound softens, and begins to putrefy.
And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it.
Then look for any small scrofula on your index finger; if there are any, cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large wound at the root of the scrofula, you must not cut into that root, but rather bind it tightly with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off on its own without harm.
Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, since there is no excess left due to the size of the scrofula. you must proceed to cut the root of it, and drain [it], and stitch [it] as we have said.
you must proceed to cut the root of it, and drain [it], and stitch [it] as we have said. Scrofula that has suppuration should be pierced where it appears to die.
And pierce it as mentioned before, depending on the case, then apply cautery with ointment and similar things to that which remains of the suppuration. And when the wound is well cleansed, apply healing ointment to promote flesh regeneration until it is healed.
The ancients spoke of the incision of the throat; But I have never seen it done in our land, only written about in their words.
For those with difficulty breathing, it is necessary to remove the obstruction in the throat known as the epiglottis; And if no aid is provided through this method, it is because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses that are hot in the mouth, throat or both tonsils.
When the illness is in the passage of breathing, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid suffocation and death.
It is necessary, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we divide it beneath three circles or four in a small transverse slit between two of them, rather than by the quantity of the cut on the surface, not into the cartilage.
And these places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that has no flesh and where vessels run lengthwise.
And if the masters are afraid, they must stretch out the skin of the throat to all sides and cut down into the heart until it reaches the windpipe. And remove the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut into the surface as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the interruption of the flow through the cane which must pass through the broken area and through the defect of the way.
and leave the wound open for one period.
And when the hour has passed by which strangulation is doubted, gather together the two lips of the wound from its center, and cut through it completely without the cartilage.
then administer medicine that promotes tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breath defect. therefore cover the epiglottis for one who cannot breathe, and they will instead inhale through the wound, thus saving them from death.
and for this reason, the ancients ordered that one leave the wound open until the harmful effect of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they order to suture the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
And I was called upon to cure her, but found her just as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found blood issuing from it, knowing that she had not opened a vein nor ruptured her windpipe such that air escaped through the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed;
And all the damsel had was that she lost her voice, but later returned to herself;
Because of this, I say that one should not fear an incision to the epiglottis.
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of jaundice, and it occurs mostly in women.
et it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
or natural has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles us in flesh, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our arteries. and there is fear, and it is not appropriate to operate with fire unless it is small, and this has been proven by all the sources. if you find it as our flesh and it does not reach any vein, then cut it like we cut the nails, and treat all its hair if there is any. And stitch it up quickly, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways for us, of which I will describe all the similarities.
and it is necessary that I explain all the differences between us and them.
I say that them is sick with heat and fever until the boiling passes, and the rotting is complete; then the fever and heat abate.
With us there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains a cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the colour of the body, and begins like a yolk, and becomes large.
and they are according to two similarities, either coarse or moist, and very much of colour as I have said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to treat the bone disease 'nout', that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments known as "entromissoires," according to how their form will be used in this chapter.
and the method of examining abscesses is that you take hold of the moistest part you find in the abscess and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument, and take care what comes out.
if running moisture is evident, whatever its colour may be, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
and if no moisture issues from the instrument, know that it is greasy and treat it thus by making a cross-shaped incision into it, then seize it with pincers and gently scrape away its skin on either side while you draw out its core along with any threads attached to it.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then extract it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything is left behind, the wound will reopen multiple times.
and if even a little is left, and blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powder, restrain the wound, and apply warm poultices to draw out the abscess, healing it with other treatments until it is fully healed.
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with something that encourages flesh to grow.
and if the beating vein opposes you or something else, then hurry and apply crushed vitriol to the place, leaving it there for two or three days until the wound rots, suppressing the boiling of blood. Then return to cut what has remained from the night.
Look here at the shapes of the introducing instruments, and they are of three kinds: Large and medium and small;
And there are three kinds of squares, which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they come in three types: Large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
And they are like the needles with which we sew sores, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they have been proven to be effective against dark blue fistula abscesses;
And they are of three kinds: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
The shapes of hernia are very similar, as you see here:
And if there be hernias with two curves of three kinds also;
And if there be hernias with three curves, and they too are of three kinds;
And if there be hernias with two curves, and also some with one curve only, and they too are of three kinds.
et all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these to which one applies are sharp, and there are some that only cut in one direction, from which we remove the nerves so as not to damage the vein or nerve.
and these intrumentals are the handles answered in many, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of abscesses.
and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and they should not be used other than in fleshy places like legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to bark peels, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding: And it is sometimes placed in a position that heals by closing veins and arteries, and other times according to this grand design:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like female breasts;
and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must be careful according to this form from line b. until g: then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing meat, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs low, and is softened due to its size like in women, then cut it into two parts above, through two similar incisions; So that one is attached to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to the line g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat. Apply what we have discussed regarding stitches and powders and any other necessary treatments until it is healed.
And if it is not healed or the incision is not fully complete due to either the patient's unwillingness to rest or blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. Leave it until the remaining matter and fat is discharged, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and there is moisture within them.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, treat it as we have said for incising scrofulas, and if the wound becomes hollow, apply cauterization as we have described before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is closed together, abscesses often result, just as there can be swelling in the vein with an abscess.
and if you recognize it as such for the artery, the abscesses are long in depth. and when you feel it with your hands, you sense tightness.
and if it is in the vein, there will be raised lumps on top.
It is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the shoulders and the jaws or in a lot of other places and it is very large. One must therefore avoid the treatment of iron, and one at head should also avoid it, especially in those who are swollen due to an artery rupture above their skin.
Then make an incision at the waist with a circular motion, and carefully separate the artery from its surroundings until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it, piercing through to the other side, and secure the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you when extracting the two arteries at the temples.
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a probe until the blood which is there has drained out, and the abscess will be opened.
Then bring forward the treatment that causes swelling, until the ligature falls off. Then treat it with ointment, continuing to do so until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess along the skin, then insert the needle underneath where you are holding it with your hand, and make it pierce through, having a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side; then bind the abscess as I have told you, with one of two threads from one side to another across both shoulders;
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then insert another needle with all of the thread underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and secure the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess so that its excess comes out, then cut the heart's excess and leave what is tied;
Then put on top a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then provide treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.
Also abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to nerves when they are injured or by too much hard work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands, and in all their joints, whether it is a serious abscess or a minor one, and its colour resembles that of the body, and there is pain in many positions;
When it is held very tightly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in a perfect part of the body but below the heart;
And it moves well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and one which is in the joints should not be cut with a knife; Perhaps there would be contraction; and if it is on the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula.
and if it is on the head or forehead, make an incision with the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with the hook and peel it, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it is healed.
It sometimes appears on bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with delicate roots and a large head;
And there are small and very large ones among them;
et I saw man with II or belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were slightly split, and moisture came out of them immediately.
I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces of weight, and in the other VI З., and the procedure for incision is such that you observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the material is white, moist, and has a fine root. then cut it open with a wide spatula, and let the cautery be present.
then cut it open with a wide spatula, and let the cautery be present. For when you cut it open there is often a great gush of blood, and if the blood defeats you, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the iron incision, then take some well-made hemp thread, and bind it around the wrist as we have said, leaving it there for two days.
then hold it tight, and do not stop tightening the hemp thread until you feel the wrist, and each part of it with no movement.
and if the roots are thick, there is fear in cutting them especially for the belly, but you may well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the tendon which is of a pale color and poor substance with a milky appearance.
For this is an abscess exacerbated, and I will come to the treatment of cancer thereafter.
When the boil bursts open. If the swelling appears due to cauterization of a wound or a fissure caused by erysipelas, and it is located on the belly, affecting some of the bowels as happens with other ruptures, or from blood leaking from veins or arteries according to what has been described before, or from flatulence;
and if it is due to the rupture of erysipelas and the discharge from bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles that of flesh, and it feels as a light thing without pain, appearing with several discharges. And if it's due to the discharge of the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed with two fingers it retracts, then reappears, and perhaps it becomes clogged, greatly enlarging at the entrance of the bath and because of hard work.
If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it appears clearly when you press it with your hand, it does not constrict.
and if it is due to blood, it appears with these signs: large and hard abscesses, arranged according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the treatment is that you must observe whether its appearance is caused by arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the treatment is that you must observe whether its appearance is caused by arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness. You should leave the treatment to others. For there is doubt and fear in it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for both artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or hernia, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat and still, then draw blood all around the affected area. Then have them rest often between your hands, go around the marked place with all of your fingers, then extend half an inch above the entire big thumb. Then bind it around with a strong thread or firm rope of stout silk, ensuring the knot is secure.
Work on half of the abscess as it extends onto the ligament, insert your index finger there, and feel for the intestine. If you find it caught by the ligament, free it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen;
And if you find an orifice, grasp it with the hook, and cut away any excess;
And if the artery or vein is in your way, go carefully around it, then return to your task and take two needles with fine thread, insert them twice, and put these two needles into what you have pierced in a cross pattern.
Then extract the abscess four fingers above these needles, and if you can see it, remove the needles, and let this area rot by itself as the dead flesh flakes off. Where you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat according to what is needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Where you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat according to what is needed, and remove the abscess as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area accordingly, and seal/heal the wound.
The cancerous sore. We have spoken about the similarities of cancer in the previous section, and how it should be treated with medicine, and when one must avoid iron-based treatments.
And now we speak of cancer that has spread to the bone marrow and requires great caution in its treatment. The ancients say that when cancers are located where they can be scraped away like those found on mammary glands, thighs or similar areas, one must remove it entirely at its earliest stage.
no one has ever healed it before me.
And for the operation, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient once with black bile;
then make him bleed if he has obvious congestion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
then cut your oncology or cancerous growth, and shave his head from all sides, and remove it entirely without leaving anything behind;
allow the blood to flow freely and drain it well with your hand or something solid, and if the bleeding flows contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops; Then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already spoken about the different types of dropsy and how the accumulation of water is formed, as well as the signs for each type, and the treatment that can be done with medicine or with iron.
and one should not use iron in these two types of cases: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarcus, for these are mortal conditions;
Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure is not effective, consider if the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as constipation and digestive issues. If you use iron, do not touch there as there is doubt.
And if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and has no other illness but only dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed like this: Make the patient lie straight on your hands, and support them while pressing their belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the sharp-edged spathe like this: And let there be two parts cut. It should be pointed but not so sharp that it can reach the intestine when inserted and cause injury.
Then check if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: So you must cut above the bump on the third right bone under the arm. And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the third right bump.
And if it is due to the spleen, let your incision be on the right side, and do not allow the patient to lie over the incision so that excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce through the skin with your tool, push it in, and lift your hand to scoop out all the fatty tissue between the skin and fascia as if you were skinning something down to the size of a fingernail or so.
Then pierce the fascia until you reach the water spot, then pull it out, and insert this tool which is shaped like so. And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and is made of light brass or copper, and has in its lower part a small aperture; and on one side it is fitted with three holes; and two on the other side, and one more;
and the tip is cut like a feather, and it is in the shape of the incision which scribes use to cut feathers:
at the top is an axle, so that when the instruments come to the water, it immediately rises above the instrument;
empty it then by half or one-third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to the release of their spirit from the body, or they may fall unconscious, or they will be close to death;
but empty according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the conditions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the orifice that I spoke of, so you pierce according to this method;
then begin the instrument again the next day if you see that he is suffering so, and draw a small quantity of water;
do this each day, and be careful not to draw out too much water but only a little.
And if you are doubtful of the patient, and leave too much water, it will cool the heart or sand, and by excessive sweating or bathing in sun, and he will become dehydrated. And treat with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the water, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its place.
If necessary, pierce it with a very thin and sharp instrument in the following way:
Then insert a thin tube through the penis, and tie it, keeping it in place for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then replace it.
And perhaps it is not necessary because the urine that flows out will keep the tube open.
For those whose hole is small, the copper plug will be medicated as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the tube in its proper place are injured. Some men are born with their urinary opening at the top of the penis and thus cannot urinate without lifting it upwards. And they cannot recover because the material or substance cannot reach the marrow, and this is a severe illness.
The manner of treatment is such that the patient often lies on their back, then extend the head of the penis and also stretch the perineum like the size of a feather, so that the orifice opens in the middle, as it should be.
And be cautious of the discharge of blood which happens many times, and if it occurs, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
penis sores This inflammation of the penis occurs many times, and it appears as an ugly redness.
And there are both malignant and benign ones.
You must take them with a thin instrument, cut and clean them all, then apply moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment. Then treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of foul colour and offensive, you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cut it open and if the abscess is situated on top of the shaft, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the pus that is inside first. And when it is sealed, treat it from the outside.
For when you treat them together, the head of the shaft is not secured so that it is not perforated, and this leads to blackening and corruption both in the shaft and the glans.
You must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a plaster made of honey and flour which is composed of pomegranate peels and figs, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic as follows:
The cauteries help the two conditions together: That is to say, in the removal of blood and in corruption.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a hollow reed into the penis and have the patient urinate through it.
And when the skin is sticking to the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, you must therefore peel it off with a sharp instrument until the foreskin is loosened and the head of the penis is free from all sides.
and if this is a serious matter to discuss, then you must peel it with spatule at some pouch of the head of the penis and the skin;
then carefully separate it into two parts, and place a thin piece of moistened linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as with other wounds; nevertheless, when we do this work of our own will, and especially to children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the most gentle for their well-being.
I say the ancient ones did not circumcise their children because it was not in their law, and we have only acquired this practice through experience.
for I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons performing circumcisions around one day old, with forceps, and all at once.
If the heart were pierced by two arrows, it could happen that one of them would pass through while the other remains stuck inside. Now if it were pierced again, the pain would be doubled, and during its removal, which is not done properly due to the depth of the member's point;
And during the removal of the nail, it might happen that the iron escapes, and the wound will spread, and often they heal in such a way that they do not need treatment; I have seen this myself.
Of the cleaning which is done by force on all that is tied in thread I have found the goodness of experiment; because the force cuts as well from above to below.
For when you press your hand down, cut evenly along the line of all that you hold tight; But make sure the thread is tightly wound around the skin;
and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child believe, if he understands, that you will not tie him up by binding the thread around his penis only, and then you can make him urinate in all the ways you know how.
then make him stand between your hands upright, and cover his genitals with yours or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
then push your hand onto his penis and blow into the heart, and pull it upward so that the head of his penis is within you. then thoroughly clean it of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the root with a doubled thread, and tie it underneath from one place to another.
then thoroughly clean it of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the root with a doubled thread, and tie it underneath from one place to another. et hold it with your two fingers using the index and thumb, and grasp between the two tendons, then lift the heart upwards gently and draw out the head of the penis. then let the blood run little by little, for this is the wound. and apply powder on top and over the powder a linen cloth glued with a raw egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again with another dressing until it is healed.
The form of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
the two edges should be turned up and sharp, and the blades should also be as wide as the handles equally.
The error of purification is when the heart escapes to the incision.
Therefore, you must extend it with your nail, otherwise the flesh will form an abscess.
And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pincers to grasp it, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the rod becomes swollen, let it be until the hot abscess cools, and then lightly pare it.
Then cut it as you are able to move it, and be careful not to harm the base of the rod, for this will do it no harm.
Cure therefore the place of scalding wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it exceeds beyond measure from the heart, and goes upwards, then it will not harm.
Treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
where there is retention of urine
Retention of urine is caused by obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar things as we have said in the classification.
And if the urine is not released and you see that retention occurs due to a stone at the bottom or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees. And their feet should be placed on the patient's back, stretching out their abdomen from above the back, and restrain the patient's elbow as much as you can. And thus, the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above it, which loosens the urine.
If it does not come out as we have mentioned and the patient feels severe pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", which is formed like this:
and it should be made of fine silver, light as feathers, like the quill of a bird; The tube should be half a palm long and finely crafted at the tip.
The method of urine extraction is such that you take a thread doubled over and tie it to the tip with either wool or cotton, then insert the tip of the thread into the syringe.
and cut the superfluous part of the woolen thread and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and seat the patient on a chair, and anoint their scrotum and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and lukewarm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen;
push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel its presence until everything is emptied, which will not be done properly if the guide leading there is twisted;
then stretch the thread along all the wool in several places, and the urine will follow through the wool, then remove it carefully, and allow the urine to flow;
and start the syringing again until the bladder is emptied, and ease the patient.
When scalds or blood enter the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it needs to be drained of water and medicine, do so with all the instrument which is called a "catheter", and its shape is thus:
It is closed, and it has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the inner hairs by which the medicated plug is such that it blocks the urethra without addition, so that moisture can be drained, and pushed out when needed;
and when you want to empty your medications into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and drain by pulling on it.
you will then be able to draw out the moisture with the catheter, and afterwards push it back firmly again; If moisture enters here, it will go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the subtle form of the enema used to cleanse the bladder;
And it is made of silver or tin, with the head being higher up;
And it descends to the left side where the ribs end;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to use for the enema inside it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thick thread, and heat the pouch over a fire;
then insert the head of the clyster into the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder gently, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make a circle out of it, and punch a round hole in the center. then insert a strong thread through the hole, gather the circle together like you would with a funnel, and place within it whatever oil, moisture or water you desire, then tie this to the instrument.
and do like you did with the bladder, pressing gently by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stone
We have spoken of the types of stones, their extraction, and accompanying remedies.
And we have explained the distinction between kidney stones and all other types of urinary calculi, along with their specific surgical procedures. and in bladder and urethral stones;
and we will describe them openly and briefly.
I say that bladder stones occur more frequently in children, and this is signified by the urine escaping from the bladder akin to water due to its subtle nature;
and there is visible sand in the patient's urine, causing them to feel a burning sensation upon urination, which may occur multiple times before eventually ceasing; And many of them have foundations sunk deep;
And the healing is light for children up until four years of age, and it is very difficult in old men, and it is moderate among young men, to those who are between youth and old age;
And the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the bile that is in the intestines. For sometimes it becomes difficult to reach the stone.
Then take the patient by their feet, lift them up and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, sometimes coming out on its own.
Then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, with their hands placed behind their thighs, so that the bladder is completely lowered downwards.
Then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into it.
And if it does not fall upon touching all at once, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger if they are a grown young person; And push it into their fundament, search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then cut at the neck of the bladder.
Then press down with your finger, and push the stone out from where you want to cut.
Instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand and tell them to stretch out the testicles upwards with their right hand, while removing the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where you will be cutting, using their left hand.
Then I inserted the spatula cutting, from which this is its shape: And splitting what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin;
and be straight over the stone, and press your two fingers towards the anus or the foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large;
by chance if the pressure on your two fingers at the anus is such that it would be without effort;
and you should know that there are stones with angles and edges; It must be drawn out gently;
and if it is shallow, resembling a hazelnut, round, with only a slight opening.
On one where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not come out, you must extract with tongs that are like a file at the end, to pull out the stone so that it doesn't escape. or push aside the subtle instrument curved at the end.
and if you cannot manage it like this, then enlarge the wound opening, and if blood oozes out, cauterize with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, first push the largest one towards the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull with force, and the smaller ones after that if there are several.
And if it is very large, one must take care of it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: where either he dies, or urine comes back through the wound that the flesh cannot seal;
but nevertheless try to pull it out, either by drawing or breaking with tongs, until you extract it in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, bind it tight, and place atop a cloth moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water in cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then resolve the patient onto their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen the bindings, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and unguent of basilicon, until it is healed.
And if an abscess arises in the wound and bladder blockages with blood, and urine is retained which escapes together with the urine: So push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will run into the bladder, and cause an infection;
Then cleanse the wound with water, oil, and silk, and treat him in all ways that you know until it is healed;
And you must ensure that whenever you treat him, the two thighs are tied together, and gather your medical supplies accordingly.
And if the stone is small, and it is lodged at the urethra's entrance, stuck there such that urine cannot pass through; if the treatment I describe here fails, then you are justified in cutting it out multiple times. I have already proved this thus.
Take an iron rod, shaped according to this form, with three angled prongs at one end like a pitchfork:
then take the thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot retreat back into the bladder;
then gently insert the boring iron into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the boring iron with your hand within the stone little by little until you are able to pierce through it from one side.
urine will come quickly; then press your hand over the remainder of the stone that is still inside the penis. If it is immediately broken [the dislocation] and extracted with urine, then the patient will recover.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one string below the stone and another above it, then make an incision towards the stone between the two strings, extract it with force, untie the string, and clean out the clotted blood from the wound. Treat them until they heal.
Of the stones of women
Sometimes stones occur in women, and if it happens once, then the treatment is severe, and it is prevented for three reasons.
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
and the second is that you cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
and the third way is that, by chance, you cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands;
and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of a man, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear in it. If necessity arises for this, you must take an expert midwife, and if you barely find one, and if not, seek out no chaste subtle mirror;
and the present one is a wise midwife in women's lives or a woman who knows part of the art and instruct her to do what you command for the examination of the stone; and carefully check if the woman is a virgin:
and carefully check if the woman is a virgin: then you must insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone;
and if you find it, pull the stone out from under your finger, and instruct her to insert her finger into her vagina, then grasp and press your left hand firmly over her bladder.
If she finds it, have her pull the stone out gently from the opening of the bladder down to just above the thigh root.
Strike the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it moved to, and feel for the stone in that area. and do not move his tooth above or below the stone, let the incision at first be small.
and do not move his tooth above or below the stone, let the incision at first be small. then pour the vinegar into the incision, if you feel the stone growing so that the wound increases until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
that is to say, small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with furrows.
If you know the symptoms, you can understand the outcome.
And if the blood overtakes you, apply ground green vitriol to the place, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
then return to your task until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones from men, so that they may assist in your work.
And if the blood defeats you and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the spot along with tent and bandage cloth fibers, do not start again, leave the stone alone and do not pull it out because perhaps the patient would die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the area can be accessed, return to your work until the stone is completely removed.
A watery mixture is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white liquid, which comes from under the heart of pigs and can be found inside eggs.
And it is called "syfac," and sometimes it appears properly in the egg's membrane so that one might think it was another egg. And it is the pig's skin, which lies between the white liquid we mentioned earlier.
And this does not happen if you have no pus. And the generation of this rice water is due to weakness that comes to calves, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from blows to the joints, and this moisture has many colours: where it is discoloured towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens often;
and these are the signs to recognise this assembly, for if it is white and soft as we have said, then the abscess will be round, like an egg, with pus long in shape but not opening the joint, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very tissue, then it is an abscess which has retained part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another kind of egg;
And if moisture is between the skin of the calves and the white sinew, one can feel it well.
Therefore, when you wish to know the colour of the moisture, test it with any object that fits as described above. According to that which follows after the introducer, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body.
Then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and put beneath them a lot of cloth.
Then sit on their left side, and instruct the helper to sit on the right, and stretch out the leg towards one of two sides of the calf's heart.
then take the spatule knife, and cut the skin of the calves among them from the length up to the wrist, and let your incision be completely straight while separating the skin of the calves until you see white flesh, and carefully peel it according to your ability.
then pierce the white flesh with a water-filled tube through the wide opening, and extract all the water, then put your thumbs in place, and stretch the white flesh upwards.
and do not touch the heart of the calves, but only the white flesh; cut all of it or in pieces especially the side of him carefully, for if you do not peel it well enough, water will return.
And if the egg has been knocked from your work, put it back into place once you have completed the surgery of the sinew.
Then join the two lips of the wound in the heart of the swine with one suture, then treat it like any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, you must tie the suspending vessels to prevent blood loss.
Then cut the swine open along with its suspending structures and extract the egg, treating it as we have said.
And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots. If you cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound moist linen soaked in rose oil.
If you cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound moist linen soaked in rose oil. Place some other linen soaked in wine and oil above it, then put the two pieces of cloth on top, add doubled rags, and tie it all with bandage that is made like this.
Then take two cloths, and stuff them with wool like this example so they are sewn together at the waist of the pants, one piece goes under the buttocks up to the back, while the other goes on top towards the armpits.
And with the other two at the head on both sides, let it all be tied together in the buckle of the pants.
et sometimes this cauterization method is used instead of iron surgery, and you must take a subtle cautery knife, cut the skin on the testicles, heat it as we have said so that the white substance containing water is uncovered.
then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance with small pricks, flay it with this hot subtle cautery.
And cut it in every way you can, until everything is eradicated.
and ensure the fire does not touch the egg.
and know that this work is safer. and be careful of blood loss, and learn from the works of surgery.
And if anything opposes you, whether an abscess hardens or blood flows elsewhere or any other matter, treat what opposes you as described above.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then induce perforation as I have told you, for when you are certain through the signs we mentioned that water-carrying branches are present, make the patient sit on a raised seat; Then pierce the abscess from below with a spatulate object as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body.
And let the openings be wide so that all the water may flow out freely.
Afterward, place cotton on the spot and bind it, leaving room for the remaining water to flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the water to drain into the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or an instrument used to draw out water from edematous patients, which has this shape mentioned earlier.
Widen the pouch of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it is re-assembled after six months or so, and when it is re-assembled as before, thus the patient will live through their days.
Know that in the incision of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, which is why it seems better to me to leave it alone.
And I will tell you about the work and its similarities to an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses arise on the body, especially on the head. And it is due to frequent occurrences.
That is to say, by excessive acidity and bile which has spread to the head or through injury.
And the colour of the abscess is according to the colour of the body; It does not cause any pain, yet it is an aggressive abscess.
And sometimes there are fearful, hard abscesses of dark colour which arise from the rupture of an artery or the swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an arterial rupture, it is recognised by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And you must not touch it at all.
Those who are subject to swollen veins are recognized by their reaction when the fingers touch them, and one can easily perform the operation on this resemblance as well as other parts. And you cut the heart of the vein, then stretch out the egg above, and tear away the white substance, and remove all parts of the egg's suspension.
If the egg is already hardened with these parts nested together, then you must pull out the egg and cut it.
And if it is hollow at the surface or inside the vessels, you must remove all of that membrane and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a bandage resembling a turban, with the softening of the tendons, and the patient cries out terribly when it bursts.
And the cure for this disease is just as fearsome as the one before, yet we will tell you its treatment according to what the ancients did.
You must have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then place the tendon suspension below your two hands, at all vessels that are near the artery, and hold them firmly while stretching it greatly.
Then cut through with a broad sharp spatula across the vessels until they are uncovered, and then peel back on either side as we have said before when extracting arteries from the temple.
Then I insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came out, and then tie it again to the other end. Then cut them exactly in two, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound like the others where we tie a bow, so that no vessel leaks and nourishes one of the clots.
Because from this there is no harm, and if all the vessels leak, then you must treat the clots in all the vessels. So that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, dry out, and cannot be helped.
The events of this chapter occur through the incision that leads to the abdomen or the extension on the stomach in the region of the intestines, which is why the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the openings.
And this rupture is either from the incision or its extension, and these two types of ruptures occur due to many reasons:
or from blows, or jumping, or heavy lifting, or similar activities;
And the signs that indicate an extension of the incision are a gradual appearance of symptoms over a long period and it does not occur suddenly; And the abscess is equal in size up to the surface due to the incision pressing on the intestine.
And the signs are when it's from the section of the spleen; there is sudden pain at first and different abscesses appear under the skin close by due to the intestine coming out of the body through the rupture in the spleen.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the gut, and are held there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when they are pressured.
And in these iron treatments with fear, which is why it must be avoided.
And the method of operation is that you instruct the patient to pull their intestine back into place with their hand inside the wound, if they are able to do so. Then be mindful of his neck. Place your hands under his collarbone. Lift his thighs.
Then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin from the lower back to the length of the body. Then push the lips of the anus inside with hooks according to how much you need to open the wound, and make sure that the esophagus can exit.
Then remove the fat that is under the skin of the lower back until all the white fatty tissue is exposed on all sides.
Then insert your index finger into the one that follows the coccyx, which is between the first sacral bone below the egg skin, and between the second sacral bone, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second sacral bone.
And then move your right hand inside the hearts of the coccyxes, and stretch the first sacral bone upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg toward all the sacral bones on the side. Instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and untie what is below behind the binding.
And feel with your fingers for any coiled intestine or hard sacral bone, and if you find anything, push it towards the stomach below.
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it into the posterior part of the sciatic nerve, which is behind the skin covering the buttocks; After the waist, then cut away the flesh that appears to be made up of strands, until there are four threads remaining; Then tie them together one over the other in a cross pattern, and bind the sciatic nerve, which we said is beneath the skin of the buttocks, with a strong two-part ligature; Then wrap the flesh around the threads and bind it in a two-part fashion so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter from outside, preventing any abscesses forming; and place again the bandage according to the first long bandage with two fingers of that one, and after these two bands leave a gap below the heart of the calves as wide as a finger; and after, do all of the other [round] movements according to the shape that the egg has;
then press in the area below the skin of the calves until blood flows into the bowels, as we have said before;
then bring moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wound; then apply the bandage as we have mentioned. And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding. For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it sticks by itself;
and if it delays to fall, let it be soaked in warm water, and apply what we have said earlier, until it falls off.
then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
Of fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to do the operation with an iron tool.
And the ancients said that it is done like a spiral vine that wraps around a stick, in such a way that you tie vessels together, gently twisting them after cutting.
then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels fall away.
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the testicles become visible.
And none of the intestines descend to the calves, but if they do, it is little, and repair every hour.
But nevertheless, if it stays too long in this position, the wound or ulcer grows so that the intestines descend.
And this happens due to the extension of the ulcer that is in the groin, as we have said, because it extends and softens, then swells and opens.
And the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this way. The patient often lies on their back between your hands, then scrape the area around the rupture swollen for about three fingers wide according to its size.
and then extract the synovial sac that is beneath the skin that covers it, then take some fat and place it on the spot where the sac was exposed.
press it perfectly against the abdomen, then cut the two visible spots of the synovial sac above the top of the fat, and cut one after another.
then extract the top of the fat, and do not cut any part of the synovial sac nor spread out its contents or anything else, as I have already instructed you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse. then treat it by following the procedure for treating wounds.
then treat it by following the procedure for treating wounds. And when you cut the sons, clean them and treat the wound until it is healed.
The sinew is restricted, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but cauterization is suitable here, and more proximate to healing.
softening of the skin of the calves
The skin of the testicles often becomes soft in some men because the contents inside are softened, and this is evident to see.
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure him, that the patient lies down on his back, and the surgeon cuts the skin that has softened above the natural skin.
then sew the two lips together in one seam, and if you see any excess of the softened skin first cut it away to three seams or four firmly.
then cut between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until they are healed and the threads fall out.
The castration.
Know that cauterization is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
and it is only necessary for two methods.
One is that a doctor must know how to answer when asked, and he knows the treatment.
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
I say, therefore, that castrations are performed in two ways: By either attraction or incision.
In the method we use by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and drooping; Then grasp them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
For the castration of the testicles: It is necessary that you hold the animal and press its skin above the testicles with your left hand, then bind the belt, and cut each testicle with one stroke when you have properly scrotumed them.
leaving no place for the common surgeon nor the subtle surgeon who is over the vessels,
and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction because with the latter some matter from the testicles might remain and thus the animal still desires lust.
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Des hermaphrodites: Of hermaphrodites, where one finds both male and female generative organs mixed together in an individual; this is caused by heat or cold in the womb during pregnancy.
A hermaphrodite is of two kinds among men, The one is such that between the two testicles appears like a woman's genitalia in its natural form, where there may be hair, and sometimes it discharges urine.
And the other manner is found in women, appearing on the wrist like a rod and two knobs.
And the treatment of men and women is such that you remove all joined flesh, and treat it like any other wound.
In the second manner, for men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
Tetigoine is a joined flesh on the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to look at. And some women have it also large like a hand, and that is the treatment.
You must hold the excess flesh around the wound with your hand or pincers, and gently cut it.
And do not go too deep, lest blood flow out, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And at another place where it arises in the mouth of the wound, and it fills, and perhaps bursts out, and is like a cow's udder in appearance, and so the ancients called it "udder disease". You must cut it, as we have said with cauterization, and treat until it is healed.
Erratic it is when the woman's nature is not pierced or the opening is small; And it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness which has come about;
And it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness which has come about; where it is attached by a clamp, or by a fine wire or spike, and it is firmly fixed in the marrow, be it on the side, below, or wherever.
and prevent conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flow of menstrual blood;
and knowledge of this is obtained through observation of the urine.
If the obstructions are close by, take them out with your fingers or a rod.
If it is fixed with a fine wire, and it is close to the two cubits, then hurry up, and cut it thus:
place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
then extend the two lips widely, so that the fine wire is exposed, and cover it with your fingers;
Then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it on the spot, and have the woman lie with her husband every day, so that it does not heal.
And if the suture is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatule similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is made of unworked wood, suspend it from an oak branch and split it;
And have ready the hemostatic medicines, as needed, such as dragon's blood, incense, along with egg whites;
Then bring a broad hollow cane so that the wound cannot heal;
And thus it shall be for a long time, and bring him a dry linen tent;
Then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And when there is a newborn child in the womb, it must be delivered in this manner, unless there are encrusted abscesses. For an encrusted abscess in the womb, one should not apply cauterization.
Hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without a usual cortex, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thick.
And we have already mentioned in the division their similarities with others, and the signs, now I will say which ones receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and hardness, when they are deep in the anus and cannot be felt, should not be treated with cauterization.
Those who are at the mouth of the swamp, where one can feel it, are those whom one can cure.
You should thus place the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the hemorrhoid with forceps, and cut it at its root, then powder over it with medicines that restrain blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
And if blood flows from it, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, gallnuts and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white to make an ointment which you place on her back.
And if there is no bleeding, that's good. If not, have him apply cups to his back and breasts without piercing them.
Then take linen, soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And the one called "albathir" is red, resembling rough skin, it should be cut like the telul, as I mentioned. Then treat until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses occur in the breast, such as cancer, stony abscesses, herpes, tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and various other diseases that I have mentioned in my classification.
Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears on the vulva, which is not one of the abscesses that are meant to burst.
And if you wish to know the work of iron [i.e., surgery], then look whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce [it], but let it die until the pain is eased.
And then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats for him to lean on, supporting his back and bringing together the parts outside of the leg.
And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms underneath his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage.
Then suction from his right side, and introduce the instrument with which you work the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards the matter comes.
and it is necessary that when you go to introduce this instrument, that you insert the point first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters inside with the instrument does not go further than it should and does not harm the patient. and if the instrument is larger, one should cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not harm him.
and it is necessary that he put the handle of the instrument on top and hold the instrument.
And when the abscess opens up, and it is softened by hand, one should cut it at its head with a spatula.
And when the bowels are empty, you should place moistened dressings in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound.
place the dry dressing outside of the wound over the cavity, and put over the cavity and the hand clean moist wool that has been boiled with mallows.
then treat it after two days of dressing, until it is healed.
and sometimes you should rinse the cavity and wound with an enema of water and honey, then with water or boiled roots of lily and long aristoloche. then return to the dressing.
If the wound is swollen in the scab, you must avoid cauterizing with iron but treat it as we have mentioned previously.
Of childbirth Mestier est premier a la baile qu'elle conoisse la figure de l'enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l'ar:
then hasten the child to go out (of the womb). then know that these births are according to the natural position, and the baby comes out headfirst, with the second twin following.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the baby comes out soon.
for when it descends headfirst, so does the twin with him, and the mother's excesses are cleansed through proper childbirth.
and this one who comes out differently is not born naturally.
For sometimes it comes out on its feet, or the body or shoulder first, and hands, or on its belly, often, and occasionally turned onto its neck, and in other bad positions.
If it is necessary for the nurse to be wise and skilled in these matters, and beware of errors and deception, I will show you all the ways in which she must assist him.
If the child comes out feet-first naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, have the midwife sit on a stool, where other women hold her.
And mix her nourishment with cooked olive oil or fenugreek, then put the nurse between her two hands using the small spatula which is shaped like this: [shape description] And break the amniotic sac, and scoop out its nail so that all of the moisture that is within flows out.
And press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman an enema made of ground fenugreek with sesame oil.
Then make her sneeze with juice of rue, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. Now press the child's belly.
And if both hands pop out, you must gently push them back in turn. And if they cannot go in, place the woman on a chair, lifting her feet upwards. Then get up the chair from the ground, holding onto the woman so she does not fall when standing up.
And if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut her hands with a knife as mentioned before, extract the child, and push it back evenly.
Of the child's birth upon its feet When the child begins to walk, you must push them upwards. And then turn it over gently, until it is even.
Then take one foot and stretch it gently, again and again.
When they jump up to the hips, instruct them to grab hold, and make them sneeze vigorously. If it jumps, so be it, if God wills it.
And if it does not go beyond as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lightly done.
And if it does not come about as we have done, say one must take muskroot from the pharmacy, and sesame oil, and molten gum, and grind everything in a mortar. and apply this ointment to her female nature, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, make her a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, leaving it for an hour; then have her sit on the chair, make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, gently press on her belly, for the baby is jumping now.
From the birth of the child upon its knees When the baby comes in this manner, put balm on its hands back and forth; then be mindful of her neck, let her feet hang down, and have her lie on the bed; and she bends her hands back and forth, then he presses her hands onto the stomach, and removes the cushions underneath, until she is properly aligned below. and if the child does not jump, take her feet and move them vigorously, then massage the stomach upwards, finally put in your hands. and shake the child back and forth; and instruct the woman to hold herself so that the child comes out.
From the birth of the child with one hand hanging out I must devise a way to bring back the hand: if one cannot retrieve it, make the woman get up and walk.
if she cannot walk, have her lie down on the bed, and lift her legs vigorously;
Then bring forth the musk concoction I have described.
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then carefully help to bring back her hand. Also guide the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to grasp [the child] until the baby is out.
From the exit of the child upon its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary for the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it back and forth, and lift [the baby] gently.
And when it is equalized, place upon [the baby] the natural musk concoction with oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move a little bit at a time.
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to hold still. and make her sneeze. in the same manner for all secondary dislocations
in the same manner for all secondary dislocations When it comes out forcefully in this manner every time, cut the phlegm with your nail until all moisture is drained.
and if the child spits on their face and neck, wipe it away from the root so that nothing is left behind, and clean the child.
then push the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and tell the woman to hold still once.
Of a dislocated ankle joint. Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; And this is not a strange thing, and often happens. Two things are strange indeed, yet they exist.
Two things are strange indeed, yet they exist. I know them, though they multiply, divided by the surgeon's knife, bound to sorrow.
And sometimes they arise naturally as we have stated.
If they arise severely, treat as we have said, with a skilled surgeon acting swiftly and gently. And act so that it moves towards salvation. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the month of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and even up to XV, all shaped as children by the wondrous flow of blood, and it is essential that the surgeon knows all this, for such things may befall him. si do as is required.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have mentioned before, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to perform manual labor; you should know if the woman is of sound virtue and has no accidents or fears of death;
the woman should be supine on her back, with her head tilted downwards, and her legs lifted;
and the minister should hold her in two parts, or tie her to the bed so she cannot move during the extraction of the child;
then rub the woman's mouth with moist oils mixed with a poultice of althea and fenugreek seeds, then anoint her hands with these oils and poultices;
Then place them in the mild bath, then position it where they put the weights so that they are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is fitted with one so that he does not fall on his head.
If you insert the weights in their eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or armpit or near the ribs, and if he falls onto his feet, then pierce him with it or hold it to his lower ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the weight in his right hand and place the basket between two fingers of his left hand, and put all this into his hand gently, then insert the weight into any one of these places we have said until its contents come out.
Then insert it against another oncine (swelling), or the third if you require more, so that the extractions are equal;
And then stretch them evenly from one side to the other, so they can be removed, and let the oncines (swellings) interlock to keep them in place, like this is the form:
If any part remains, anoint the wound with some of your fingers' oil, and press those into that part, and pull on the other part;
And if nothing remains there, place this oncine (swelling) higher up, and do so until it comes out entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot move it due to stiffness, you must wrap it in a cloth until it is entirely covered. Then cover the knuckles of the sole or heel, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it becomes stuck during delivery, or if there is an acute assembly of membranes around its head, you must press the pointed spatula between your fingers, split open the membranes, and extract the fluid. Or you may use an instrument called 'almidach', the construction of which is described in the following chapter along with other instruments.
And do the same if the child has an abnormally large head naturally.
then extract the bones with tongs, and if the head pops out and is held by forceps, let it be split open so that the moisture which is inside comes out.
and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on his feet, the attraction is light, and the guidance to the mother's breast is easy.
And if it is trapped in the belly or the head, you must extract it with fabric wrapped around the hand. and split open the belly or the head so that the moisture inside flows out.
and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, then insert your hand into the shoulder socket perfectly, and draw it down to the mouth of the socket; then insert two or three fingers, and withdraw them gently;
and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to abscess which has occurred there, it should not be operated on, but moist and oily things must be applied; he applies poultices, along with warm softening and moistening agents dissolved in water.
And if the child is lying on its side, and you are able to put it upright, then apply what we have said about living children;
If one has no power over it, then break it into pieces, leaving nothing of the sinew behind.
And when you have done this, if it brings on the hot abscesses we spoke of that come from the marsh;
And if there is an outflow of blood, it should be dressed with cold water compresses restraining the flow, and other treatments should be administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died; then another formed on top of it, and this one also died. After a long time, an abscess formed in the buttock; it swelled until it opened and began to produce a great deal of pus.
I was called to treat [the wound], and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal/close the wound.
I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an [the first] bone came out, and after some days another one did too. I was greatly astonished as there is no bone in the belly.
So I thought it must be bones of a dead child.
I cauterized the wound, and extracted pieces of bone from it, such that the woman was in a better state. And for a long time the woman dressed it thus, and only now does there seem to be a little lump in its place;
And I have not written this chapter except to aid those who, when they find a strange case, might know how to help it.
Ci après vient le forme du pressoir, à quoi on a les livrés.
Et à deux tours aux deux têtes des deux liens. However, the horns should be more subtle than those of the restrainer, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the mouth of the post should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood one finger thick, and its length a palm and half. And in the middle of the two bindings there should be two fittings made from this same wood, firmly attached to each other, half a palm long or slightly longer.
And these two fittings should be inserted into the mouth of the post to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of a pair of tongs; and it should have two jaws, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the womb with all the instruments, have the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two jaws of the instrument together into the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then operate your hand with the instrument, just as you would with tongs evenly, according to the extent that you see fit to open the mouth of the womb, so that she may do what she wishes.
Cist estrument sunt tuit sormontez, And when the physician has prepared them, it is all the more urgent to operate on them, and it is of higher importance for men according to their condition.
Do not despair if you do not have the instrument ready, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the midwife is hindered during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with conviction; bind your hands over her mouth and nose. And if she faints from this, it is good.
If not, take a pot and pierce it where the cover is, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the sufferer gently inside, such as valerian, wormwood, anise, chamomile, cassia-lignea and centaury. All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in the pot with water over a fire.
Then put a cane or tube from the pot, and place the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it so that the vapors enter into the patient's mouth.
Then make them sneeze, as we have said before. If the assistant runs out of medicine.
And if it remains after this treatment and does not leave, instruct the nurse to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot infusion, then place it on the affected area, and call for the midwife. Once she has found it, have her grasp it gently but firmly, ensuring the patient does not twist during the extraction.
But she should move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull gently. Will come and will dislodge itself.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of coughing and herbal fumigations;
and if it does not work with all that we have said, be careful not to go astray when extracting (the humors).
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound should tie himself to the thigh of the woman and then cleanse her with ointment made from four ingredients. it will heal and reset (itself), and come back strongly.
but nevertheless, when it heals, if foul-smelling wind comes to the stomach and head, it will afflict the patient. So suitable fumigations are required for this:
None of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and menstruation is as follows:
And it should be similar to that of a dog, with the head placed above the fire in such a way as to allow for careful observation.
And the fumigation should be over the coals, letting the fabric smolder until it is completely consumed, then start another one.
Many children are born without the anus being pierced, instead having it blocked by some delicate membrane. So at the bath, she should pierce this membrane with her fingernail, and not use a sharp spatula, taking care that it does not touch the surrounding area.
Then place on it wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a piece of lead wire into the hole, leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go outdoors.
And sometimes this blockage occurs suddenly in wounds or abscesses; Thus it is necessary to cut into that blockage: Then treat as cured, just as we have said about the case of the tongue.
Fistulas that come from under the anus are suppurations, and swellings that come from around the anus outside, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or multiple.
And when this suppuration is old, it should be worked on, and still moist with white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And it is known to those who have experienced this through evacuation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and perhaps a worm jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee bone.
And thus one recognizes a fistula that perforates the anus, but not through it: and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and carefully push a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula if there is no curvature.
And if it is twisted, insert a slender probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
if you cannot feel it, nor does air or wind escape from any opening as we have mentioned: know that it has not pierced; hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the urine duct, it allows urine to escape, and cannot be healed by medicine.
If the probe has pierced down to the hip joint, then it is positioned correctly. if there is no twisting and the pain is around that area, then it indicates a bowed condition, and neither medication nor immediate dressing will help.
And for these fistulas, there is no cure but to work on them, and the foolish pride of surgeons who involve themselves with it.
In that which is not perforated and is not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on their back;
And lift their legs up to the thighs, and have their thighs bent towards their belly; Then insert an iron probe, or brass if there is curvature, until you know where the probe enters.
If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger, and then feel that the probe has pierced [the fistula];
And if you feel a gap between your finger and the bone or flesh, then know that it is pierced. If you do not exert pressure there, one cannot heal it.
One says that they can be healed well sometimes, but this rarely happens.
And the assistance provided is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously stated. Then push it fully heated into the fistula until it reaches its base. Do this twice or three times until you know that these faulty flesh bits are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then treat wet wounds with butter until all moisture disappears; afterwards treating them with an ointment that coats and heals the skin.
If he is thus healed, it is good.
If this wound cannot be healed in any other way;
and if the wound is inside and does not reach down to the bone that lies at its base, but rather there is between your finger and the wound a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula in what remains of this covering over the core; cut away from the beginning of the fistula and push back before the wound, then you may cauterize after so that it reaches to the head of the wound. and the wound will be released and fall out.
Then beware of these flawed flesh wounds which appear like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
And if the blood defeats you, flowing between your thumb and the incision, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined flesh wounds, and the stemming of blood flow and drying of moisture;
then treat the wet wounds with butter or crushed matter until the skin turns pale and the burnt flesh falls in the pallor.
then treat the wound of suppurating ingrown toenails with hardening dry medications.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes up to the anus, and is far from the body, put your finger in the anus and feel it.
If you feel the wound, and between two is the membrane or the skin or flesh where it is about to break, then have no fear that can be seen as a sign of hope and trust through one of these three ways:
where you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can treat it with tents and heal it as initially intended.
and do not go too deep, so as to avoid cutting the membrane that holds the foundation, and it results in involuntary evacuation of feces. then heal it, as we have said.
then heal it, as we have said. perhaps it will be cleansed, or you can remove this covering and clean it after being cut near the foundation with a tent or another pointed instrument. then remove this faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as you can. Study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula from forming outside of the anus.
Study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula from forming outside of the anus. If it were less serious for the patient.
And sometimes their fistulas form in this way: and it is when you insert a tent into the fistula, and it is situated by the anus near the skin above, take a perforated tent according to this form: ...and insert the curved wire into it in such a way that the probe follows this path.
If it is penetrating the edge of the anus inside, then remove the thread from that perforation, like you would insert your finger into the anus;
And draw the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, holding them tight to each other, and leave it for one or two days.
And restrain it at times so the son cuts off its limbs which are between them, and they fall.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not rupture, make it burst in every way you can, unless it is too deep. For it is not suitable to operate on if too deep, then treat it as we have said until it heals.
The form of the sharp-spined spatula that is used to make a fistula is very thin on one side and piercingly sharp. And on the other side it is not sharp, so as to avoid cutting what should not be cut; as you can see here.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: When they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, with some bleeding from them, and there may be one or many, these protrude outside the anus and at its head.
but those which are outside have little moisture, and even now or a little citron water or a little blood, and they have the body's colour;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers, until the fundament leaves them outside, and the worms appear. if you rush, and grasp it with the pincers or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
and if the pincers cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, and apply some hot powders on them in place of cauterization. Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat other treatments until they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, administer to the patient a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it can be expelled clearly. When patients complain of pain, and if the filament is far from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
When patients complain of pain, and if the filament is far from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. You take them with your nail or pliers and cut off the filament, then treat it as we have said until it is healed without requiring an incision by iron. It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread, and push it into a needle, then draw the thread through and pierce the needle from the other side, turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
Tighten the thread firmly, then tie a knot in it, remove the needle, and do this for all others, leaving one to drain any excess blood.
Then place on the base a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, instructing the patient to rest.
Leave it there until they subside, and once they do, treat them with ointment and other remedies until the area is healed.
dryness of feces or fundament Many times there is constipation of feces in the intestine, and due to the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is ineffective. You must cut away at the point of a spatule or with your nail the bark above it, so that it does not become damp. then treat it until it is firm as it should be;
and if it cannot heal, then start the scraping again more vigorously than before, until it bleeds a lot and is raw; then treat it until it is healed.
where there is trembling A formix is a small faulty appearance between the body, and goes deep into the skin;
and sometimes it strikes cold, and one feels it like a shivering death, and it spreads throughout the body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the trembling, so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around. Then turn your hand around the entire quill so that you grasp it all around the trembling, and place it perfectly, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
And if you wish, make this with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be hollow underneath and flat on top. Do not pierce [the skin], for you must hold it with your fingers, and apply pressure.
And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling, as it is explained in the previous chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one uses silver, or melted lead alloy for the cautery.
And sometimes one makes these small and large instruments according to their intended use. Those that are used in the treatment of children and for those who are weak and ailing are small.
Those that are used in the treatment of children and for those who are weak and ailing are small. The shape of the enema instrument is broad at one end, where the belly is tied in this way:
And if there is a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the intestine is pierced inside;
And it has two openings on one side, and only one on the other.
And let the belly or container for medicines be made from an animal bladder or parchment, pierced all around with small openings, and have one inch between each opening. Then insert into these openings a strong thread of twisted gut formed in the shape of an X or woven around it, and assemble the belly as you would a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to an instrument with a strong thread in front, then administer as a clyster.
and this is the form of the circle
and let the medicament not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the ministers squeeze it with both hands together until it is completely empty, then remove the clyster, and have the patient lift their legs to the wall, and if the medicament wants to exit, hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps for an entire night after, it is even greater help.
And if you catheterize for a bellyache, and the medicament wants to exit quickly, so redo it until he is cleansed.
And if the haemorrhoids are on the anus or there is an abscess, let the clyster be as gentle as for a child.
And this is the subtle form of the enema, on which the skin is held taut:
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the classification [or division];
and now we will tell you the treatments with your hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are inflicted, and where the wounds are located, as well as what has caused them.
The things by which wounds are made are by stone-throwing, and the cuts of a sword or knife, or of a lance or stick or arrow, or similar things;
or they are made according to the location of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, since they will be remembered in their own chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it's due to hitting a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn, and the wound is large; you slightly suspect of an abscess forming hot. Make it bleed just a little from the superficial temporal artery especially if there is very little blood coming out of the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of where the impact occurred.
And purge the patient of fullness from wine and fatty meats.
And if he does not wish to bleed, his flesh should be reduced, and let him drink no wine nor eat any meat.
and place upon the wound, if warm abscesses come forth, cotton moistened in rose oil only or in styptic wine;
and if there is no warm abscess, place upon the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and not moved by the air, a powder which I will describe shortly.
and if the air has moved it, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then they should be joined by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the abdomen, specifically about stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, gaping open, and only held together by a little skin, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats like boiled beef, wheat, cooked pork, chicken, and similar foods.
And if you find skin with corruption that has not reached the bone, carefully cut away all the corrupted tissue, and discard it; then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding and cannot be stanched with medicine, remove the artery; if you find it severed, tie it up with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and ensure you add this powder which binds, as soon as the flesh has healed.
and the type of powder is as follows: take one part incense; dragon's blood, two parts; galangal root, three parts, and finely ground powder, apply to the wound, holding it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
then bind it tightly, and leave it bound without loosening, if there is no swelling; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes one uses only quicklime powder when they do not have incense or dragon's blood, but the cold has moved away from the wound.
And if the burn has moved away from the wound, especially during summer, then do not put this powder on it.
but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, until it becomes soft. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture accompanies the wound, and it is minor, extract it with delicate pincers;
and I will tell you about skull fractures later.
On the neck wound:
If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant distinction between this and a head wound; however, if the carotid artery or other arteries in the neck are severed.
If it is the black part, there are no other means than to leave it untreated, and do not apply any constrictive measures, for it harms the bone and causes it to retreat. And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the nature of nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest organ.
but let the medicine be warm, just like heat washed in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and wax also washed in lukewarm water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist salves.
And if the wound is large, cut it open and bind with bandages; then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and hairy, and filled with worms, pierce them below that level;
and if the artery is severed, and bleeding ensues, uncover it, scrape it, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the windpipe of the throat is severed, or the heart, and the conduit remains intact, by which breathing continues, cut into the heart above the trachea in the neck, but do not touch the throat itself, only restore it to its natural shape. Then hold it firmly in place, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound has penetrated to the bone, then probe it. If there are fragments of bone in the wound, pull them out forcefully if you can, and for those that cannot be removed, leave it to become putrid, and let the discharge be eased and alleviated.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have described in its respective chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe whether there is any windiness coming from the wound when the patient walks. Know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind it to stop the blood from flowing out, and returning to the heart, which would kill the patient; But put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
And if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; Then there will be no spasm, nor bad heart tremors or strange breathings; And when you see favorable signs, know that the wound is healed. Treat it then with bandages and other dressings until it is fully healed;
And if it fails to heal, and there is continued discharge, then know that it has developed a fistula;
Treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, whether on the chest, arm, or back, treat what is visible first. If it is large, suture it.
And if it is small, use powder. If the wound penetrates deep into the bone and has splintered pieces, clean the wound, and realign the sharp ends of broken bones if they are disjointed. and if they are not removed, let the wound rot, it will ease the extraction.
and for wounds on other body parts, the treatment is as we have said before.
Rupture of the abdomen.
The ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small;
From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which requires the insertion of other objects.
And the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it requires more precise placement of the intestines, which must be done carefully.
Because the intestines swell when they feel cold, making them harder to place precisely, and for this reason, the medium-sized wound is better, as it allows for easier repositioning of the intestine to its correct location than other sizes.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific sutures that are common to other wounds.
However, they are more specific when it comes to the suture of the belly, and I shall describe each one and provide clarification.
I say that when the wound is small, and a part of the intestine lies outside, and it is easy to replace, it can be done through one of two ways: Or because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or due to the intestine being swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it this way: Moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, which you have boiled in sharp vinegar and cypress, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is gone;
And sometimes make this restraining wine, and it has been proven to help with swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or other liquids in which mallow and elderflowers have been boiled, for through this, entry is eased to little things;
And if nothing can enter, make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to cauterize the area around the wound, one must not cut it unless there is great need for doing so;
and these are the instruments to split or open it:
if you cut inside at an angle and outwards, and see this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have burst out, so replace them dry according to their natural form in their proper place if you can, for it is worth trying.
When the wound is wide and located below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head. and if it is located below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two halves, position them so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
And thus you must manage what I say for large wounds and small ones.
For small wounds use what is available to you, then with your hands administer merciful medicine that holds the entire wound together, and join its lips.
And this is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's width, then leave two inches from the head of the wound, and there insert a needle with good strong thread. And pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the siphac, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierced from that part, and join the two heads of the siphac together in fours.
Then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound accordingly, and leave one finger's width, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop until all needles are tied according to your needs, until the entire wound is constrained.
And use medium-sized needles, between fine and thick ones, because the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well. For this reason, they should be medium-sized.
And one should not insert the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sutured.
and then cover the joints with gauze made from needles, so that they do not wound the patient when asleep, and put a little tent or bandage over the joints of the needles to hold them in place, and leave it until the wound is healed.
this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires just one or two needles.
The second kind of suturing is common, and it involves bringing together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue with one needle or a strong middle-sized thread.
and when you have pierced these sides all together, bring the needle back to the starting point at the other side in the way one sews clothes.
And place a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of one thumb.
These stitches are for a man, and I stitched up a wound on a horse's belly which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was over a palm in size, and the intestines were protruding two palms in length, and the wound was located in the middle of its belly.
I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days; I treated him, and he was cured.
And the surgeon had judged that it would kill him, but this was a miracle.
And I did not treat it with any ointment because I was in a place where none could be found nor any medicine. And I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or I will tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
Take the needle, and push it from the outer part until it reaches inside;
when it has pierced through the heart from right to left, leave the tip of the needle where it is or rests inside after you have pushed it in, and make another hole on the other side from the inner part until it reaches outside;
And the understanding of this suturing is that you sew it just as furriers do with furs, leaving one side of the needle unthreaded and taking it up again on the other, until the whole suture is completed.
The second method of suturing, as Galen calls it properly, is when anyone does it by joining the two parts together naturally and applying one tip of the needle to the other in such a way that...
Insert a needle at the base of the nose, and pierce that spot only, and leave the two nostrils alone. Then turn the needle, and pierce it from outside to inside, towards the two nostrils.
Pierce each one from outside to inside, in two other places of the nose that are on the other side.
And this is the binding way, or suturing method, most commonly used.
Galien says this word, and they testify that one must suture the abdomen with two needles, each having its own thread.
And one needle must be pushed from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, its stitching is more serious than those of other parts of the belly.
The judgments about this wound are such as the judgments for other wounds:
And it is when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than moved by the physician, then reset the intestine and sew it.
Then apply the powder of burnt animal fat, and if the physician has moved it, then put some fresh ointment so that the wound heals. And bind the wound with thread, joining together the lip and the cheek. Then treat the wound like any other until it is healed.
And if you don't have any medicine, apply old cotton wool to it as soon as it starts to produce pus, and move it twice daily until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple.
And if you suspect that the wound may cause a spread to vital body parts, then it is necessary to wet a light linen cloth with tepid warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the groin and under the armpits.
and if he feels pain or inflammation in his bowels, which often happens, then cleanse them with a tepid black wine enema, especially if the inflammation reaches the intestine;
and pierce it from within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to treat than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
And if the wound gapes open, push it back like with the intestine, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and turned black or green, you must tie the black part so that no blood runs out of it, for there are veins and arteries within;
then cut what is between the tie, and hang the two heads from below the wound up to outside in order to ease its extraction when the guts fall out, and the wound heals;
On the rupture of the mouth
When the intestines are round and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I saw that a man was wounded in his belly by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which came discharges and flatulence.
I treated it as best I could, and did not cease to remove the pus until he was healed, and the wound closed up.
And when I saw it healed, I feared that the patient had an ailment in his belly. and there was no ill, but he remained in good health, eating and drinking.
and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up like this: take large plasters, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the plaster has opened its mouth, put it on both lips, so that it tightens its mouth above them;
then cut the plaster's head and this will hold so that it cannot be undone, then put another plaster after in the same way as before, until the wound is fully bound up; and cut out the wound.
These chiefs are applied to the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
Take the end of this gut string and make it very smooth, then tie to one end of the gut a fine flax thread twisted around it. Then insert the thread into the needle and pierce through the gut, then pull back up through the rupture.
And this method of joining is not false, but according to the way of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the major intestines, there will be no remedy nor health without great skill.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula," especially when it is covered and curved.
Fistula is truly a faulty hardened white knot, where there is no pain felt and it also resembles the quill of a feather.
And sometimes it leaps clear bowels, and other times thick ones; Sometimes little, and others enough;
And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh covering it, this is unless by one of nine causes: That is to say, due to the scarcity of blood or pus; Or because of its nature; Or due to the hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which prevents new flesh from forming; Or because there is too much bowel; Where the flesh is porous, and the material of poor quality; where the medicine is not effective in treatment; where due to the corruption being a manner of pestilence; where due to the characteristics of the region, digestion is slow, healing is delayed, and swelling occurs naturally; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and the treatments of medicine in this section.
Now is when I must inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed manually.
Know that fistulas occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that arise in major veins, arteries, nerves, at the anus, in the intestine, bladder, some ribs, the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; And so until it returns to its proper place of origin, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of quick healing, and there is nothing but work and ignorance [involved].
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you are doubtful of its cure, and you wish to know it for sure, then take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, insert [the probe].
And if the fistula is twisted, then search for it with a slender probe of lead, because lead can bend according to the twist.
And if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly probe it with instruments, then cleanse it by administering an enema through one of the openings, for moisture will flow from one opening to another and clean [the wound].
Then treat it skillfully to your ability, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and check whether it is completely severed, and carefully ask the patient about their pain when pressing with your hand, as well as where they feel it.
And once you have truly located where it is, whether it is close to a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the areas I mentioned, treat it accordingly as I said before, and remove the fault and corrupted flesh that lies within.
Then cure it until it is clean and healthy, and if the fistula is well-formed in a straight line, then you must treat it completely as best as you can. Then insert damp cloths soaked in healing medicines into it, pushing them down to the end of the fistula so that the medicine may corrode any remaining excess at its base.
and then I apply stimulating ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said earlier, and if the bone is corrupted by the ulcer, amputate it.
If a wound or tumor does not harm your vital organs, as we have said before;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove the affected area until all corruption is gone, then treat it with stimulating substances to promote healing until it is cured.
and if it is not healed, and becomes swollen again as before, know that you have not reached deep enough.
If you uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore its place.
And if it is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it. There may be another cause from which relief comes naturally.
And if there is a small corrupted bone that you can grasp with tongs, remove it with the appropriate tool for this purpose. If there are multiple bones, extract them all at once and leave none behind.
And if moisture hinders you, and there is no risk of harm or danger, then cut through the moisture, flesh, and bone to free it.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that causes rotting to the wound, and let it rot around the bones until then the bone will be more easily extracted.
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, clean only the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
And if a large part is corrupted, and it reaches the core of the bone; It must be cared for and cut away entirely until the corruption is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg caused by something within the body, such that matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, but there was no reason for opening [it] from outside.
But the doctors in their madness worked so much on it that they opened up the abscesses and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, with many apertures through which all the bowels and moisture of the body flowed.
Many doctors tried to cure him for about two years, but none of them were wise in the art of surgery, until I was called upon. Upon examining his leg and seeing the treatments he had received as well as what flowed from those apertures, I observed that it came out through the apertures with a strong smell. The body of the young man became red, and it had a yellowish hue.
I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, finding it rotten and perforated, with the rot spreading deep inside to the very bone.
I scraped away the part of the bone that appeared rotten, taking care to ensure there was no further rot beyond what I removed.
I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time but it would not heal.
Later on, I restarted the process and reopened the wound to expose the bone as before, finding that the rot had continued into it. I scraped this away too, then removed it altogether, but was unable to make the place heal. but I could not do so as I was cutting around one palm's width of the bone, and it was torn throughout all its soft part, then I restored it with medicine; and it was healed and joined swiftly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of my fear of death from him. For due to the blood evacuation he bled often, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone grew a hard tissue, which was well-formed and caused no harm or side effects whatsoever, either at present or later on.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way: take a cord, and tie it to the end of the bone that is protruding, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and put another thicker flax rope over the flesh above the bone and tie it tightly while stretching the head (of the protruding bone), so that you draw away the corrupted flesh from underneath and uncover the flesh above where you wish to operate without cutting into the flesh.
and place a red hot iron or a table under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh;
you must take as much care as you can to see and feel the extent of the corruption, and check again once more.
And if the bone is corrupted but does not open, and the corruption is either in the middle or on one side, you must uncover all of the flesh.
then place the red hot iron underneath, and then cauterize from one side of the corruption to the other, and let there be a gap along its length as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and cauterize the bone on the other side.
And if the corruption is present between two joints, there is no other remedy but to amputate.
And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it presents itself. Clean it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm the veins or nerves.
Know that there are many types of incisions and saws used to cut these bones, depending on the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, as well as their thickness, delicacy, size, smallness, and hardness. And for this, it is necessary to match each type of work with its corresponding tool.
And know that your work will show you the instrument or tool needed, according to your knowledge of this art and the signs of various diseases. Think carefully about the instrument or tool you require according to what is necessary.
The head may become dislocated either due to internal causes or external ones.
And when you have treated that ulceration with medicine and it does not improve, then you must amputate the limb up to where the ulcer originates so that the patient can escape death or the greater evil of member loss.
The signs are that the limb turns black as if burned by fire and it may become darker still. The ulceration can spread from one member to another and then throughout the body.
If you hurry to cut it, and if this is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as a scorpion or snake, and if the corrosion is at the top of the finger, then cut it there, and do not allow any poison to reach the hand.
And if it has reached the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not extend to the arm.
And if it has reached the arm, cut it with a knife.
If it goes beyond the cut, it is death, and no strong remedy can be given other than a quantity of its antidote.
And do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot: If it comes to the first joint, then support the other joint after.
And if it affects the foot, support the whole foot. If it goes up to the leg, support at the knee joint.
And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to leave the patient to die.
The way to support or set the limb is that you bind it above and below, and have some assistants hold one end of the binding downwards, and others hold the other binding upwards, and you cut away the flesh between the two bindings with a spatula-like tool, until the bone is uncovered.
Then cover with cotton or silk, and place a linen cloth on either side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and no further injury or abscess occurs to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
and I will tell you about what happened to a man with a sore foot:
He had a dark patch that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe, eventually covering the entire foot.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cut off his foot, and was healed.
and long after, the corrosion returned to his thumb, and he came to me. I applied resonant materials to it after purifying the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
and he saw that I wanted to cut off his hand, but I did not wish it, as I had hope of resonating with the material. and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die because the man's health was weak.
and he became desperate and returned home, then hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed.
And I have not described cauterization with hot irons because it is done differently elsewhere if there is need for it.
At no time should an abscess appear in the flesh, and remain so long that it forms a large gathering of pus; Then it swells up and bursts open, the pus escaping, leaving the wound raw like a hollow vessel; And the skin above it is as thin and delicate as fine linen, not extending down to the bone or nerve; such a disease is called 'ulcer', and not 'fistula'.
But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called a 'fistula'.
and let the skin be such that you cut this skin all around, especially when it is delicate, like a scarf; and does not care about its corruption.
And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cut it thusly with a scalpel:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowels that come from it have a foul odour, then administer an Egyptian medicine enema, which is made thusly: take alum, oil, and litharge, equally, and put it to boil in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take what you need from it, and mix it with water and honey, and flush the breast with an enema, and hold the aperture closed. Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing gently.
Do this several times until the breast is softened, and remove the pus.
And if you have performed an enema with ash water when this medicine is not available, and it is the case that you take wood ashes from vines, pour water over them, then strain them, and perform an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then perform an enema with water and honey where there is a small amount of powdered litharge. where you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the blood flow.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the flesh is well cleansed, then clean it with what makes flesh grow in it, which is a definite plaster made of rose oil and wine;
where you cleanse it with certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have described in the chapter on ointments;
and if the hole in the breast is small and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron instrument a little bit, and put in it some Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, cut it and leave only enough space for the clyster to enter, and if the hole that emits feces is above, close it or lower where it is.
And if you cannot cut the intestine as desired, arrange it in such a way that the intestine falls to its lowest point because when the intestine is perforated, do not allow any food to enter and if you cannot cut the intestine as desired, then prepare it accordingly. that the intestine runs slightly downwards, leaving nothing of the perforation.
that the intestine runs slightly downwards, leaving nothing of the perforation. and take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound, and place them on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound. then cover as much of the surrounding area as possible with a hole in the chest that is wider than the first, then place soft ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and apply it to the wound to ease the pain, and do not remove the large outer cloth for several days.
and the one on top of the chest wound should be frequently removed to alleviate the pain and inspect what comes out with the pain, whether it is poison or pus or blood or digestion, or undigestion.
and keep watch for the patient's pain levels and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in such a manner that you see nature emerging from the wound, then you know the chest is healing, and bring them close to health.
And then release it in the morning or on the third day; when you unwrap the wound, change to a new cloth and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poison lingers for a long time, do not despair of health, for healing is near.
For there are men for whom healing of injuries comes late, and others who do the opposite.
And if bowel movements become irregular after many days, know that the condition will not improve.
And if the healing is slow and prolonged, apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in nature, such as a definitive ointment containing a large proportion of vitriol. This will be the final medication applied.
Take definitive ointment, and make it with rosehip oil, mixed equally in amount with old wine.
Then cook it and make use of it;
And this same thing, when well cooked and thickened, is better without definite ointment present, or you can take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and powder it with honey while it's still on the fire;
Then glue it to a cloth and spread it over the chest, sometimes administering long-stemmed aristoloche and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour from vetch and centaury; And make use of it with simple or composite medicines: Grind them, make powder from it, put on the honey I mentioned earlier, then apply it;
and if the wound is long, and not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has reached deep, and caused pressure on the bone, or hard tissue, or ligaments. if the treatment of the fistula wound, as we have said before.
A panari is an abscess that arises beneath the fingernail or toenail of the hand or foot, or it may arise in other areas.
and when it is neglected and not treated, an acute abscess develops, spreading pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and may even destroy the entire nail.
and it causes corrosion down to the bone, resulting in a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the finger or toe becomes enlarged, with a purple colour.
When you treat it as we have said in the classification, and the treatment does not improve its condition, then you must cut away all that which remains of the nail with an iron instrument, and afterwards cauterise the wound. The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
And if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to pierce it, wounding it, you must place a needle under the nail that is piercing the flesh, pushing it upwards, and carefully and gently cut away this flesh, then apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all of it. Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away, and pull hard, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, healing is not possible.
And if you see the finger is corrupted, cut it away from us, as it is said before, then treat until it is healed.
and if he is wounded, and kicked, and feels great pain, then you must first treat him with a cautery.
cut the nail with a sharp spatula by slicing across it, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the flesh beneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, apply something that soothes it.
The two extra fingers that grow in some people's hands may be very fleshy, and sometimes there is also bone, and occasionally they have nails, and any of these can appear at the root of the knuckle or on various parts of the hand.
Those who are born with a stiff finger cannot move it, but those who are born with a bend in the finger might be able to move it.
For someone who is fleshy, the cut should be light in this way: Cut it at its root with a wide spatule.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: So you must be careful when cutting.
For the one that grows in the back of the hand, you must first cut away the surrounding flesh down to the bone, then cut out the bone with an appropriate saw, and treat it until it is healed.
The swellings that come to the fingers together come through birth, or by sudden wounding, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Thus it is necessary that you cut that suture so that they may heal according to their natural shapes; Then place between two tents or dampened cloths with rose oil so that they do not stick together; Or you place between two pieces of fine lead until the flesh is sutured as it should be.
If swelling comes to anyone's palm of the hand, cut this suture as is necessary.
Veins are open wounds filled with melancholy humours that come from many parts of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than others.
Thus you must administer to him sometimes purging of bile, and then heal with holy water.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that they cauterize it, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you raise the vein and draw all of it out.
The incision is according to this method: First immerse the leg in very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin, then raise the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place, or two or three places with a wide incision, then raise and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, until enough blood has come out according to the condition of the patient.
And then let it settle, and instruct them to refrain from meat, consuming only black bile.
Start the evacuation and incision again when the veins are full, causing harm to the patient.
The remedies for this are as follows: Spread the patient's leg, if it is hairy, then immerse in a bath and bathe the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
And if you have no bath, heat it by the fire instead and then cover the area above the vein from the knee to the head of the leg or underneath the ankle.
Then work the skin with an unciner, and flay the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch it.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then push the vein aside, until it is raised from the skin, and then cut it with an unciner lightly, then cauterize in another place above by three fingers.
then flay the skin above the vein until it appears, then raise it with a hook, as you have done, and cut it with another unciner, as you did before.
then make another cut, or more if you need to, then raise it and cut it with the finger of your foot, then pull it and lift it up until you reach the second cut.
Then extract [the wound] layer by layer until it is completely clean, then treat it.
And if you cannot treat it and lift [the skin], insert a needle through the whole length with strong double thread, tie and pull it, place some beneath the line, turn your hand on either side until there is none left; Be careful that it does not split, because if it splits you cannot treat nor lift [the skin], and this harms the patient.
And when you have treated the whole [wound], place on it moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil. Treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wound together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not sever it. draw it out as we have mentioned before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not slice but rather divides the vein.
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein; but let it be large as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein is entwined in the legs, in warm parts of the body where no grass or tree grows and on land that has no moisture.
And perhaps it arises elsewhere other than in the legs, and this occurs due to decay that comes from beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms arise within the body, engendered between skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then its color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outwardly, like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead measuring one and a half to two inches, tie it there, and leave the lead hanging from the leg. Every time exudate forms outside [the wound], rewrap it with the lead and retie it.
And if it is too long [i.e., the exudate], cut away a part of it and rewrap with the remainder, but do not cut it at its root so that all comes out. For if you cut it [i.e., the exudate], it will sink back into the flesh, causing an abscess and decay in that place, as well as a bad disease.
For this reason, it is necessary for it to be treated piece by piece up until the head, and not leave anything on the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated, measures five palms in length, or ten, and a man came to me whose vein emerged measuring ten palms long, and when you cut it, it ejects one ray of blood through an opening, and pierces down to the bottom, so that all comes out.
The matter inside it should be evacuated, and medicine promoting growth applied for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is very narrow, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or foot, and a lot comes out through the opening, so that one should not cut it.
Cure it therefore as we have said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh. This disease is called 'ox disease' in our land, as it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from member to member until it tears through the skin where it was, and dies.
And it is bred from the corruption of certain humours, just as worms, snakes, flatworms and Ascaris in the belly come about.
And one doubts its maliciousness because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and then enters the eye, it may destroy it. And this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and treated, one cannot resist but when it is seen:
one must therefore bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then press upon it and treat it forcefully, and if the pus is perfect within the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is to run into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming towards the eye or head near to it, then tightly hold underneath it the brow firmly, then press upon it, and treat it forcefully;
And you must use purging of the body with laxative medicine to remove harmful humours and avoid eating meats that cause putrefaction.
Of the pain that arises from windiness. This illness is called 'vakirir' in our land, it is a pain that afflicts certain limbs and can move from limb to limb.
And I have seen what I tell you. I was called to see a sick woman, she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And soon after, I saw it rise up towards the shoulder like a worm, more than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another.
The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, then spreads throughout the body, eventually reaching the other arm.
It then returned again around the body, as I witnessed it.
I was amazed at how it moved from limb to limb as I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before. Nevertheless, I had heard that many desired to move the pain from one place to another, but I never believed it until I saw it in this woman.
And I thought it was because the woman had a slender body and her veins were exposed, which made this trapped wind visible.
And it does not appear according to this reasoning for those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, bind it above and below tightly, then apply pressure until that windiness is forced back into place; burn the area with a cautery;
and if you cannot see it with your own eyes, treat it as if raising blisters, using foul-smelling pills, such as those made from serpent's flesh, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they pierce.
Their variations include some with large points, others small, some are hairy, while yet others are smooth. and among them are those with two corners, some that have tongues, while yet others consist of multiple parts.
and this which falls on any limb falls according to two manners: or in the principal member it begins, like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appears to you: you should be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many situations; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain, when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and if it touches the substance that is above the brain, is when there is darkness and stiffness in the eyes, and swelling and redness of eyelids, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and loss of understanding, and vomiting bile; And perhaps it exits without fire from the nostrils or the ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jumps out white moist wound looking like pulsation, and also comes out like burnt flesh;
and if these signs appear to you, attend the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is embedded.
The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty. and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope. Know therefore without doubt that death descends.
And the sign that the arrowhead has not pierced the lung is when there is no foam-free discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily and seek cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the abdomen, it is near the small ribs; It causes great pain and great difficulty breathing; And all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrowhead falls onto the stomach, perhaps something undigested of the meat comes out through the wound.
And if the arrowhead falls onto the belly, and no excrement comes out through the rectum, there is no hope in its treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, the urine jumps out and flows freely, and the patient feels intense pain; Know that the wound is fatal.
The other limb, like the arm and collar bone, throat, shoulder, scapula, spine of the back, ribs, thigh, and legs; these limbs are protected according to many precautions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man that an arrow fell on his neck into the root of the nose; I tried it, and I treated it from underneath the ear fat, and she was healed without numbness.
And in the game I extracted an arrow that had fallen into the fatty tissue of the eye beneath the conjunctiva below it. The arrowhead was embedded and could only be reached by its point towards the shaft, and the arrow itself was as long as a Turkish bow, with a light iron tip without barbs;
The eye healed, and no ill consequences befell it.
And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs;
I loosened the barbs, and manipulated it enough to extract it, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew out an arrow from a man, which was lodged in his stomach or abdomen, and I thought he would die.
and after thirty days had passed, it did not change its condition; I cut above the arrow, manipulated it, and drew it out with force, and there was no ill effect.
And if you see a man who has an arrow that fell on his back, and the wound is closed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and it does not alter his natural condition nor cause any harm to his natural functions.
And you see another man, who has an arrow that fell on his face, and the wound is closed over; and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many others of the same kind.
And draw out an arrow from the prince's nose that was lodged in it, and it had slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely bent.
I was called to treat it after it had been lodged there for three days. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I searched carefully throughout the entire nose, but did not feel it. and he felt a pricking sensation and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was due to the point of the arrowhead. I applied an attractive and digestive poultice over the spot so that the flesh would not swell; And the shaft of the arrow appeared to me.
And the shaft of the arrow appeared to me. I put the plaster on immediately, and the wound healed quickly, but the patient remained ill for a long time, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose.
And he told me about it. I applied a corrosive ointment to the wound immediately, until it opened up, and I probed it, feeling the tip of the arrow as it emerged.
Then I inserted a probe into the wound using that corrosive ointment, until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible.
Over the course of four months, I gradually widened the end of the arrow until it protruded sufficiently from the wound for me to grasp with a pair of tongs, and I pulled it out bit by bit, but it would not come free.
Then do not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took it one day with well-made forceps, according to that which its form will come in the end of this chapter, so that I drew it out, and restored the wound.
And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, because the book cannot possibly cover everything;
But the wise masters know well very little about great things, and on what is presented to them and lacking, find new work, and a new instrument, for the understanding of strange occurrences which happen in this art.
I say that arrows exit from members where they are stuck by two manners. or through the place where they enter, or through another part.
and the one that jumps out through where it enters, is an arrow penetrating fleshy parts, and sometimes must be removed immediately.
And if it does not need to be removed right away, leave it there until the flesh around it is rotten and the exit path has been prepared.
and also if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, you leave it there for a few days and move it every day.
and then it will jump out, and if not, you must pierce around with an awl until the surrounding place is enlarged, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body but cannot be seen, then probe all over it with a small stick. And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot do so because of the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, then cut until the wound is large.
Pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is attached to it on both sides as best you can, then break or bend the barbs so you can pull it free.
Be careful not to break the arrow as this would make its removal more difficult.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissue is rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, so administer that which we have said about wound treatment in this chapter.
And beware of incising the nerve and opening a vein, and set up means by which you may extract the arrow without danger, either soon or later, firmly or gently.
Place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that there can be; and if you cannot do so, then place him as indicated by the signs which the wound reveals.
An arrow which has entered from elsewhere or where nothing of it appears but the skin is swollen there if one sees or feels anything at all beneath:
Make an incision above it until the forceps will grasp it, then extract it. If it should spring away now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if she cannot exit, leave her be for now, then resume extraction until it's complete.
and if the arrow is in her bone, push it through the entire shaft.
and if the arrow is stuck, and you wish to administer pushing, provide a pointed instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters the hollow of the tool.
then push it through thoroughly, and if the arrow is hollow, insert the pointed instrument within to ease its removal.
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around it if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow is stuck in her chest or belly or bladder or side and it's close to the surface and you can cut there, then cut.
And guard yourself from cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, and finally stitch up the wound if necessary. until the treatment is clean.
The shape of the pincers used to extract arrows resembles the beak of a bird, as you see here: [image]
And there are many ways to do this. large, medium, and small, according to the amount of arrowhead.
The shape of the wooden wedge is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here in this image: [image]
There are thirty-one veins from which one can be cured, of which sixteen are in the head, namely: Two "herbech" arteries located behind the ears; and the two visible temporal arteries; And two veins which are in the two eyelids, which are called 'spirals'; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the nose; and the two glands which are on the neck; and the two veins which are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are called 'circles'; and the two veins which are underneath the tongue.
The veins that we commonly heal are five in each arm;
One is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side, and laymen call it 'the head vein'; The means is called "faste", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic [veins], which lay people call the "heart vein". And the basilic vein is found on the right side, and lay people call it the "abdominal vein", and it lies above the muscle, and it is through this that one is healed, as it clearly appears near the armpit.
The cephalic vein is the one that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
In the leg and foot there are three veins: One is located beneath the arch of the left foot, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein which is called "nesse", that is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic colds and headaches.
and the quality of bleeding is such that you raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth. then hold the patient's neck with a strap so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. close your fingers to your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, make an incision there.
Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein until you reach bone. Then lift your hand so that all of the vein upstream is exposed. Cut through both skin and vein in one incision across two fingers' breadth, and allow blood to flow freely as long as you wish.
Then restrain it and bind it tight until it is healed.
I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for long-lasting migraines, persistent eye infections and acute watering of the eyes.
The quality of bleeding should be as follows: And let the patient strain their neck until the two veins are clearly visible. He will feel the pulse below your thumb, and then make an incision there.
Then place your heart over the vein above your index finger, push the lancet underneath and lift up the vein and skin as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your needs.
Then release the patient's arm and place your finger over the vein for an hour before covering it with cotton. And then bind it tightly, leaving it like this until it is healed.
We have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of this book.
The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding of the cerebral [vein] for ancient diseases of the face and for migraine and redness.
and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called 'fosseur', of which this is the form:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or another object, and let out as much blood as you wish; Then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so that it is secure but not too tight, without constricting the entire hand at once.
However, the flames must not be too sharp; And let the wound be crooked, for the bone is close by, and perhaps it will break the flame if it is delicate.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples aids the eyes, and treats inflammation, redness, and swelling in the eye, as well as diseases of the face.
And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient stretches their neck by twisting with a cord, as before.
Then wound it, and let the wound be transverse, slightly shorter than the length of the flame, and somewhat wide, for there is no flesh there. And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it breaks;
Then drain out the blood until you have what you need, then bind it with cotton, and wrap it tightly.
Opening the vein in the nose is good for fever, sudden headache, and illnesses of the face such as migraine and facial redness, especially when it is long-lasting.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient should stiffen their neck, then strain their nose with your left hand, and take the delicate long flame, inserting it between the two nostrils where the vein does not open fully, and the blood will begin to flow.
and do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is quickly restored;
The bleeding of the two arteries helps with narrowing the throat, and in beginning of inflammation, and in many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and tumors;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient stretches their neck beneath one another, as we have said;
and let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein from the long side a little broadly, then draw out blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
Then remake it on the other vein, untie the bandage, and hold all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate. and leave it until morning, for the wound to heal.
The bleeding of the lips The bleeding of veins on the upper lip helps with glue in the mouth and gum corruption, and fissures of lips and nose and around it.
And the qualities of the healing process require you to have the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said. Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip, and the other is on the left; they can be recognized by being darker in color and having small dark veins around them.
Treat both of them and if you cannot recognize or are in doubt about which to treat, then cauterize the larger one on each side; do this also for the two veins that are above and below as it is a similar process.
Of bleeding under the tongue. The bleeding of veins below the tongue is aided after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it helps with narrowing in the throat, and diseases of the eye, and mouth ailments.
and the qualities of the bleeder are such that the patient knows to place their hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue, and look beneath each side for a dark vein.
bleed one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
where they are pierced with a very sharp, wide-mouthed lancet or a subtle olivewood one as keen blades, and it is called "anesil". And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open up narrow veins filled with dense, visible blood, and those that contain thick and cloudy blood; and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame:
it is more pointed and slender, and it is for bleeding the delicate veins where there is thin yellow blood.
The bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, aids in treating diseases below the throat, and in the neck, chest, and abdomen;
And the bleeder must bleed gently, being careful of the artery underneath. And if he strikes the artery, causing blood to flow out, it must be stanched as I have said; And one must not pinch the flame, but cut it like a thread.
And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must remove it, and change to another one. Or if you desire any ray of it, or you heal in its place the vein among the arm: It opens clearly And apply the flame to the thread, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of incision, it is necessary that you first pull out the arm, until you touch the site so that you recognize the pulse. Sign the place of incision, then bind the arm, and open the vein below with a knife. Be careful not to wound the artery when you see the place swell, for that is the artery. Avoid it then.
And if you see it rise upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery. Hurry then, and press your finger there for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. If the arm is bound, leave it so, and do not move the patient's arm.
And leave it to fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched, and you faint, and there are no medical professionals present, then cut the artery that is open, as it leads to the head. And staunch the blood.
And take a piece of fig bark, split it, then take one half and bind it firmly until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that's good. If it is not, then treat as mentioned before with powders that staunch blood.
And the binding is not severe in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The bloodletting of the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from both above the head and below the body, for it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And the bloodletter must take care not to go too deep, lest they hit the nerve below, and if it is struck and swells, the bleeding will be severe, and perhaps they cannot stanch it;
And this nerve often lies close to the surface, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must bleed it with a slender instrument; And avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make a long cut to open it.
The bleeding of the cephalic vein is beneficial, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
And it is necessary to bleed by piercing with an olive twig or a myrtle twig, for it is the safest of all veins, as it has neither nerve nor artery underneath. However, one must seek the lightest spot, and not do much harm if one misses the first time, and then begin again. And by chance the spot swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it does no harm.
The quality of bleeding depends on your judgment.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it should not be used except to preserve health and prevent future illnesses.
and let the incision be made on one of the three veins located at the elbow: that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic; and if one must bleed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
and one must bleed either the first or third day, two to three hours after midday.
The time for administering bleeding is not fixed but whenever required, day or night, at all hours and any time.
And one should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a pregnant woman within the first four months and up to seven months of pregnancy. They ought not to be bled who are aged over sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it is done, one must first cleanse the bowels with a light clyster if there is an abundance of retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful and superfluous waste from the intestines which are detrimental to the principal members.
One should not be bled if they are too full of meat or intoxicated until such time as these conditions have passed nor is it suitable for those who suffer from dropsy.
And if one wishes to be bled after suffering from violent abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, exertion or labor, lack of sleep and fasting and for those who have no strength left in them due to injury or illness...
Then subtly reduce the humours, if the blood is thick, through food, drink, and medicine, if you have the power.
Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin out the blood, and treat yourself for the pain around the third part of your body, as we have said.
And protect yourself that day from work, exertion, lustfulness, and similar things.
And remain still and cheerful, and have the surgeon stand higher than you when treating you, and rub your arm twice or thrice before he tightens the ligature moderately, for if it is too tight or narrow, blood cannot flow.
And then you rub the place with your hands until the veins swell, and they can be felt.
Then moisten the wound with a little old oil, and place your left index finger on that vein beneath the site, slightly higher than where you wish to make the incision, so as not to allow the blood to escape and cause failure in the procedure.
For there are veins that flee like cords when incised, and for such cases which are full of windiness, so that when you place the knife upon them, it retracts from the flame and cannot open the vein, thus it is with these. And if you open the vein too much, then the wound is too narrow; for this reason, the surgeon must be mindful of these things.
And if the wound opens up for the first time, it is good. If not, begin again somewhat below that place or above it, if the areas are not swollen.
And if the areas are swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. Perhaps there will be hot abscesses arising from this situation.
Do not enter the bath, then restart the incision if it pleases him.
And if the hole is small and blood flows out delicately, causing you to doubt that it will not come out in sufficient quantity as desired, then press firmly on the same hole with all your flame.
and work a little quickly, rather than when the flesh is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh swollen, do not reopen the wound, and put a little oil liniment on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is soothing in this place where the oil belongs;
and thus administer the oil liniment in every wound that you treat for veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same thing is astringent and bows when placed on the flesh; so subtly does the blood separate and disperse when it is too profuse.
And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when there has been no previous bleeding other than the opening of the vein this time or the incision is small, you must act quickly and apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the wound for an hour.
and after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, you should do this, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness appearing, then it will not harm them. and if you see this, apply something made from aloe or myrrh dissolved in calamint juice, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance occur at the bleeding of the basilica:
Put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft when compressed by the hand, that is a bad sign. Therefore, ensure you do not put anything on it that we have mentioned, for perhaps the artery will burst.
But apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Draw out the blood according to its quantity and the colour of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red. And if you see that it is thick, leave it so until it becomes thin. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the flames be wide.
For one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable to bleed them often in small amounts, and you must bleed by slicing across, not pricking.
And this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding lengthwise or widthwise.
And for one whose body needs bleeding, give them moist bread soaked in pomegranate juice. If they are hot-tempered, draw three or four times as much blood. If they have a cold constitution, feed them moist bread soaked in spiced syrup, either of mushed grapes or honey with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, well scented.
And if he faints during the operation after a great loss of blood, it is necessary that he inhales beef broth, and subtle scented syrup, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for venous evacuation.
And if he wishes to bleed out his arm, and operate another time, it is necessary that when he is weakened by great bleeding, he bleeds little by little according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm after the first operation, and has a strong constitution, it is recommended that he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding or after nine hours.
And if he wishes to bleed from another part of the body, it must be done on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and it causes fever. If one must drain a large quantity, then the opening should be enlarged until it yields in padding. Then ensure all the conditions for healing are right, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, so death does not come to the padding, and this happens many times when healers are neglectful.
And it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and make blood come out a second time, if the opening is closed, that you press heavily upon it. If he bends his arm, make him extend it forcefully, for this would be wrong.
But leave it until it heals a second time; Where you prick it with the tip of a flame, until the frozen blood escapes from the vein, put on some wool soaked in warm water, and press lightly.
And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then drain it from the same place, or from another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein between the arms is drained in place of the one on the head because it is composed [of two].
And the method of cauterization is for the patient to immerse their hand in hot water until the nails are red;
Then bind it gently so the vein appears clearly, then cauterize across its width, not from side to side nor lengthwise.
And if the wound is wide and it must be cauterized close to the joint of the hand, and blood cannot escape, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is in summer, do not plunge the hand into warm water, for one plunges it more often during winter than in summer.
And the incision of this vein is safer than all other veins as it has neither artery nor nerve.
The incision of the basilica vein in the right hand is valuable for all ailments related to the liver, and this is how it should be done:
Immerse the hand, and plunge it into warm water until the vein becomes swollen so that it may be seen. And if the incision is made lengthwise, and you cut across it completely, it will not cause any harm.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all beneath, denuded of flesh, and then return the hand to warm water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
And when you have bled from the blood as much as is necessary for you, put oil and linen on the vein to weld the wound, and do so with each ray.
The bleeding of the one on the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right [hand].
The draining of the spleen is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments in the thighs and legs.
And the quality of his cure is such that the patient soaks their foot in warm water and rubs it over the vein until it perishes, then binds it above the ankle. and the vein is in the ankle, and from there up the leg it goes very much downhill;
treat it then where the slope is steepest, or at the ankle, whichever moves better.
And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves which are beneath, and treat it across as well, just like when cutting.
And let the flame be gentle.
And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to the water, and let the vein empty completely.
And if you miss the wound the first time, try again a little above it, for the skin is salty;
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise for the other foot similarly.
The skin of the sciatic vein is found at the back of the ankle, and its incision relieves pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his wound is such that the patient enters the bath, and presses down on the ankle for four days by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
And if it opens, then treat the wound in all ways that you can, and traverse it. And it is better to cut it, for the skin is salty, and it is very sensitive for most people.
And it is better to cut it, for the skin is salty, and it is very sensitive for most people. And if you do not find it, then press any point of his foot which protrudes at the back or towards the small toe, and be cautious of the nerves.
Make sure to remove any blood that is flowing until you see it stop, then untie the binding and apply cotton, pressing down on it. She is now healed.
Cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass.
And cupping is done in two ways. Either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this cupping method that does not involve wounding is done in two ways. Where there's fire, or without fire.
and venting, which is done by striking and by bloodletting in fourteen places of the body, one being entirely at rest at the top - the head. and another is midway on the neck; and two others at either side of the collarbone; and the cupping glass below the chin; and the cups over both shoulders; and cupping glasses on the hips; and cups over both arms; and the cups for both legs; and the cups for both ankles;
and cupping does not draw any blood, only taking small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and thus it does not weaken one at all, unlike bleeding of a vein; and it should not be administered, nor with fire or without fire, in any illness caused by overeating until the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness cupping must be done, or for habit's sake, we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and in between at any time;
For there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have such heavy heads.
And for those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
And for those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and spit up blood. And there are those who dream and see blood, wounds, death, and similar things during the night.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is towards the middle of the month, we order that they be cupped after three hours during the day.
Bloodletting from the nose helps with the splitting headache that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuating all the body.
and this cupping is in place of bleeding from the head artery, and one must not use it for someone with a cold constitution or who has catarrh, as it causes them great harm;
and for this reason, one must not use it on the elderly or those with cold ailments in their head.
And those who bleed often become forgetful, so the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Cupping in the middle of the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and basilic arteries, and for this reason, it aids in narrowing the chest, and in splitting the channel of the lungs, and in coughing, and in fullness.
and it should be applied briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes loss of memory or stomach and heart problems.
The ventilation of the two collarbones is beneficial for head pains, eye ailments, migraines, choking sensations, tooth root pain, and it sits at the place where the basilic vein arises.
And you must instruct the patient to extend their arm fully for measurement, taking care not to constrict the artery and avoiding any excessive bleeding.
The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth ailments, such as gum infections, and similar diseases that affect the oral cavity. And it is located at the place where the veins of the two lips arise.
Ventousation of the shoulders helps with illnesses brought about by heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is just as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from those larger veins.
And instruct the healer not to make it too perfect, for the bone is bare of flesh, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the anus and diseases below, and it must be large and made of brass, requiring good traction; And perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; and it causes large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs heal evidently, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and relieve flowers.
and they are located at the two sophens, and the two ankles; yet they weaken the body over time, and bring about fainting in many conditions.
The way to apply the cup is as follows: place it first on an empty area, suck vigorously, put it quickly, move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears.
then incise, and put back the cups, and take care with the condition of bodies, for there are those who have tough flesh, and clear pores. you should only strike once, and make large wounds, with deep punctures. And suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice. The first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time.
And when we wish to draw out thick blood gradually, we only strike once. And if we want much blood, we often restart.
And if the blood is dense, strike it thoroughly, and finish by piercing the heart suddenly; this is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and narrow veins, you must oil the cupping glasses with an aperitive and dissolving ointment. If it is linseed oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil or cucumber seed oil
and if it is to heal, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
And if the wound has tender flesh and large pores, do not apply oil but wash it after the fomentation with rosewater, or cold water, or black nightshade water, or squash water, or china root water, or any similar solution.
And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar solutions.
And those who have excessive swellings should rise with old wine, or an infusion of salt water, or a decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar remedies.
and it is not advisable to bloodlet with cupping before the bath or during the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours.
and one should not sleep after cupping therapy, it is necessary to stay awake both when one needs to be cupped and during the treatment itself.
And take care if the patient is choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed; they should eat cold things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar foods; and eat small amounts of food, lean meat, and moist meats.
and eat small amounts of food, lean meat, and moist meats. And for those with a cold constitution, take honey syrup and drink aromatic medium wine, which is neither old nor new, eat little, and consume small portions of food, small birds, and pigeons.
and on the day he is cupped, he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some men treacle or musk once before or after the cupping to comfort their main limbs. and let the blood be refined, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
The cups that are applied without injury are those placed over the liver, and over the breast, podagra, and the abdomen, groin, kidneys, and hip, because these members cannot bear to be wounded there, nor is it done for anything but to draw blood from member to member, just as we put them on nipples when a child suckles;
to remove the viscosity from the member, just as we apply cups to the abdomen and groin to reduce the size of the member;
and it removes the pain when there is concretion or stone, as it perhaps extracts the concretion by its attractive virtue, or dislodges the stone from its place;
And thus it does when applied over the liver and abdomen in cases of retained flatulence, these cups are administered empty to simply draw out. Sometimes they are administered with fire and sometimes filled with warm water, as in cases of pleurisy, and one may fill the cup with warm water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The method of administering fire cupping is as follows:
It is two fingers wide and half a palm deep with a small hole in the middle, large enough for a needle to pass through, and it is made of soft copper so as not to injure the patient when applied to the limb.
And it has a metal bar running across the middle, either copper or iron, to hold a lit taper and there are various sizes of cups, large and small, depending on the illness and the constitution of those who use them.
For children's cupping glasses are different from those of adults, and those of thin people from those of fat ones.
And thus one should place this cupping glass on the limb:
Take the candle of wax or tallow and place it inside the cupping glass through the hole that is in the glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass and does not burn the patient;
Then place it on the limb, with your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, you can let out the vapour, and remove the cupping glass.
And take the tallow again as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
In the cupping treatment administered for pleurisy, it is completely hollow and has no tube or opening, and it should only be applied when it is full of water, and placed directly on the affected limb.
and its shape is thus:
Suction cups are not applied to any limb where one cannot place a cup due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And on the bare skin of these places if any, such as fingers or toes, and other similar areas.
The quality of use is such that when you find suction cups filled with clean, odourless water, take them.
and place them overnight in fresh water until they are tender, and have nothing in their stomachs. then bleed the patient using veins and cups, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches;
and when they become full and fall off, if it is a place where cups can be applied, apply them, because this is very beneficial afterwards.
If not, lift the area with ease, then water, very well, and then bandage it.
and if the area bleeds excessively after the application of leeches, dampen a linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
and if the blood has multiplied, apply ground vitriol to warts or similar things, until it is dried out.
where you place half of a peeled broad bean, leaving it until it dries up in the air will staunch the bleeding now.
and if you require more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach themselves, rub the place of fresh blood with a needle until blood appears and then put them on: immediately upon sensing the blood they will attach.
and when you see that they are defecating, apply a powder of aloes and ground sel or ashes on them, and they will drop now.
Here we have the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu'il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n'en lurent;
and for this reason knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found any good one;
and I know nothing else except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated patients and gained experience, and through the habits of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, showing clearly the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is necessary then that we state in the prologue of this book the main points and the chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains focused on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on both sides if nothing else prevents it, such as frailty of body, infants, or old age. Whether the weather is too hot, or far too cold;
Eat cold foods, such as cold porridge and goat cheese, but avoid any wine or greasy meats. Do not overindulge in too much meat that fills the veins with blood until you are certain there is no risk of a hot abscess or spreading matter to the limb;
If the patient relapses, return them to their initial management.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one feeds the patient with meats that have high nutritional value and are rich in fat, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, eggs, chicken feet, cow stomach, duck eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar foods. For if too much nutrition is taken, the healing process can be hindered and the fracture may occur again sooner.
Understand that broken bones in the elderly and frail cannot be properly reset or healed according to their natural drying process for limb recovery. Nor can those who are too young, such as small children;
But have no fear, reset over the broken bone with large clamps that grip and bring the limb together, so it is strong as before. And do not move it at all from its position, for this reason you must nourish with large pieces of meat, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways fractures can occur. For there is fracture that requires splinting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write.
For there is fracture that requires splinting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write. And if fracture with wound, and fracture with just a slight crack.
And for each method have its tools and proper instruments in the restoration, according to what memory brings to mind when needed.
And the bone is known to be broken when it is twisted out of place and obvious from the outside, with a sound when pressed by hand.
And when there is no twisting or sound upon touch, and the patient feels little pain, then there is likely no break.
but there may well be a twist, or a crack, or a small fracture. You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow here, and then hold it firmly yet gently.
And know that the fracture which goes through lengthwise, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together equally, otherwise hot abscesses will form there.
and if hot abscesses do come about, leave them alone for one day until the abscess is calmed down;
then set it equal to the stumps that you can find lightly and cleanly, and know that its restoration is easier than those where parts are missing.
then hold it firmly, just as one should do afterwards.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, stretch it out in two directions, whether it is an arm or foot, or with your hand if it's one of the smaller limbs, or with two cords, or with one cord and use your hand.
Place the limb according to its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are disjointed, you bring them together by all means possible towards their joints as much as you can, and be careful not to cause any injury or pain to the patient through your work.
Adjust the two ends of the bones well according to their best shapes.
Feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not yet aligned properly:
If it heals well, and is not held too tight or pressed so much that causes hot abscesses and contractions in the limb as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at the right stage, chastise the patient well so they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, or turning around, or in any other way. Ensure that the limb is well secured so they feel no pain. For when they feel no pain, it is not yet ready, and must be put in such a position that they do not feel any pain.
Ensure that the limb is well secured so they feel no pain. For when they feel no pain, it is not yet ready, and must be put in such a position that they do not feel any pain. And take care that it is put correctly, without any twisting when it is restored.
The qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs vary in size, length, and shape.
For there are small members, such as arms, legs, and similar ones: you should wrap it in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are larger, such as thighs and calves:
you should wrap it in a wide and firm bandage because the broad bandages embrace the whole large member and hold it tightly from all sides so that there is no slack.
then bind it with light pads, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly over all the bandage then go above the break and tighten less so that the breakage can move a little away from the break.
and soften the ligament little by little, so much that you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another ligament and turn again immediately onto the broken place.
then return to the lower part of the break and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first passage above.
then place between the ligaments linen or soft cloth, so that it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on soothing hot poultices that reduce the abscess and the swelling, and leave them there for a few days.
Then strain it over your sieves, and let them be half of a thick cane cut carefully, or of the wood used to make handles, or of palm ribs, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the sieve one places over the broken bone be slightly larger and broader than the others;
and also as long as it is necessary for the member, be it small or large; then strain over the sieves just as you have done with the first layer, then bind above it with thread accordingly, just like in the first layer on the fracture; the narrower part is above, the wider below;
and the thread must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be made of soft flax;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bindings with twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have more than two finger widths between each strand.
And if the patient is injured by the bones of the stars after the restriction in their veins, place beneath them pads of linen or woolen dressings so they do not wound themselves.
When the wound is accompanied by broken ribs, and the heart is ruptured, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not fitting to reset all broken bones on the first day. For when the limb is large, it should not be bound with strands until after five or seven days, or more depending on your assessment of the severity of the abscess that has developed;
and here is the method of ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains;
and it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and make this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of making a healing plaster for various fractures, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of making a healing plaster for fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take 1 lb of apricots, myrrh, nettle, galangal, asafoetida, and gum Arabic; then add 10 lbs. Myrrh and aloe, take 5 lbs. Alechil (an herb used for its medicinal properties), take 9 lbs. et in powder form, and mix it with egg white; if the man's complexion is warm, then apply this plaster, for it has good ingredients and quickly restores broken bones, aiding many men.
Another type of plaster that is useful for sprains: take mullein and viscum, 10 each; myrrh and aloe, 9 each; acacia, 6; armenian bole, 10; grind it well and mix with water or egg white, then apply.
Another kind of poultice for joints and bones that have moved out of place, it soothes the emerging pain, softens hardened bone tissue, and treats fractures. Take some new linen cloth, soak it in warm water and oil, and place it on the affected area.
This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good to ease a hot abscess, and properly removes pains.
Another type of poultice that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth-apple leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of a plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remainder of an abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violets' flowers, vetches flour, of each one part;
Grind them together, mix with wine, if the limb is hot, mix it with moist coriander water or plain water; and apply this.
Another plaster method stronger than the first one for when a persistent abscess affects limb restoration. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; And grind it, and mix it with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put a broken limb together to restore its strength with anything other than wax and oil; he also says it must be neither too soft nor hard but between the two.
And it seems to Galen that one must place on the broken limb, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another type of plaster that is effective for injury and pain: Take mugwort and chopped men's hair, or bird feathers, and viscum, and mix them evenly with glue, then grind these into a plaster and bind it.
And then you must undo the binding a little after, taking care that the patient feels no pain and that the bone has not moved out of place. Do not undo it by hand if dry. And if pain comes to the place or itching occurs, or swelling or restlessness is felt, then hasten and undo it now.
and take light fabric, and sea sponge moistened, immerse in water, then lift the area until itching ceases, and pain is soothed. then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry wool soaked in water or rose oil above, and bind with linen, until you are sure the abscess is warm.
and rest the inflamed limb, and pain should be gone, then resume gentle binding with a small amount of plaster, do not bind as tightly as before. and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has drained and the redness, pain, and swelling have all gone, and you need to use poultices and bandages, then start it over again just as you did originally.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes it is left for XX days, as seen, until the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh approaches.
Therefore, restrain it more than before, and thicken its meat, as I said earlier;
And if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come to it; Moisten it with warm water each time you undo it, every third day, and loosen the binding slightly;
Through this treatment, nourishment is cut off to the limb, and amends the mistake of those foolish surgeons, who reset the limb crookedly;
This is harmful, and such work is fearful; I see no other option than to leave it and operate correctly.
Many types of fractures exist, and they present in various forms; the causes are distinct.
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the shaft pierces and removes all bone down to the soft tissue beneath the bone, just as an axe or wooden club would do. And so this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Where the sword chops the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute".
And there are wounds from these two types of fractures, large or small.
And if there is embedded impact, or cracks due to stone fragments, or falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches the membrane beneath the bone or above it on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is as thin as a hair, responding to the bone with a small fracture, and thus it is called a "capillary" break.
and if the wound is made by a blow from stone or by falling, or any similar thing that drives bone inward, and its edges are split like those of cauldrons when hammerers strike them. if the stone enters within it.
And this happens more to those with moist or soft bones in the head, such as children's heads.
and it happens in all these types of fractures that small fragments are dislodged, like stars. And I will speak to him/her in his/her place.
We know all kinds of fractures through their deformity, and we inquire about them by touch, and from the corrupt flesh that is on top.
The resemblance of hair is understood by the fact that when you uncover the bone and rub it repeatedly, the black fracture appears.
In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's symptoms, and if you see no ill symptom, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, fainting, feverishness, chills, redness around the eyes, and other similar conditions in many cases, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no alarming symptom and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
And if it is in the summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane beneath the bone become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part as follows:
and that you take the sick person's head without pity, and uncover the bone in every possible way, and over the wound's surface as gently as possible, and if bleeding occurs upon uncovering the bone or pus comes from the abscess, then there is help for what must be done, and it is necessary to fill the place with damp rags moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess has healed, and be sure there is no further bleeding; Then start by removing flesh around the bone, and this is done in two ways according to their work:
One way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
And the second way is that you make multiple different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron:
and you work lightly so as not to harm the head.
If the bone is hard and strong, then you must drill around it rather than cutting into it with knives or iron rods, so as not to penetrate too far beyond the skull, and there should be a ridge or circle above the point, which stops the tip from passing through.
and you must have several of these, so that each one comes into place according to the type of bone, so that you have drills for all your tests.
and this is the form of the three types of drills:
The quality required to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced.
Then remove the drill slightly further away and repeat this process all around, then use the scalpels to cut the space of the bone that is between the perforations, doing so as finely and gently as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand or any of the instruments such as forceps or pincers.
And make sure you do not touch the brain or the sciatic nerve.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the remaining splinter with an instrument similar to a small scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other scalpels.
And if there is any leftover small bone or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments. Then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
The other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is more gentle. And press it very firmly, for this is his instruction. You must first expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped instrument; and here is its shape:
And do not cut on one side, as the blade is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edges face towards the bone.
Then strike gently with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane below.
If it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, as you can lift it without causing harm or fear of injury.
Et if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the marrow, and the bone is merely cut above, with small pieces present, you must smooth out this roughness, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you should have in varying quantities, to apply appropriately in each place according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-fine cuts and subtle fractures, you must adjust your approach according to its direction.
And this is something that cannot be fully answered by someone who has merely studied this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dampen it with rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another piece of cloth doubled over twice or three times, dampen it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. do this as lightly as you can to avoid damaging the wound, then apply another bandage on top without tightening it too much so that it only holds the cloths in place.
leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess is cooled down, then remove the bandage and apply medicine such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologist remedies, and similar things.
and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it immediately with mild medicines without any biting;
and ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment nor allowing any pus to accumulate, for when pus gathers on the brain membrane, it runs and putrefies, causing great harm to the patient;
for when you apply biting substances onto it, they corrode from above. Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
And if blackening appears only due to the medicine applied, and that it has such a property, you must take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and mix in a small piece of linen cloth, then place this onto the wound; Then let the physician proceed with treatments as necessary, until healing is complete.
Know that sometimes both parts of the collarbone are broken or just one, for there are two bones.
The broken end is cartilaginous and does not break further; it only becomes dislodged or twisted, then heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the collarbone's gap and align that break within your index finger so it fits snugly, then gently push from outside until the collarbone regains its natural shape. Do this gently, and wait for the patient to indicate no pain from your treatment.
And if the fracture is above the nose and cannot be properly set with fingers alone, you must put a stick, slightly thicker than a finger, equal to the head of the shoulder bone.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another just like it, and restore the first one as soon as possible on the same day, if you can.
If not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess is pacified, then place on the head of the nose tented linen bandages if the fracture is in one part.
Where you place another on the other side, if there is a fracture there; And let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some restorers say that one must wet the bits of cloth with butter, changing them every day. It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour paste; Then let the tent remain, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes goose quills are inserted in place of tents, and if there is soft cloth around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient blows through it. Or do as you wish.
And if abscesses form in the nose while you are working, put some wax ointment or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a piece of diachylon there.
And if no abscess forms there, apply an external plaster made of bran flour, incense powder, and egg white, then put on light dressings, but do not tie the quill.
If the quill's fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound, treat it with appropriate dressings and ointments, and apply plasters.
And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with tents, and place thin planks of wood inside until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured sideways, and there are no external wounds, and the fracture is only outwards, without splitting it in two, unless the edges overlap slightly inside, one may easily detect this.
You must, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger and gently push the broken part inside, then adjust it with the other hand from outside, ensuring it is aligned.
And if the jaw fracture is separated in two, you must administer traction on both sides until they are aligned.
If there is movement or a crack in the teeth, secure them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a doubled piece of cloth. and place on the cloth a large well-made star or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it as firmly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meat dishes.
And if you see that the shape changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed. and put an ointment on top, made from mill dust with plenty of egg or sesame seed flour, after you have removed the crust.
and put light woolen ointment on top, and if the ointments harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed. Many times it heals in three weeks.
And if a hot abscess arises, so treat it as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, treat it as long as no part of the bone has been removed; so delicately to remove it with appropriate instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Once you have removed all the displaced pieces and there are no remnants left, clean the wound, if it is wide, then apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
The forearm breaks in multiple places towards the front, near the shoulder, and this fracture occurs in three ways:
Where it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to reset.
Or there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And the treatment is as follows when the fracture occurs without an accompanying wound: have two assistants where one holds the shoulder with the broken forearm while... and let the other stretch the neck towards the affected part;
then place your two hands evenly on the fracture, so that its shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor conclusion (to it).
And if you need to further extend it, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your need; stretch and lift the arm, holding the sphere in your hand, so that you can evenly place the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out because it is too deep, due to that reason, the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow beneath their shoulder, and have your assistants push the shoulder downwards so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
Then adjust the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it misaligned, you must cut above it.
And draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut it with one of your incising tools. but apply the force beneath this instrument to secure the skin flap.
and it resembles a spoon, without teeth, and is as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and have two heads, as you can see, with one wide and the other narrow, just like the gap in the wound that was created when you drew out the bones.
and when you are confident of a hot abscess, cauterize the wound, and if the gap is small or you suspect a hot abscess, fill the wound with lint and tents according to its quantity.
And if a warm abscess appears, dampen a cloth with rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and uncut, is that you place on the bone a plaster made with mill powder and egg white, and put light dressings on top, and place a sphere beneath the pillow if you need to. Then take a very wide bandage, one palm-width in width, then place two layers of cloth on the dressings and plaster. Then take a slender stick three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs. Place the stick over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, beneath the healthy shoulder, and underneath the injured shoulder. and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the marrow has not moved from above the broken bone, then encourage it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them again.
and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their shoulder when they sleep, to raise the shoulder upwards. this lightens the fracture of the collarbone due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind their arm to the neck and do not release it unless some unfortunate event happens until 20 days pass.
then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and restrain them again, leaving them in this way until they are healed.
And it is restored most often within twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
For a broken shoulder
Soon it happens that the shoulder dislocates from its wide or middle position, and is not set back into place through touch alone;
If you fix it according to the shape of its break, and reset it following its natural form, in any way that you can;
Then put on the place powder of mill with abundance of egg, and light tapestries, and place over it a double cloth; Then place on top a wide and thin pillow, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is thinning of the pillow in any part of the shoulder, fill it with flax tapestries so that the pillow remains even;
And then hold it firmly with a large bandage all around, so that the star cannot move from its place, and check the binding each day.
And every time it softens, bind it again, and keep the star level if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side.
And the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this number of days is complete, you may unbind it, and be certain, for it is not light bone that moves easily.
And if a fragment of the bone protrudes before and pierces beneath the heart, they should do as follows: remove it and treat any abscess with cauterization, as we have mentioned for fractures previously.
Of the fracture of the humerus...
The foot is sometimes broken in half, but this occurs rarely. But it often breaks at the outer edge.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downwards and causes great pain for the patient due to a lack of alignment, resulting in shaking and trembling movements. Sometimes they vomit blood and one can see the ends of the bone through the skin, which indicates a severe fracture.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back, and you place a cushion between their shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and carefully align it evenly in every way possible, until the bone structure is as it should be;
Then apply plaster and fine cotton wool soaked in thin brine of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it with a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move; And wrap the bandage around the back in a circular motion, tightening it gently, and loosen and retighten every hour, if it softens, then tighten again;
And if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching that arises in the place, or pain or abscess, hasten and release it, remove the plaster, and address what has come up regarding treatment methods.
Then reapply the plaster, and hold it tight until it is healed.
Of broken ribs
Know that the rib fracture occurs only in the thick part behind the back and at the head inside, and it bends only because they are fragile. And one feels it well during examination with the fingers.
And the treatment is that you set the break evenly, as it should be. Then apply the plaster, and restrain with a splint if you need to.
And if the rib fracture tilts inwards, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, like a stitch, as the bone pierces the membrane. And it causes severe pain, with violent vomiting of large clumps of blood, which is an immediate danger; the old people have applied great remedies.
And there are some who say it is necessary to administer foods that bloat the belly in order to push the rupture outward.
We do not do this unless heat has already come to the abscess. And if it has, then drain it.
And some of you may say to put cups on the spot to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; However, there is doubt that the cup will draw out excess humours to the spot due to its weak suction.
And some of you say to cover the site with damp wool in warm oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the length around, then be cured by the treatment for pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing against the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument beneath to protect the lung.
And then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if hot abscesses develop, apply moist rags soaked in rose oil on the affected area.
Treat the area prone to abscesses regularly, ensuring it lies constantly on its side where necessary until it heals.
And also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will heal or not, take note: if you see their hands become soft, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or stretch, and when pricked with a needle, there is no sensation.
Know that it is deadly in many positions, and if they feel better when you move them and apply pressure, know that the bone's socket is saved, and the patient can be cured with proper treatment.
If a similar issue arises in the spine of the back and you wish to ascertain whether it is healed or not, observe if the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents involving the hands, and on the back watch for windiness and involuntary defecation.
And when he has been placed supine on his belly, there is involuntary defecation. And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to mount, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: if you do not treat it well.
And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is more trivial.
And the treatment is that you spread on it warm oil of roses or yolk of egg, until it is soothed;
Then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; And let him not sleep on that part of his body where he feels pain, until it is healed.
And if any bone becomes dislodged, it is necessary to cut above the heart. remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment and freshen the flesh until it heals.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', push it with your left hand's palm until it is level with the other hand's power, then apply a plaster and a bandage over it, if you need to.
then restrain it, and if there is any dislodged bone inside, take it out through the wound, then treat the wound until it heals.
Of the broken hip bone.
Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if so, there is no great diminution at the head. and while it is long, and bent backwards, and comes to the patient pain in place, and pricking, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, so that you are above the break; and feel where the fracture is and what its shape is;
and if the fracture is at the head only, make this fracture even, so that it has its natural shape.
And if the fracture is lengthwise or inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see this break clearly to restore it. And when you have made it even, put on an emplastron, then place a stick of wood or heartwood over it, and bind the fracture so that it does not move.
and place the space under the ribs, so that the strap is even. Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if hot abscesses arise there, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned. then return to the restoration, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident;
On the fracture of the shoulder.
The assistants are those located between the armpit and the top of the shoulder, and if they are broken, one must restore them according to one of two methods:
one of which is that you take one wooden rod with an average thickness, according to this shape:
Et tie the two shoulders with two bindings, lift them upwards, and place the patient on a seat.
Then throw the broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the armpit, and place in the middle a curved piece of wood, then lift something heavy where the ministers extend downwards.
Then place the splint so that it breaks evenly with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
The other method is to lift the patient onto their back and bind their hand to their neck; command two assistants to hold what is above the break with their hands joined together, while another holds below at all points of the binding, stretching each part as required.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, tighten the cord below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective positions.
And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, you should place one binding underneath the armpit, and the other towards the neck, underneath the splint.
Also, if the break is towards the neck, you should place one binding lightly and without force, so that the splint sits evenly on the spot and against the neck.
Then set the fracture evenly as it ought to be, holding it still if no abscesses come about.
And if abscesses do appear, don't hold it still for seven days, and apply moist woolen cloth with rose oil until the abscesses are soothed.
Then hold it still again, and the way to do so is to place a poultice on the fracture, then bring the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on their shoulder or chest.
And wrap it with a cloth, holding it still over the shoulder and arm so that the arm is held in place like a star, unless something prevents this or if the bone is displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the fracture, allowing one finger width of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to extend three fingers on either side of the break.
Then tighten the splints on top of one another, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, tightening them more firmly and less loosely.
And if you see the placement of the splints and their tightness, as we have said, during the work of restoring the broken limb, and you suspect an abscess may form due to heat, leave it bound until the seventh day, just as we mentioned.
Then inspect every three days the bandage, that no itching or swelling may arise in the place, nor nourishment come to the member because it is too narrow. If the treatment succeeds, as we have said.
And if none of these accidents occur, do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands resting on their stomach.
place under the shoulder a cushion filled with wool evenly, and check every hour during the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not change, nor the bandage become loose.
if it succeeds due to the virtue of medicine, give them the diet we previously mentioned, ensuring that their food is very refined. and when it begins to recover, let it be big.
It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be treated within forty days overall; and then it must be loosened and administered with baths and medicinal ointments to correct the position.
And if the dislocation is bad and tight, it may take one day or two months to loosen.
Of arm fractures:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," and one is small, being the bone that follows the wrist.
and the other one is large, which is below towards the little finger.
Should the large "foscile" bone break alone or just the small one, or perhaps they both break together.
When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing occurs quickly.
And when the large bones break, healing is more difficult, and the injury is graver than when they are broken together.
If it is only the small bone that is broken, you should slightly extend it and set it evenly.
If it's a large bone, you must extract it with greater force.
Place them on a cushion and hold the wrist of their hand higher than the others, with their little finger lower than the other fingers. Have the patient cross themselves over, and place a cushion in front of them higher than they are to prevent any strain or discomfort.
Then have your assistants extend their arms to the part below their hands or wrists, while another assistant is above them.
Then place them in an even position according to their best form.
And if it has broken into pieces, place each one back in its position; and if there is a piece missing that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision above and remove it as we have said before.
And if with the breaking of the wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, warm abscesses appear, so apply I cloth bandages made of rose oil and white wax, that are neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth bandages gently above, so that the warm abscesses are eased.
And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of the mill powder with abundance of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be closest to and slightly wider than the others;
And know that there must be six stars on the arm, in several positions: Whether the bone is broken in one place or two;
Hold tightly above the break, more so than elsewhere, and ease off as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; And let the cloths that are placed on the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough;
And let the cloths that are placed on the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough; And let the thread that is used to hold it be of flax, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And support the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any bad accident befalls the limb, such as itching which comes to the limb, then you must sprinkle the limb with warm water until that itch is soothed.
And let the limb rest without constriction.
Then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, or something similar occurs, address it accordingly.
And if you suspect that nourishment cannot reach the limb due to its restriction, it is necessary to soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until circulation returns, then bind it again.
And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
For that which is around it, then bind his hands to his neck, and keep the necks equal, and guard against movement and turning, and let him sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps even twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of virtues.
On the breaking of the hand
Know that the back of the hand and the knuckles rarely experience breaks but rather frequent dislocations.
And when the heel of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to know how to cross their legs, and sit upright directly in front of them evenly;
then place their hand on the stretched cloth, and have the assistants stretch out the broken bones, aligning them with the marks, until they are properly joined;
et put the plaster and the swabs, if no abscesses come, then place a stent according to the size of the wound. and wrap it in one linen cloth.
And if the break is around the edge of the sole, make a sphere out of linen cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot. then strap it with a long cloth and the stent should be made of soft heartwood as large as the sole of your hand; secure it tightly, as is needed.
And if the fracture is on the outside, it must be that you place a splint above and another below the broken bone so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind the whole thing around the hand, and tighten the binding between the fingers.
And if the break is at either of the thumbs then it must be immobilized as needed. and hold it with a flat surface, and if you see that there is a small straight stick to raise the broken bone, and do not move it;
and if the fracture is in another place, like in the index finger or any of the others, make it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after. or you bind them all together in an 'I' shape, which is better if they move, or place a stick under it, as with the thumb.
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and aid those who suffer from them, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and it is easily seen when the leg turns forward or backward;
And restoration is done by binding the ligament above the break, and another below it. And the patient lies on their face; then each minister extends their binding to their respective side equally.
and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, let one of the ligatures be towards the armpit and the other ligature below the break.
And also if it is close to the knee, then let the binding be above the knee, and the extension below.
Then the surgeon must align the bone with their two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if no abscess forms there.
And if an abscess does appear, let it cool down, then return to your work and care. The leash is made in such a way.
You must wrap over the fracture with strong bandages doubled in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and thread a long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the string up above.
Then turn the bandages back over the leg and thigh, put some splints over the fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly distribute the pressure, then start tying in a triple or quadruple knot over the fracture. and when you go further above the fracture, hold it less firmly.
then tie two threads to the ends of the bone that you have inserted between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints above them. Then return below the end of the thread until you reach near the foot.
hold it firmly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, ensuring no abscess nor swelling or other similar thing develops. and if it does occur, then untie it and address what has arisen, as we have said many times.
and if there is any fragment of the bone held within, it must be removed, as far as possible. and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and draw out fire. and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one must insert nails into it, as with the shoulder and arm;
however, the patient does not suffer any harm from this restoration.
And know that the thigh is restored in an average of 50 days, perhaps a little less or more depending on the diversity of temperaments.
Know that at the knee area there are few breaks, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a crack, or a hole, and this happens to every wound, and unhealed wounds, and one feels it well.
And this restoration is done by placing what is rounded in its place equally with both hands until it can be assembled.
Then apply a plaster and insert a round nail if you need one, securing it as required. Then continue with all the procedures we have described for other fractures such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; If you apply to each case what is appropriate for it, until they are healed.
On the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called 'shin' and the other is called 'calf';
And they have similar fractures like those that occur in the arm, and for this, the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the treatment methods are all the same. If both bones are broken together, it turns the leg from all sides.
And if the fine bone is broken, it twists forward.
And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible. And it turns downwards.
So extend it gently, place it straight, and bind the splints evenly.
But nonetheless, if the fracture is severe and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be less intense and more gentle. And ease it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side to another, and they should be as long as the leg from knee to below.
Then wrap two layers of bandage around them and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is secure.
And they apply one splint along the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and it holds the leg in place to prevent any movement, and properly done, it supports the fracture or wound.
and move each leg daily, to check for abscesses or other complications. heal it until it is fully cured.
Of broken bones of the foot.
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot, there may be a break or crack, and it can be crushed in various ways.
And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were trying to walk, and then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, pressing until they return to their places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage it on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small board with two curved ends, then tighten it to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that are necessary.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken finger in line with its length, and let it be slightly wider, then put under the foot that table I mentioned, and strain it appropriately;
And if there are two or three or more broken fingers, place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the table under their foot. And let it be stretched over the top of the table away from the foot's belly so that it holds it well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have said before. And treat each accident as it ought to be treated.
Of the fracture of the bone in the wrist.
When the woman's hip bone is broken, make her sit with her legs spread apart, then lean her towards her back part and hold her from behind;
Then fill the wound of the patient with cotton until it is filled up;
Then make the woman stand up, and lift her back bit by bit until the cotton comes out, reaching the entrance of her body, and the bone returns to its place along with the stool.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she is done, put it back in, doing this for seven days or so. If the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a goat's bladder, tie a reed to its opening, and insert the whole bladder into the body. Then blow strongly through the reed so that the bladder is fully inflated inside. The body will thereby restore the fracture.
It should then be filled with cotton and left in place for several days until it is healed.
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is fractured, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
These fractures are not hidden from one who applies study and practice to them, and reads my book attentively.
For the fracture indicates to many the right way of restoration: understand it therefore.
In the rod, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the rod; Then wrap it with fine cloths around, and leave it for three days therearound, and it will be swiftly healed.
When fracture is associated with wound:
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it's large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, to be immediately treated so that the wounds we have described may testify (to its efficacy).
And if the wound heals, treat it with vitriol to stop bleeding, unless you have other means, then restart restoring the fracture that very hour or day, provided no hot abscesses arise.
And if hot abscesses do arise, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about an evil event.
And if the broken bone is visible on an exposed heart, you must set it gently with your hands at a small extent.
And if the extension is not equipped to align with your hands, use this iron instrument which has seven or eight tines and is as long as the width of the wound; and for this the surgeon must grip three or four, according to what is needed in each treatment of a fracture;
and be round and slightly thicker so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and be sharp at the front, and thick in the middle towards the front, like this
And it is called a "palanche," so the curved blades must be placed over the head of the protruding bone; and push it in once until it returns and is even with the other one. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has a hold of it.
And if you cannot reposition the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool for this, either a chisel or a saw, according to your ability.
then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si do your best to ensure it is back in its place, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and apply it properly if that was the issue. and do not apply any ointment or other oily substance to the wound, as it will cause it to become infected and corrupt.
Then apply stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered. Cover it all around with a bandage according to the size of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the broken area.
and often these foolish surgeons have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases. And the constriction should be looser and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear an adverse event may occur as we have stated, and you find pain at the site, it should not be treated with stellar [astrology] remedies. but wrap around it, instead of using stars [astrology], hard rags, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is swelling again, remove what you have put on it previously and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
And you should loosen the limb twice daily, in the morning and at dusk, until it is fused and healed.
And the limb should be bandaged in such a way that the swelling flows downwards gently.
And if after many days it does not heal but swells again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must examine the wound with a probe and remove all these troublesome pieces causing this pain.
And if a fistula forms at that spot or some other kind of infection develops, you must treat it according to what he said in his previous chapter.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on a limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not draw it [the wound] out, for many times death follows, but leave it until it rots.
Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall out by itself, then treat the wound if you are able to.
And if you cannot, then leave it.
We often encounter the healing of fractures, especially when they are near the joints, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the appearance of the affected limb. And sometimes the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Take care then if it is fresh for us. If you administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, as well as sarcocolle, alum, and similar substances, in whichever of these things you choose or use them all together, and mix it with a styptic wine or egg white or isinglass. and place them on a cloth with pads, and hold it tight, and do not release for two days.
and place them on a cloth with pads, and hold it tight, and do not release for two days. then remove the first bandage, and start another one, until the inflammation is gone.
or you bind it onto a well-made wooden board; because the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the inflammation has already hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed, scrape away the top layer, and expose the excess. or you reduce it with a scraper until it is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
Of the limb which is weak after recovery
When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: because one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bandaged as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing the nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bloodletting; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or due to having little blood in their body, they become weak.
And the treatment is for you to have the patient eat, and make their body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within them; and administer it well, and give him joy and permission;
then apply pitch onto the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great nourishment, and irrigate it often with warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
Of a twisted limb after the sanctity. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is evidently broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a foolish doctor has done this in our land;
and these procedures are blamed for causing great harm, often resulting in death;
However, if the nodules and torticollis are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or softened herbs that have been cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, roots, and honeysuckle, and similar things.
Make a softening plaster, such as well-made daisy plaster, and take the juice of marshmallow, mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply this plaster on top.
Alternatively, take fatty figs, grind them with colander husk, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. Let there be gentle movements to the limb every hour.
If the torticollis is old and hardened like stone, requiring removal with an iron tool, it should be cut down to the bone using a delicate and light knife. and apply a compress and devote attention to their care.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, you must reset it immediately without delay.
For if one delays, the joint will swell, and perhaps it may be reset painfully into its place;
due to which one should not move it at the hour when it is swollen: often causing infection and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them be until the abscess subsides;
then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to foot.
Often it happens that jaws are dislocated on both sides, and dislocation of both occurs in two ways: where they are slightly moved from their places, and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, and hang downwards, and the saliva falls from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his speech is slurred.
When a dislocation is minor, one can recover through many treatments.
And if it is complete and perfect, then you must reset it promptly, and not delay;
and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes their finger from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides; And the other fingers of the hands shall be bent outwards, to make them equal.
And instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions. The assistant should apply equal pressure until it returns to its place.
And if it is badly dislocated, especially if both jaws are involved, bathe them with hot water and oil until they can be gently reset.
Do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed with softened gums, apply moist lint dressings in a soft ointment made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft cords.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulder extended between two pillows so that they cannot move it to the right or left, and do not try to bend it. They should eat lightly until the pain is gone, and keep their jaws clenched shut.
Then let them eat whatever they want lightly, and do not strain themselves by opening their mouth too wide when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper place within an hour, and they do not return to their correct position, fevers and persistent soreness will occur, and possibly violent purging, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, know that it is ruinous; and many times the person dies within nine days.
The fork cannot be dislocated from the inside, along its length or at the base; and is sometimes dislocated outwards, which can easily be felt.
And the recovery process is as follows: let the patient lie frequently on their back with their arms outstretched; and then press the place hard with your palm, and it will return
then apply the plaster and bind it tightly;
and if the shoulder is facing towards the knife, it cannot be reset; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place as we have said;
then put on the plaster and bind it, securing it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
in the same way, reset the shoulder blades when they have dislocated from their place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n'est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:
Of which one is that it dislocates to the part of the socket below and the second [dislocation] is at the part of the shoulder blade; and by chance dislocates above, and this occurs rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves;
and often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it easily falls through to the bone.
in those who have sufficient flesh, it falls [dislocates] slowly and returns slowly.
And occasionally it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it has dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain. And then begin the treatment.
And it is understood that dislocation occurs when the arm falls towards the shoulder blade, and there is a notable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find an evident disparity between them. and you will find a hollow at the shoulder head, and beneath the shoulder blade up to the neck is like an egg. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move in any way.
and if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it evident at the neck.
and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new or the patient is young.
And the procedure is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then places your palms underneath the armpit, and forcibly lifts the dislocated joint upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upward, then places it underneath; thus will come numbness.
And if it does not come about as we have said with hands exposed afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the minister applies soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, to be applied accordingly;
then the patient is turned onto their back, and a block of even wool, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath their armpit, then place the heel of their foot on the block, lift the head of the virtuous shoulder, and pull the patient's hand;
and another minister holds the patient's head, so it does not move downwards. this shoulder returns immediately, and if you see that it resets following this method:
and have a man who is larger than the patient be present; and he should stand straight facing the patient's side, and push their shoulder from under the armpit of the patient, lifting the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air. another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, you may use something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is also reset in another way:
And one fixes a long stake into the ground, so that the head is as round as a pistol, and it should not be too thick nor too thin. Then one should be placed underneath the patient, but let them have soft blankets on top, and the patient must be extended along the length of the stake.
Then one must stretch their arm downwards on the other side in such a manner that the joint will return to its place gradually.
And if it does not wish to go back into place due to all the things we have said, then do this treatment: Take a stake two arms lengths long and four fingers wide which has a rounded head so that you can insert it perfectly beneath the shoulder blade according to this shape:
Then place over his head a soft linen cloth so that it does not hurt the patient, then put it underneath the armpit of the patient;
and extend his arm onto the long side of the log, and tie the shoulder joint to the log, and the arm to the head of the patient, then place the arm on a plank from an upright ladder, and let the hands be extended downwards, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the dislocation has returned again now.
And when it is thus, in whatever way, you must put under the bedstead a woollen pad of equal size, then apply the plaster prepared with flour of mill, together with incense and egg white, over the whole shoulder and around it; then strain the binding under the bedstead suitably, and turn the bandage back upon the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And ensure that he moves little, so that the limb may be comfortable, for it will heal sooner;
and then let him move more after five or seven days, and set the limb again; And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has entered it or for another reason, you must apply cauterization to three openings, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all that, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched, or weakened. and understand that the joint will never be properly fixed in place.
The dislocation towards the armpit, breasts, or back is caused by a thrust and stretching of the hands, and another remedy should be administered there.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if after the healing process the member becomes cracked and moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until this cracking is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
On the dislocation of the neck
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated to a small degree, and it returns in the same way;
And if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for it can be seen clearly and felt well; And reset according to each particular case. And when you join the sick person's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is separated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
And you must reset it even if there is an abscess present, for if the abscess occurs, it would make reduction difficult;
and perhaps it cannot be fully reduced from end to end, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even more pain, and perhaps death may result.
And the restoration is as follows when it can be reduced: extend your hand to their two hands; And let his arms be spread out, with the hands of the patient placed mirror-like according to the cut around, above and below, then push the joint towards the armpit or the palm root until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press firmly on the root of the damaged palm's wrist.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
and make two ministers extend the arm, and let two ministers bend it, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, then wrap it with a double-folded long and wide cloth;
and when the mirror has joined the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns;
When it is in place, apply dry poultice with egg white on top, press firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck; leave it for a few days, then remove it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, unbind the bandages and leave it alone.
If you see that the joint is not well-bound, restart with the poultice and bandages, leaving it for a few days until it is firmly in place. Then remove the bindings.
And if the patient feels a tearing sensation after the joint is reset and it moves again, bathe them and massage gently, pressing until they feel relief. Where you put on the joint a sheep's fat pad, then leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put back the fat pad, and have him enter the bath again; And do this twice or three times until he is healed;
And if you see pus, put on moist warm cow dung mixed with butter, and keep it on top;
It will return to its normal position.
The dislocation of the hand
The wrist dislocated, and its recovery is light, lighter than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset immediately to its place of origin, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the area becomes swollen or an abscess forms there.
And the resetting is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, having your assistants stretch out the limb, and ensuring it is aligned correctly, so that you place their palm over the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Nevertheless, one must check that it is indeed in place; Then have the patient put the back of their hand on a table, both during extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient put the back of their hand on the table, and place your hand over that joint's area.
If it stays in place now, that's good. If this is not done, strain the emollient plasters to soothe hot abscesses, and leave them be without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after a few days, the joint remains twisted;
and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerve or artery has been severed;
if there is no other way to grasp it except by cauterizing around the case, and perhaps nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned, then strain it and leave for five days, then release and leave as such.
And if it cannot move well, and there is any injury, then bathe it in warm water, and rub until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand dislocate in every direction, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly;
Thus stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
Leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day;
Bind it at night as we have said, unbind it during the day, make it move, and bind it again at night;
Do this often until it is narrow, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and act as you have done before, until it is healed;
And do likewise when it is dislocated in any other place.
Of dislocation of the spine from the back
When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment, as death comes swiftly to the patient.
And its signs are that the evacuations come out without wanting it, nor can she hold them in, and many times certain members are softened, or the two thighs or both arms or one.
And many times the spine is dislocated into four parts.
that which is displaced to the rear is called "crookedness".
the treatment is that you must wait if it came from childhood. there is no cure or healing for it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment say there is little benefit in all of it.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have designed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the case of curvature which occurs at the foot in front, no one knows its cause nor its treatment;
And also that which occurs directly on two sides, and it cannot be treated except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face in an equal place, and have a strain beneath them, so they do not get hurt;
Then fix one iron rod firmly in the ground at the head and another at the feet, and tie a cord beneath the joints of the patient, and another to the hips, knees, and ankles;
And have two assistants hold the bindings, one on the head and the other on the feet, between the two firebrands.
And ensure they are well secured, the firebrands as we have stated, and let the physician place their palms on the spine firmly, until it returns to its proper position.
If it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms-length long, and place it under the patient's side, let the patient lie on their side with their head resting on the board, then put the middle of the board on the spine. And let the physician place their feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its proper position.
and if you see this, make him turn his hand over. and put two red-hot irons on the patient's head for a long arm, and towards their feet another two, with each iron being separated by about one palm's length.
and have one hole in each iron where the pivot goes, and let these irons be firmly planted so they don't move.
and between each pair of irons put one turning iron, upon which the pivots turn, and have two small irons about a palm's length to turn the pivot.
then bind the pivot which is among the handles to the pivot towards the head, and another binding from the feet to the other pivot, each of the assistants turns their own pivot with all their strength, while the master keeps the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, then some swabs, and finally the stem of a tablet three fingers long to treat the area of curvature and the healthy part of the spine. Then bind it with a bandage as we have said, using subtle nourishment for the patient until healing occurs;
and if any issue arises at the end of treatment, administer softening and soothing medications along with the stem we mentioned earlier; and sometimes it is administered in one piece of lead, and at other times the appearance arises in the lower spine of the back, which people believe to be a case of dislocation; and this is the bone which appears, for this reason one must not presume: may cause death to come upon you.
Know that only the joints of the hip and shoulder are subject to dislocations, not any other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and especially inside, or rather dislocated forward and backward.
The knowledge of its internal dislocation is as follows: when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their sick knee to the fire. And it is the place next to the swollen abscess that is hot, because the hip joint has come loose there.
And the sign of him for whom it happens in reverse is that this affliction stands contrary to what came before.
And for the signs of the one who is about to experience this in front, it is that he stretches his leg well according to its course. However, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot forward, and retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he goes, he steps on his heel.
And the signs of him who has it behind are such that he cannot bend his knee or double up, and one leg is more twisted than the other, the groin is softened, and the shoulder head is in place under the ribs.
The remedy for this type of dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, there is no treatment. And one must not have any presumption about it.
And for the one with fresh dislocation, which has four types of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left; By chance, it may return to its place, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return with this method, you must prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg vigorously by hand, or bind it with a ligature above the knee. Another assistant should extend their hand above in such a way that they press their hands under the patient's armpits, then bind them tightly with a ligature around the thigh. Another should hold the head of the ligature.
and they extend upstream and downstream all at once, such that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been corrected, as we have said, it is good.
If not, it's necessary to apply treatment in a similar manner.
When the dislocation is on the inside, you must place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh and the part below the groin, stretching the bandage upward towards the groin and towards the hip;
Then have another attendant take his arms and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, stretching it outwards forcefully. It will return to its place immediately.
And this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in this way as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bond above the heels and below the knees, keeping the injured leg extended twice more than the other.
Then be hung above from a post, and be raised above the ground two arms in length;
Then command one attendant to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another attendant be suspended with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns now forcefully.
And when the dislocation is outward, let the patient lie as we have said for one with curvature, and bind the soft bond above the injured leg properly, and also above the foot;
Then place two red-hot irons, one on the head and another at the feet, then insert a red-hot iron between the thighs of the patient in this position. Cover it with wet bandages so as not to scorch the patient, then stretch each assistant toward him, and have the assistants mirror the position of his hand at its dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place [the patient] on a board, i.e. a plank, and press them as we have described for 'gilbosse', and let the patient lie on their sound side.
And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the afflicted leg until it reaches its full length, according to what I have said. And have the assistants place their weight on the afflicted limb, then push with one hand and stretch downwards towards the knee with the other.
And if the dislocation is outward, one should not stretch the patient downwards nor lift them off of the ground. Instead, they must be positioned as if their hip were dislocated outwards, just as we have described placing a person with two dislocated hips on their back. And place it on his face, with the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must apply pressure to the joint against the board. And it will be effective when the patient extends their legs, and they are even in length. Then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and use a bandage to hold it tight so that the hip does not move. And let him rest for three or four days, then untie the bandage, and apply more plaster on top.
And if you see that they are even in length, bind it as before, and leave him like this for another three days.
Then untie it, and have him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated according to three ways: That is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and behind;
It does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, know that they are dislocated.
And the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot upon your feet.
Then take their kneecap in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply. and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he flexes his leg lightly at his thigh;
put the plaster on top, and make him stretch his leg towards his thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it;
and the patient should not exert himself to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not aligned, apply strong traction, as we have mentioned in the treatment of hip injuries, until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the heel...
The heels may be partially or fully dislocated, internally or externally...
And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the side where it is dislocated:
the reset is gentle, and it should be gently extended with the hands when he is only slightly moved.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold them by the leg above the ankle;
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then to the left twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot gently upward;
Do this twice, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot each time;
If it stays in place, that is good;
But if not, start the process again, for it will return;
And if it cannot be done that way, then have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and firmly fix a forked stick into the earth between their thighs, then wrap the cloth around them to avoid injury;
Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or use rope to tie it above the ankle; Then each minister should extend equally, and the stick is placed between the patient's thighs to hold them in place as they are extended.
Next, have the lead surgeon grasp the dislocation evenly with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy leg underneath; the dislocation will then return under pressure.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and swabs on top, bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg; ensure the ligaments above the ankle are not too tight.
Leave it for two or three days, and if the bond softens, then strain it.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days. And if they move before this period is over, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
If an abscess forms here, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
Twice. When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without work, and this is a minor thing.
If the dislocation is in any of the back or foot joints, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a straight chair, and place your foot on what appears to be the affected jointure, then press hard with your foot until it returns.
And when it is even, and nothing appears to be wrong, place underneath the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then strain it hard, and leave it for three days, then untie it. And let him rest until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together.
When a wound occurs along with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
Be not presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you lack compassion, mercy, and patience.
Employ at the outset soothing remedies for abscesses first, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery. And when you see some hope for the patient's recovery, then reset this limb now even if hot abscesses form there.
When the limb is replaced, administer soothing things for hot abscess, and treat the wound as required with drying ointments.
And if the dislocation involves a fracture with small broken bones, remove them, and do as we have said for simple injuries.
Beware of entering a state of fear as I have mentioned, for this is worthy according to your Creator and for the well-being of your arm and body.
