After I have completed for you, O sons, this book which is the last of medical knowledge with its complement and reached the end of it through its explanations and declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is part of operations, that is surgery by hand.
Because surgery by hand is prostrated in our region and time, entirely lacking until perhaps its knowledge has perished and its trace has been cut off, and there remain from it only brief descriptions in ancient books which have been altered by hands: and error and hesitation have befallen them, until their intentions were closed and its sight was prolonged. It seemed good to me to revive it with the ordering of this Treatise according to the way of position and declaration and abbreviation, and that I may come with the forms of instruments of cautery, and others, making clear through addition declarations, and hastening what is necessary.
The reason why there is not found a good craftsman of it with his hand in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and its author must exercise himself before that in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated until he knows the joints of members and their forms and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and their number and their exit and pulsating veins and quiet ones and the places of their exit.
And on account of this Hippocrates said that "a name with a name is much, but with work it is little," especially in the art of hand.
But we have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid falling into error which kills men, as I have seen many of those who are formed in this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
Which means that I saw a foolish physician incise an ulcerous boil on a woman's neck and he cut some arteries there so that blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who undertook to remove a stone from a man who had had it for many years, and the stone was large.
So he approached him and removed it along with a piece of bladder.
Whereupon the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had been summoned to remove it; and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I deemed that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving payment from a certain Duke of our land on account of his medical skill; and there happened to be an accident involving a black eunuch who was with him, namely a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the physician, in his ignorance, hurriedly set the fracture upon the wound with bandages and splints tied tightly together, not allowing the wound to breathe.
Then he dismissed him according to his wishes.
Afterwards he let him go for a few days and commanded him not to untie the bandage; and thus it remained until gangrene set in on his leg and foot, and he met his ruin.
Therefore I was summoned to him, and I hurriedly untied the bandage; and tranquility followed, and he was delivered from his pains.
However, the corruption had already become established in the limb, and I could not prevent it.
Therefore the corruption spread throughout the limb until he died.
And I saw another physician who pierced an ulcerous cancer, and after a few days it became worse until its wickedness was increased with the death of his master.
Which means that when a cancer is pure and from melancholic humor, then it is not permissible to touch it with iron at all unless it is on a member which can bear amputation so that the whole of it may be removed.
And therefore, O Son [of man], it is necessary for you to know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely, the operation with which recovery is associated; and the operation with which there is danger in many dispositions. And I have already pointed out in every place of this book where an operation comes about that has fear and trembling.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious about this [operation] and to conceal it: so that fools may not find a way to speak and dishonor it.
Therefore, take measurement with care and protection, and your patients with ease and firmness, and use the better path leading to health and commendable success by the grace of God: and leave behind terrifying illnesses difficult to heal, and remove from yourselves that which causes you fear, so that hesitation may not enter into your faith and benefit. For it is more remaining to your glory, and higher in this world, and ultimately for your reward.
Galen already said in certain of his admonitions. Do not treat bad illnesses lest you be called evil physicians.
Chapter One.
Chapter Two contains incision and puncture, bloodletting and bandaging, wounds, the removal of arrows and similar objects, all arranged with forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
Chapter Three contains restoration and reduction, treatment of dislocations and similar conditions, arranged from head to foot with forms of instruments.
To God alone the glory.
The Surgery Book of Albucasis.
Book One
Chapter One: On the benefit and harm of cautery; and with which complexions it agrees, and at what time: and if with iron or gold.
Chapter One.
But before I recall the operations with it, it is necessary that I mention the qualities of its benefits and harms, and in which complexion it should be exhibited.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of cautery's benefit and harm is a lengthy and subtle science, hidden and secret.
Also many wise men have spoken about it and disagreed about it. But for me, a little of their words is sufficient, fearing prolivality.
I say therefore that cautery is beneficial universally to every complexion that has matter and lacks matter, except for two complexions which are the hot complexion without matter and the dry complexion without matter.
But concerning the hot and dry complexion with matter, they disagreed.
Some said that cautery is beneficial in it.
And others said the opposite, namely that cautery is not suitable for the ailment which arises from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and it is unsuitable to heal with heat and dryness.
And the one who said the opposite said: that through cautery there is benefit for every hot and dry ailment which happens in human bodies, because when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say through his speech that from experience it has often been revealed to me thus.
But nevertheless it is not necessary for anyone to come upon it unless he is already proven and trained in the final chapter on cautery practice, and has known the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of ailments within themselves, their causes, accidents, and time duration.
But with regard to other complexions there is no fear for you: especially in cold and moist ailments. For all physicians have agreed upon these [ailments], and they do not disagree about applying cautery to them.
And know, my sons, that the cure by cautery with fire is secret, and its goodness is combined with medicine burning on it. For fire is simple; its action does not extend except to the member being cauterized, nor does it harm another connected member, unless slightly.
But the action of burning medicine extends to that which is remote from the members and perhaps causes difficult-to-heal ailments to occur in another member, and perhaps kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Now we have learned this through experience because of the length of our service and study with this art, and our standing on the truth of things; and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of my discourse.
And know, my sons, that they [physicians] disagree about the time when cautery should be performed, and they place the best time in spring.
But I say that cautery is appropriate at any time, for the harm occurring because of the time is submerged in the cure that is drawn with the cautery.
And especially if cautery is performed because of pains from necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay; for there is feared from them a greater evil than the slight harm that does not occur because of time.
And do not fall into the belief, O sons, which only the common people and foolish physicians estimate, namely that there is always a recurrence of that illness which is cured by cautery; and they put forth this consequence, but the matter is not as they think: for cautery is nothing but a kind of medicine which alters the temperament and drives out the moistures which are the cause of pains.
Nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine by the speed of its action and the power of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion; and it is possible for illness to recur at some time according to the temperament of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the strength of it: and what accumulates in his body from an excess of superfluities therein: and what reaches him through foods, and like causes, unless there arises an illness in which cautery is administered. It is possible for a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and moistures, such as cautery of the tooth because of pain, etc., not to recur in it.
But this occurs rarely.
But the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is true, not however as they mean it; for they believe that there is no cure that can compare with medicine or anything else after cautery has been performed.
But the fact is quite otherwise than their meaning. Cautery is the last resort of medicine only in this sense, that when we apply methods of cure to certain illnesses and they do not succeed, then we apply cautery at last and it succeeds.
Ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron. They said this not because of the equality of gold's weight or its noble substance, but because it does not cause pus at the site of cautery. But this is not absolutely true. For I have already proved and found that it does not happen so in certain bodies without others.
And cautery with gold itself is good and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you heat the cautery of gold in fire, it is not apparent to you how much heat you want because of the redness of gold. And when it starts cooling down, if you add more heat on top, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, an artisan falls into trouble with it. And for that reason we use cautery with iron more quickly and appropriately for the operation.
And indeed I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to sections and ordered them from head to foot so that one may easily find what he wants from it. Chapter: On the method of cauterizing in the coronal suture.
Chapter 2.
Cautery here is beneficial for the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain, which are two causes of madness and abundance of flow of humors from the head to parts of eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat, and generally all diseases that happen because of coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The manner of cauterization is that you should order the patient to first evacuate with a purgative medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient requires, and his age, and his habit.
Next, command him to shave his head with razors.
Then make him sit between your hands on a square [pillow], so that he has placed his hands upon his chest.
Then place the root of your little finger over the root of his nose, between his eyes. Therefore wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with a cauterizing iron. Then kindle the cautery of olive oil, which has this shape: Then place it upon the marked spot with a descending motion, while your hand gradually tightens, and you roll it.
Then quickly lift your hand, and examine the spot.
But if you see that it has already melted away from the bone like wax or the amount of zeuherb, then lift your hand.
And if not, repeat the cautery with the same iron or another one if it cools down until you see the bones that I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and moisten the cotton with it, and place it upon the spot, and leave him for three days.
Then place upon it cotton moistened in butter, and leave it there until the scab of the fire is destroyed. Then dress it with tetrapharmacon ointment until it heals.
It has been said that the more an wound remains open, the more pus it emits. Therefore, it is better and more beneficial to keep it open.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone and the cautery held until a portion of the bone's thickness is burned.
Then the burnt part of the bone is scraped away, then it is dressed.
And others say that the cautery should be applied to the very end until it leaves an impression on the bone like a seal ring or the tool used by women for impressing letters in dough. They believe that vapors from the head are exhaled through this location, and that the wound should remain open for a long time.
Then it is dressed until it solidifies.
But these two methods of cautery seem to me not at all necessary except in certain cases where fear is involved.
And it seems better to me to leave him as he is with his own safety.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have testified regarding other members, especially when the head is naturally weak. Indeed, the first method of cautery seems to me safer and better, and that is what I use; therefore act accordingly for the sake of health.
Regarding the manner of cauterizing the head in case of headache.
Chapter 3.
When a chronic pain occurs in the whole head and persists in an invalid despite use of diaphoretics, cataplasms, purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters.
And especially if it has already been cauterized once with the cautery we mentioned earlier, but there is no improvement from any of those remedies: then consider.
For if the head of an invalid is strongly constituted and not weak, but intense cold is present, then cauterize it with another cautery underneath that one a little.
Next, cauterize the top of the head itself with a cautery over all its horns, but do not let it penetrate the skin, and uncover as much bone as we have mentioned.
And cauterize it with one cautery at the back of the head itself, in the place called 'the vessel': and this is the place where the windpipe is located. And raise your hand in this, but do not uncover the bone.
For the invalid finds intense pain because of it, and differing from the pain caused by other head cauteries altogether.
And I shall say that this cautery is to be used in its proper place, and it should be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of the head more finely, with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
And this is its shape.
On the method of cauterizing in hemicrania, both with burning medicine and with iron.
Chapter IV.
When pain and stiffness occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and even after purification with medicines for cleaning the head and applying other treatments as mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, no improvement occurs, then cautery should be performed on it in two ways: either cautery with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron. The cautery with a sharp burning medicine is as follows: take one tooth of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends on both sides.
Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a wide phlebotome until there is made under the skin a place in which the tooth can be inserted.
Then insert it under the skin until it is hidden; then bind it over with a suitable bandage made of lint, and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove it, take out the garlic, and let the wound alone for two or three days. Afterwards place over it a wad soaked in butter until pus forms at the site. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to make this with certain medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Cautery of it with iron is done in this manner:
The form of the cautery is as follows:
And it is called 'the claw': because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, having some curvature and a small prominence in the middle.
Then place it on the site and hold your hand steady; you should gradually turn the iron with speed, so that the thickness of what is burned is equal to half its width.
And lift your hand, lest the artery beneath be burned and bleeding occur.
Then soak a wad in salt water and place it on the site; leave it for three days. Then place a wad soaked in butter over it, afterwards treat with ointment until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second tip of the cautery, like a knife-point.
But beware of cutting the artery in this half of the head, as it is not the old-fashioned way.
On the manner of cauterizing in the old-fashioned way for a half-head.
Chapter Five
When you treat a half-head as we have said in the previous treatment and divisions of illnesses, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the illness is not improving with what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then you must take an iron cautery like a knife-point until it turns white. Then mark the place of pain with a line whose length is half a fingerbreadth or thereabouts; lay your hand on once and press down until you cut the artery and reach the bone. Nevertheless, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone which moves during chewing, lest the side or nerve that moves it be burned and spasm result.
And let this be a caution and care for you regarding the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut off.
For in its cutting there is fear, especially for one who does not know what he does and is neither studious nor experienced. Therefore, let him not undertake the operation first.
And I will come with a reminder of how to manage the flow of blood that occurs from the artery according to its method and in its place in this book.
But if you see that the illness does not improve with this cautery and you see the patient's body enduring the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, use the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting the artery with a cautery having two knife-points.
For this cauterization is better and more helpful. On the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
Chapter 6. When pain occurs in the ear due to coldness and is treated with remedies and other treatments mentioned in our divisions, but the pain is not relieved, then use a fire cautery. The shape of this cautery is as follows:
Then make punctures with it after igniting it around the entire ear, as it revolves; or around both if there is pain in both.
And lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear somewhat, after you have marked the places with caustic; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures in each ear, like those.
Then dress the wounds until they heal.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
A torment that is treated with cautery is only of those kinds that happen from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses. And avoid cauterizing the kind that happens from drying out and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this kind of torment with herbs and purges and gargarisms, but your treatment is not helpful, then it is necessary to cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second somewhat below its own time, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weakened part.
For softening does not happen except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of the cautery is that you should cauterize with it at the direct extremity of the upper ear beneath the horn of the head somewhat; and another on the time: whose length shall be according to the length of a finger.
And place your hand with the cautery until it burns up half the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is of knife-like shape, whose form is shown beforehand: however, do not make it too thin, as you see; and it is necessary that there be a little excess thickness on the blade. Then dress the wounds with what preceded: until they heal.
How to cauterize in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When apoplexy becomes chronic and you treat it with what we said, but your treatment is not helpful, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all horns of his head, and one in the middle of the head, as we have said, and one at the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the manner of cautery shall be according to what preceded.
And he is also cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the stomach; and this is the last one.
Then treat him with what preceded.
On the method of cauterization in Hemiplegia.
Chapter 9
It is necessary that first to the drink of the sick are given great leeches and pills for cleansing the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick one entirely, and place on his occiput the plaster made from senna, as described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it repeatedly. For this indeed is the manner of cautery: and do this according to the same order which I said there. If therefore he is healed by it, that is good.
But if not: then make him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and place between every cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauteries with what preceded.
But if you wish an addition, and the sick person is enduring it: then make him a cautery in the middle.
But if you wish another addition: then cauterize him on both horns.
Then treat him until he is healed: and let the cautery be oiled according to the form which has been shown beforehand.
On the method of cauterizing in Paralysis and Softening.
Chapter 10
It is necessary that you proceed with cleansing the head with leeches, and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the sick one; afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, and cautery on all horns of the head, and cautery on the back of it, and three cauteries on the spina of the neck.
If however the sick one needs many mollifications of the body due to his illness, and he is bearing it, and his ailment is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spina of the back, and lastly with a cautery until the skin burns greatly, and lift your hand.
Then treat him until he is healed: and thus [use] the olive oil cautery.
And concerning the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
Chapter Eleven.
No epileptic is cauterized except for one whose epilepsy is from phlegm. It is necessary therefore that you cleanse his brain first with [iron] sponges and with the rest of the treatment which we have mentioned in division when the sick one is great or bears it well concerning accepting medicines.
But if [he is] a child who does not bear medicines, then gargarisms and cleansing chewing are administered, before that many days with good food.
Then shave his head; afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to what has preceded in method; and another cautery on the back of his head, and cautery on all horns of his head.
But if the sick one is strong and bears it well, then cauterize him with cauteries which I said in [the case of] one having paralysis, and mollification of the body on the spina of the neck and back: and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method that has preceded. But if the sick one is a child, then place a fine cautery thus.
And concerning the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
Chapter Twelve.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which we said for one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an abundance leaning towards melancholy and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink that which cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in division: then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a well-made bandage from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and let the sick person sitting squarely be held on all sides.
Then present the ointment. And it is more suitable from old sheep butter.
And warm it over a fire with moderate heat, which the finger can tolerate when inserted into it.
Then pour it onto his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the sick person once every week with the rest of his good regimen until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small punctures on him, except that which you hold with the cautery: indeed let it smell.
This kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it a wick impregnated with butter or chicken fat.
On the method of cauterizing in water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When it is declared to you where the source of water is in the eye through signs which I said in division, then begin and let the sick person drink with that which cleanses his head.
And keep him from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath for several days fasting.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize him in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over the two temples with two cauteries if there is an onset of water descent in both eyes at once; or on one side if there is an onset of water in one eye; and cut with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in width of the temples; and keep away from bleeding.
If you see anything from it, then cut him immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will forgive with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting off of them, and care from bleeding.
And sometimes he is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries brought out last.
On the method of cauterizing old lachrymal passages.
Chapter XIV.
If tears from the eyes are old and continuous, and there are veins and arteries visible on the outside of the head, then verify that it is from cold and phlegmatic excesses; then cauterize with the same cautery that I mentioned for the onset of water descent, one in the middle of the head, and two on each temple, and two on the neck under the two bones.
And if you need more, then cauterize him carefully on either side of the eye, above the eyebrow's end with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for stench of the nose.
Chapter XV.
When you are treating that (the stench of the nose), with what we have said in division, and treatment does not help: then hurry, and give him to drink three nights running, cochias; then shave his head, and cauterize him with a middle cautery, with an oil-cautery.
Then cauterize him with a nail-cautery with two cauteries, on both eyebrows under the hair just a little bit.
And keep away from the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the nail-cautery.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for the softening of the eyelid.
Chapter XVI
When the eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this crescent-shaped cautery.
And if you wish to, cauterize it above the two eyebrows somewhat with two cauteries in every part: and they will lengthen from two times; and let the length of all cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not bring your hand with the cautery too far, indeed according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
And this is the form of the cautery according to this method of cauterizing with a crescent-shaped cautery.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs turn inward and prick the eye. Chapter XVII
The cautery for this is in two ways: either with fire or with a cautery that burns with medicine.
But before applying the cautery with fire, instruct the patient to remove his hairs if they are of those that he cleanses until they grow long and become even. But if the hairs prick him at their root, then compress his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow.
When the hairs have grown and become even, then place the head of the patient in your lap; next, mark with a hot iron the eyelid of his eyes, marking a sign that is like the shape of a bay leaf, beginning near the hairs.
Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or gum arabic on the eye.
Then heat the cautery whose form is as follows.
Then cauterize over the figure that you marked gradually in many places until the surface of the skin is burned like the shape of a bay leaf completely.
And the sign that your operation is successful is if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and the hairs raised at the point of cauterization.
Therefore, lift up your hand then: and let him go for three days.
Then place upon him a piece of cotton with butter until the eschar is removed.
Then dress it with ointment until it heals.
But if the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens, then cauterize that spot again as you did at first.
But if the hairs are on the lower side, then cauterize them until they raise to their natural place and become even so that they do not prick the eye.
Regarding the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in this same case.
Chapter 18
It is that you should instruct the sick person to let the hairs grow until they lengthen and become even.
Make from paper on cloth the shape of laurel leaf.
Then take from known soap and unslaked lime one ounce each or approximately that amount. Then grind them together well and make it quickly so that it does not cool down.
Then take from it and spread it over the paper you made in the shape of laurel leaf and place it on the eyelid of one or two eyes.
And place under the eye cotton soaked in egg white, and let the patient's head rest in your lap.
And put your index finger on top of the medicine and press it gently for a moment.
And you should move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
While that biting sensation persists, then leave the medicine and remove it with your finger.
When the biting sensation has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then observe whether you see the eyelid raise as it does when contracted with fire or cut, if not, then apply more of the medicine on the spot where it did not mark and darken until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then place over it cotton with butter until the burnt skin disappears.
Then treat it with a diaphoretic ointment or another one until it heals.
And you must be careful during the operation to observe the last precaution, lest any medicine fall into the eye.
But if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and something from the hairs fights in the eye, then apply the medicine again on that spot which is softened by the eyelid itself, just as you did at first.
Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the bay leaf
Know that human eyes differ in size and thinness
Therefore, according to this, let your consideration be: the path of correctness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing a lachrymal fistula.
Chapter 19
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize it in this way.
Instruct the sick person to place their head on your bosom and hold it firmly between their hands so that it does not move or shake with their head.
Then place cotton soaked in egg white or mallows mucilage on the eye and then apply the cautery, whose shape is as follows.
It should be concave like the shape of a feather quill from one end to the other, with which the cautery is made. If you want it to penetrate up to the other end or if you want it curved upwards, make it so.
But this concave shape is better for your use.
Then place upon it a cautery that has been heated very hot.
And hold your hand near the cautery, by the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip or disturb the patient, and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and burn it.
If you reach with your cautery from its beginning up to the bone, it will be well done.
And if not [done], then repeat the cautery once or twice more if needed, and leave it for three days.
Then put a cotton pad with butter on it, and dress it with a drying ointment until it heals. But if after forty days it does not heal, then put on it a sharp corrosive medication until the bone appears, and shave it according to what is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some have spoken about first.
Pay attention to the location of the fistula and find it; then place within its opening a thin hollow tube, whose shape is as follows.
And pour into it a quantity of melted lead equal to one drachma, and hold your hand with the tube firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, lest the melted lead should run into his eye.
And it is necessary to place over the eye of the patient a cotton pad soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead will burn the location of the fistula and heal it with remarkable healing.
But if the fistula heals along with what we have said regarding cautery and treatment, that is good.
And if not [healed], then it is necessary to perform the operation on the nasal passage and reduce the fistula back into its proper course according to what will be described in its own place.
On the method of cautery for lip fissures.
Chapter 20
Fissures occur frequently on the lips, which are called "pili," especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, and the treatment we mentioned under "division of diseases" is not effective, then take a small pointed cautery knife shaped like this.
And let its concave be according to the fineness of a scalpel blade.
Then treat it with wax ointment until it heals.
On the method of cautery for an oral fistula.
Chapter 21
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and then it becomes inflamed and bursts open, after which it hardens and pus runs out, forming a fistula: if you treat it but the treatment is ineffective, then you must heat a cautery according to its size so that it fits into the fistula.
Then insert it heated into the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand steady until the heated iron reaches the depth and end of it: do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we mentioned about treatment until it is healed.
If the pus is cut off and it heals, that will be good.
But if not, then it is necessary to expose the spot and remove the rotted bone according to how it appears at its head.
On the method of cautery for softened gums and teeth.
Chapter 22
When the gum becomes softened due to moisture, and the teeth are loose, and you treat it with medicines but they have no effect, then place the patient's head on your lap.
Then take a cautery with the shape that will come later, so that you place a cannula over the tooth, and insert the heated cautery into it quickly: keep your hand steady for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire having reached the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, then repeat the cautery several times according to what you desire.
Then let the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, then spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened and the gum softened and tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
Chapter 23
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is chill within it, or a worm, and medication does not help, then cautery is applied in one of two ways: either with butter, or with fire.
The cautery with butter is made by taking fresh butter and rolling it into balls on an iron spoon or a bronze vessel.
Then take a thread of cotton and wrap it around the tip of the heated cautery.
Then immerse the tip of the cautery in melted butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth, holding it until it cools; then repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then apply a heated iron to it until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Cautery with fire is done by inserting a red-hot iron probe through an ear cannula or an iron cannula And let there be something thick inside it so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then take a cautery of the shape that will come later and place it on the tooth; hold your hand steady until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed either on that same day or on another day.
It is necessary, when applying the cautery, for the patient to fill his mouth with good beeswax and hold it there for an hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish, insofar as it is possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing varicose veins.
Chapter 24
When varicose veins are filled with phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to treatment with medicines, and require rapid digestion, then use a hollow cautery heated with fire, whose shape is as follows.
Having two open ends so that smoke may exit from the cautery at one end, and place it heated on the varicose vein once, or twice if you desire, until it reaches to the depth of the varicose veins.
But if the varicose vein is small, then place the cautery according to its size.
Then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice soaked in butter until what was burned by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with toothpaste ointment until it heals into the shape of a cannula.
On the method of cauterizing for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.
Chapter 25
When excess moisture accumulates on the pulmonary canal, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it at night at the root of the throat in a depressed place, and beware not to come near the throat with the cautery, nor on the skin, except for a little of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra of the cervical spine; and let the cautery be like a nail according to the preceding manner.
Then treat it together with what preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of lung disease and cough.
Chapter 26
When coughing and lung disease are due to cold moist humors, and the patient does not have a fever or phthisis, nor long-standing illness: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the fork in depressed, soft, empty places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be like a cannula according to the form that preceded.
And if you wish the cautery to be by pricking with a cautery called "Punctum," whose form preceded in the pricking of ear pain, then let there be punctures from thirty up to almost as many more.
Then treat it together with what preceded until it is healed. And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form.
Therefore, alleviate with it by cauterizing thrice in one session.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of hiccup, in dislocation of the arm.
Chapter 27
When the head of the arm is dislocated due to moist humors and does not return to its proper place within an hour after being reduced, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then if it is subsequently dislocated by a slight movement, as we have already testified to this happening, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Then let the patient be placed on their back or on their sound side.
Then elevate the skin that is at the inner part of the armpit towards the top with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then take a cautery having two branches heated in fire. Whose form is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it pierces through to the other side, and the figure of cauterization will appear with four cauteries.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cautery having three openings, in which case the figure of cauterization will then be that of six cauteries: and there are openings according to the fineness of the pierced [skin].
And this is the form of a cautery having three openings.
And sometimes one more is added to this manner, making eight cauteries in total.
Then place crushed garlic mixed with salt on the cautery.
Then ensure that the patient remains still so that the limb is not moved during any part of the procedure until it has healed.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts (which rarely happens), then cauterize it above the humerus with a awl cautery or by making many punctures with cauteries.
For the union becomes strong and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing the Stomach.
Chapter 28.
When coldness and much moisture occur in the stomach to such an extent that they draw it away from its usual condition, and thick mucus accumulates there, and despite repeated treatments it does not improve: then the patient should be made to lie on their back and extend their legs and arms.
Then cauterize with three cauteries: one under the breastbone at the size of a finger with an awl cautery, and two below it on either side of the single cautery until the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle.
And space them out so that they do not touch each other, lest they produce pus. Let the depth of the cautery be equal to two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let the cautery used for this cautery be one according to the form of a circle as follows.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with this cautery for one who suffers from it. And it should be as follows: firstly mark a point on the stomach according to the size that you wish to cauterize with the hot iron; then cauterize it with the cautery of the point; afterwards treat it with the treatment which preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the ear
Chapter 29
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness and moisture or coarse wind, until it can naturally eliminate excessiveness through evacuation, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their back and mark three cauteries according to this figure and this size on the lower ear below the hypocondriae where the elbow reaches; let the space between each cautery be the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be straight along the length of the body, and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the amount that is burned be half the thickness of the skin without addition; and let the patient stand on their feet.
But if he cannot stand, then let him lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised up. This is the form of the cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery when you have skill and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself so that you do not proceed too far in cauterization and burn the entire thickness of the skin, for then the whole body will be burned and it will reach the entrails; since the skin there is thin, know this.
On the method of cauterizing boils on the liver.
Chapter 30.
When a boil appears and you want to know whether it is in the liver tissue or in its membrane: then, if it is in the liver tissue, pain afflicts the sick person without sharpness; but if it is in the liver's membrane, there is sharp pain. And now you see that treating it has exhausted its doctors.
Therefore, the patient must lie on their back with their head raised.
Then outline the location of the boil with a hot iron branding tool that resembles a ray of sunlight.
And this is its shape
And cauterize with it once until the entire skin is burned and it reaches the boil's head until all pus comes out; then treat it according to the method for treating boils until it heals.
And it is not proper to use this cautery method unless one has prolonged study in the art of medicine, and whose hands have performed such operations many times with success. Then indeed should they dare attempt such an operation.
But in my opinion it is better to leave it alone.
On the method of cauterizing pleurisy.
Chapter 31
The ancients said that for cold pleurisy, use a cautery with the roots of birthwort (Aristolochia) according to this method.
And it is as follows: take one long root of dry birthwort that has the thickness of a finger.
Then immerse it in oil and ignite it in fire.
Then cauterize once with it between the continuation of the fork and the neck, and twice with small cauteries slightly slanted towards the side that is under the beard.
And twice more with cauteries slightly slanted towards the back between the fifth and sixth ribs; and once with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and once above the stomach.
And three cauteries from behind: one between the two shoulder blades; and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, with the lower cautery being between the two shoulder blades.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, but let it be plainly seen and smelled on the skin. And some of the ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron like a ray, and ignite it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess itself, and pus exits; as we have described in the case of liver abscesses.
But in this procedure with the cautery there is a risk that either the patient will die immediately or a fistula will occur which will not heal.
Chapter 32: The method of cauterizing the spleen.
When you treat spleen inflammation as mentioned earlier in the section on divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not succeed, then there are three methods of using a cautery, all of which are correct.
One method is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver cauteries, as shown in the figure.
And let each cautery be about the thickness of a finger, or slightly more.
And the method of cautery should be as we have described for cauterizing the liver, equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back with their face up.
And another method of cautery is to heat a cautery with two edges as described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder, lift the skin that is directly over the spleen where the left elbow reaches, and lift it as much as you would raise your hand along the length of the body so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two red-hot edges until you pierce through to the other side of the skin. Then remove the cautery. Thus four holes are made. And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three edges.
Then care for the cautery after removing it, allowing it to discharge pus for many days, for this is more beneficial than any previous treatment.
On the method of cauterizing hydrops
Chapter 33
A cautery should not be used on hydropic patients unless they are very emaciated.
When you treat a hydroptic patient with the methods of treatment that we have described previously and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize them as follows: four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back between the shoulder blades, one on the chest, and another on the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery in place so that it may discharge pus over a long period of time.
Do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after cautery, but let them remain under care for two intentions. Then healing will come quickly with God's help.
The shape of the cautery used for cauterizing the abdomen should be like a nail, according to its previous form. And the shape of the cautery used for cauterizing the back should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs Chapter 34
When there are swellings in the feet of a hydroptic patient and they fill with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize on top of the instep of the foot, at the point between the heel bone and ankle bone. Then lift your hand with the cautery without turning it, then lift your hand again without repeating it at all.
Let yellow water be drawn out, and use a cautery of this shape:
Then make two cauteries on each leg, one above the knee and another below it near the middle of the thigh. Also make two cauteries on the hip joint. Leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time so that some water may be drawn out from it, then treat it with the rest as mentioned earlier.
On the method of cauterizing in the swelling of the abdomen Chapter 35
When the swelling of the abdomen is due to cold and dampness that weakens the powers of retention and digestion in the stomach and intestines, treat it with various treatments but without success. If you see a patient who tolerates cauterization despite having excessive vital heat, then cauterize the area above their stomach using a large circular cautery according to the method previously described for cauterizing the stomach. Also apply four subtle cauteries around the navel using a fine awl-shaped cautery and one or two large cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see excessive dampness in the patient and they tolerate it well, then cauterize them on the pubic region and both hips with a cautery. Also consider adding two small cauteries near the center of the chest.
For this treatment is beneficial, its aid does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing haemorrhoids
Chapter 36
When there are many old haemorrhoids or one large one in the anus that are caused by thick cold humors or corrupted dampness and have not improved with the treatments previously mentioned, then cauterize the lower part of the back near the buttocks triangularly using three cauteries and also cauterize below the navel about two finger widths away.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not being digested, and you see swelling on his face, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described, and also cauterize over his liver and spleen with a small cautery like a claw. Leave one cautery open for some time, then treat him until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the anus after their removal.
Chapter 37
When you cut off the hemorrhoids, then heat the cautery that resembles a branding iron.
Then insert the heated cautery into the cut hemorrhoid and hold your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood is flowing. Do this once or twice. If there are many hemorrhoids, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described.
Then treat them with suitable ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the anus, it is more likely to result in healing.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
When a fistula has been made in the anus, first make sure that its opening communicates directly with the outside through a passage and not through the rectum. Then insert a probe into the fistula until it reaches the rectum or its opening.
If the patient does not submit to the incision and operation described earlier and is afraid of it, perhaps he can be healed with a cautery.
When a fistula occurs in someone's anus and becomes chronic, pus flows from it along with corrupted humors.
Therefore, it is advisable to examine the fistula using a thin probe.
Next, determine the depth of its opening with a probe.
Then take an iron cautery similar to a branding iron.
Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula itself until the key on its handle clicks. And continue applying the cautery to it until all corrupted tissues are burned away, once or twice or thrice according to your needs.
And beware of burning the nerve or a large vein if it is present there; or if the fistula leads to the bladder or the intestines, then be especially careful in those areas.
And do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is located in a fleshy area; and consider that it does not pierce through to another part of the body.
Then care for the site until it heals.
But if the opening closes up, and no more matter comes from it, even after a long period of time: then know that it is already completely healed.
And if matter does not stop coming from it, then know that either it is passing through to another part of the body, or there is a decayed bone at its bottom, or something else of this kind, which will be discussed later.
 On the method of cauterizing Kidneys.
Chapter 39
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or thick wind, and is thereby weakened, then it is necessary to cauterize over the bladder over the kidneys using a cautery with a claw-like tip, on each kidney.
And perhaps we cauterize it again on the same day.
Therefore, there will be three scorched lines.
Therefore, these are more helpful for relief.
 On the method of cauterizing the Bladder.
Chapter 40 When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to coldness and dampness, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the pubic area over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, using a cautery from the right side of the pubis and another from the left; let the length of the cauterization be equal to the size of the joint of the thumb. Then cauterize with a lower dorsal cautery or two if necessary, according to what has been previously described for the claw-like cautery.
How to cauterize the womb. Chapter XL
When coldness and dampness occur in the womb, preventing conception and corrupting menstruation, delaying its onset, and causing pain upon their arrival, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as previously described for the bladder cautery, and one on the lower back, or two if necessary: let the claw-like cautery be used.
How to cauterize the anus in cases of displacement.
Chapter XLII
When mucous moisture flows to the anus and causes its displacement from its proper place, and the sign of this is that one leg is elongated over the other when they are brought together, and the location of the displacement is found empty.
Therefore, the sick person should be cauterized around the anus with a cautery having a similar circular shape. After you have marked it with a hot iron around the circumference of the anus, let the cautery fall into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery used be of the same shape as that used for cauterizing the stomach.
But if this cautery is not present, then cauterize with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery. Make the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then treat it until it heals.
How to cauterize sciatica. Chapter 43.
When pain occurs in the hip joint and its cause is coldness and dampness, and the treatment mentioned earlier has been applied without effect, and the condition has worsened: then it becomes necessary to dissolve the thick humors with foul-smelling pills or with artificial pills and similar remedies.
Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is done in two ways: either with a cautery and burning medicines, or with fire alone.
A cautery with fire has many methods.
One of which is to cauterize the hip joint itself with three triangular cauteries in this shape:
And make them either deep or superficial.
And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be well-oiled.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is placed on top of the head of the hip joint itself.
So there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape preceded in the cautery of hip dislocation, one should make it so that it completely encircles the entire hip.
And burn through the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain is attached to the hip joint itself and does not extend as far as the thigh and leg.
But if it extends as far as the thigh and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh, at the place indicated by the patient where the pain is felt, and apply your cautery to the groin four fingerbreadths towards the perineum: and let the cautery be shaped like a knife. And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient indicates that the pain extends as far as the toes of the foot, then cauterize him there where he points with one, two, three, or more cauteries according to what is needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is beneath the knee towards the leg, then cauterize him there with one cutting cautery.
And beware in every cautery you perform, that you do not lastingly burn nerves or a major artery, and thereby cause great harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have indeed seen one and another among those who cauterized above the vein, and persisted in cautery, and the leg swelled until a tumor reached the foot, and it was entirely perforated and corrupted: then gangrene set in, and death followed.
But if pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And learned men have said concerning the cautery of the ankle, which is this method's cautery.
Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is half the size of a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a finger's bone, or slightly less; and inside that ring there should be another ring.
And let the space that is between each ring be equal to the thickness of a thumb's joint: and let the rings be open on both sides; and let their height be like a joint or two joints; and make them handles from iron fit for the rings.
This is its shape.
Then heat it in fire until it reddens and casts sparks; then place it on the ankle bone of the patient lying on their healthy side.
So cauterize him with three round cauteries in place of one.
Then let him rest for three days.
Afterwards apply poultices with butter; and leave the wound open for many days.
Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
I say, Albucasis, we have used this type of cautery too little, because of the fear it inspires and because few are found who await its use.
Yet it is one of the good cauteries for him who endures it, and finds with it its place.
However, the cautery with burning drugs is such that you should make two tubes having a pierced ring, into which goes the rod of its door of iron or bronze, the length of the wall: whose height are two knots, or almost so.
And let the space between them be as thick as a finger, and let them be open at both ends; and let them fit together in this shape.
Then place it over the bronze vessel called 'anchae', with the patient lying on his healthy side.
And press your hand firmly upon the bronze vessel called 'anchae'.
Then pour between the two circles hot water that has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for an hour's quantity of time: and let the patient endure its bite and burning, for it finds its biting like fire until the biting ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe off the hot water from the 'anchae' entirely with sweet water; then leave it for three days.
And put butter on it until the blackness of the burning is removed: and leave it for several days, and then pus will flow from it.
This is the final treatment.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or thigh, make him stand in what contains water, in the same way that you did with 'anchae', equally.
And this is the manner of hot water: and I have already written about it in my book on the correction of drugs.
Take alkali and unslaked lime both in equal parts; grind each of them, and put them into a new pot with one small hole at the bottom according to the size of the rod that enters it. And place underneath the pot another earthenware pot. Then pour onto the alkali and lime from sweet water until both are immersed by one finger's breadth. After which you press them with your hand with a good pressure, and leave the pot until the sharp water has descended into the lower part of the earthenware pot.
Then gather up all that water and pour it upon another lime; and knead until renewed.
For it will then be of great sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cautery of other members.
Because it effects the operation of fire itself.
And among medicinals are those with which ulcers and also as theisies are cauterized, even as storax and almond honey, and lime with soap, so that both may be well mixed.
And indeed Galen relates the story of an old man who was cured by this remedy for the pain in his ulcer and sciatic vein; and he greatly praised it.
He said that no other remedy was needed and that he was cured in one application. Indeed, perhaps he went to the bath carried [in] and came out already healed. And it is taken from green senna; and if not found green, the dried one may be taken. And grind much with some grease, and apply upon the ulcer or thigh or hip where there is pain; and bind it, leaving it for the space of three hours, or until the patient feels the soothing effect of the cautery.
Then let him enter into the bath.
When his body has become damp, let him enter upon a seat.
For the pain will depart and be healed.
And know that one should not use any cautery with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat dung, when used with it to cauterize the sciatic vein, benefits it: and a cautery is made in this manner.
Wax is taken, soaked in old oil, and placed on the deep spot between the big toe and the heel, closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it in fire until it becomes coal.
Then place it on the wax, and leave it until it goes out.
Do this again.
Do not cease doing this until sensation reaches the ankle and pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called 'Vaccine cautery'.
Chapter on Cauterizing Back Pain.
Chapter 44
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to many causes, such as from accident, blow, evacuation of excess matter, and similar things, from infiltration of cold and moist material. Indeed, cautery is not used except in this single case that results from infiltration of cold material.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fetid pills and similar things, make three lines on the back where there is pain according to its width. Then mark each line with a hot iron five times or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the sick person's strength. And cauterize with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle claw cautery according to this pattern.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing a New Swelling.
Chapter 45
This condition often occurs in young infants.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that shortness of breath occurs upon elevation and movement, and you find at the end of the spine of the back and its knots that it has begun to rise above the other spines.
Therefore, when you see this, and wish to perform this procedure, then cauterize it with a branding iron that is round in this shape.
And let the branding iron be placed equally upon all parts of the spine; and if you wish to cauterize around the spines with a branding iron, make two lines or three of dots, and let the dots be close together.
Then care for it until it heals according to what we have said.
And beware lest thou apply the branding iron to the gibbosity which occurs in spasm of the nerve.
On the manner of cauterizing in Gout and joint pains. Chapter 46.
When joint pains are caused by cold humors that flow to any part of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this 'Gout' properly.
But when gout caused by cold humors is treated with various remedies and the pain persists, then cautery will remove it.
And you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries; and let the branding iron be olive-shaped.
This is its shape:
And if you wish to make dots on the surface of the foot, then do so with a branding iron.
But if the pain ascends to the knee or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it all around the knee with three or four cauteries using the same branding iron called 'the Claw'. If however more are necessary for you using this cautery, then cauterize as needed. And do not immerse your hand with the branding iron, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pain ascends to the knee and back, then apply what we have said concerning cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make incisions around the joints as if two lines were turning around them.
But if there remains pain in the fingers, then make incisions on them over every joint and over the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after some days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both sides on all parts.
And do not let the patient be discharged from good care and taking of medicines.
For if good care is given and phlegm is removed, it will be healed with the help of God along with this cautery.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing for Ruptures.
Chapter 47.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is just beginning to be close: then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to abstain from food on that day.
And let him use laxatives so that feces may come down from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and instruct him to hold his breath until the bladder or intestine comes out or appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with the cautery below the rupture on the pubic bone, with a mark whose upper end is like half of a circle.
Then heat the cautery whose shape is like this until it becomes white and throws off sparks.
Then reduce the intestine or bladder to its own concavity.
Then let the assistant put his hand on the place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the patient, and placed a cushion underneath him, and another servant is on his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding it upright.
And hold it until you reach the bone: or repeat the process again if you did not reach the bone on the first attempt.
And carefully observe that the intestine does not exit during your cautery operation, lest you burn it and cause harm or serious mischief to the patient.
Know that if you do not reach bone with the cautery, your operation is ineffective.
And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be thin and suitable to their size.
Then apply it with the other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is healed.
And it is necessary that you give him food appropriate to the length of his treatment so that it softens his stomach and prevents the intestine from protruding during evacuation.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then apply a well-made bandage and let him hold it for another forty days.
For when he follows this regimen, he will be healed completely.
But when ruptures occur elsewhere in the abdomen and are beginning to worsen, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let that which is burned be like one third of it.
Then treat it with what we have mentioned and it will not worsen.
And some of the first ones said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this shape.
After it is marked with the cautery, place a line across its width on the upper side of the rupture and another line below it. And place your hand in the middle with the key-shaped cautery.
But the triangular cautery is easier and better. And concerning the manner of cauterizing in pains due to falls or blows.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens that certain members are affected by pain due to a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with the punctual cautery.
And let the cautery be of a size suited to the magnitude and thickness and weakness and strength and position of the twist and pain arising from it.
If therefore healing occurs from the first cauterization, that is good.
But if not, then repeat the cautery upon it.
For it is customary for these pains to change from one member to that which is near it.
Therefore you must pursue them with the cautery until the sick part is healed.
And concerning the manner of cauterizing in Leprosy.
Chapter XLIX.
But lepers are sometimes benefited by a cautery to an extraordinary degree.
And especially the kind of leprosy which arises from the corruption of phlegm and bile; therefore when you wish to cauterize it, consider.
If therefore the leprosy is beginning and you have treated it with what we said concerning division and it does not subside nor stay; and you fear that corruption may spread over his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And press your last hand with the cautery briefly until it makes a slight impression on the bone and causes the scales to be broken off from it: so that the breathing of thick vapors may be alleviated from him; and cauterize with the cautery also upon the spleen according to what precedes.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the sick person and appears manifestly: then you must cauterize with those cauteries which we mentioned in the head, and one on the tip of the nose, and two on each cheekbone, and two on the shoulder blades of the neck, and six on the shoulder blades of the back, and one large one over the buttocks near the great tail, and one above it in the middle of the buttocks: and two on the hips, that is on all the hip joints with one cautery each; and two on the knees, one on all the knees, and two on the elbows, and two on the soft parts of his chest, and cauterize him over every joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, and cauterize also over all the heels of his feet and palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on the heel, so as not to burn them. Then you may cauterize with a cautery over the breastbone, and another over the belly bone, and another over the liver.
And know that the more you increase the cautery, the greater is its benefit and effectiveness.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as much as healthy people do, because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of appropriate size and thinness according to the members and joints, as was mentioned in the kinds of instruments.
Chapter 50.
When a member is paralyzed and treated with medications, oils, and poultices but does not recover, then cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries appropriate to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery enter only slightly into the thickness of the skin.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And when numbness occurs in the hand or foot, and on the spine at the exits of the nerves that move those limbs, the numbness will be removed.
But let none attempt it except one who is wise in anatomy and the exit of moving nerves.
Chapter On The Method Of Cautery In Albucasis.
Chapter 51.
When Albucasis is old and does not respond to any medical treatments, then apply the cautery deeply for a short time according to the thickness of the skin until its whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of mallows, and pigeon blood, and lark's blood; let each ingredient be one part. Mix all these together and spread them on a linen cloth, letting them adhere to the place until it heals.
Chapter On The Method Of Cautery In Cancer.
Chapter 52.
When cancer is beginning and it seems possible to stop it: then cauterize its circumference with a circular cautery, as it revolves.
But wise men have said that it should be cauterized lastly in the middle.
But to me, this does not seem so, because I fear that it may ulcerate. And I have seen this happen many times. And it is better to cauterize its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries. Chapter On The Method Of Cautery In Aboil.
Chapter 53.
When someone has an aboil and it is delayed in maturing, either because of excess blood causing it or because of the patient's age or weakness, or because of time, and you wish to hasten its maturation: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking frequently.
Then leave it alone.
For it will mature by itself.
But if you wish to perform a cautery on its opening, then heat the cautery, which has this shape:
And place it in the middle of the aboil until it pierces the skin: and let the cautery be from what follows, so that the course may be relieved by pure evacuations.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing a malignant ulcer. Chapter 52
A corrosive ulcer is nothing but corruption in the flesh that moves about and consumes it: like fire that devours dry wood.
Therefore, if you see a corrosive ulcer in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat many cauteries, both small and large, according to what suits the location where the ulcer is.
Then cauterize it on all sides until you have entirely eradicated the corruption, so that nothing remains of it at all. Then leave it alone for three days, and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all scabs and corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Therefore, if you see that after three days healthy new flesh has grown, without any corruption, then it is good.
But if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And a corrosive ulcer is sometimes treated with caustic medicines.
For it arises in the place where the cautery was applied.
However, cautery with fire is a quicker remedy. And indeed I have already mentioned the cautery of it with caustic medicines elsewhere in this book: therefore take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing nails and warts. Chapter 55
Often in the lower parts of the feet this illness occurs, which is a thick, filtered substance that harms the foot. And cautery for them is done in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
But when using fire, the cautery should resemble a hawk's feather quill made of iron, according to the size that contains the nail on all sides, and have thin edges.
Then place the heated cautery onto the nail. Next, roll your hand with the cautery around the nail until it reaches the depth of the nail. Then leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice made from crushed forest mallows with salt and leave it on overnight. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then apply a wound-healing ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet, then use cautery with hot water. Take a cannula made of bronze or iron or hawk feather and place it onto the nail or corn.
Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula. Hold your hand steady and roll it gently with the pressure of your hand so that the edge of the cannula is impressed on the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root of the nail. Then wait for about an hour until the pain from the hot water subsides.
Then leave it alone, for the nail will be eradicated with its roots.
Do this one at a time until you have treated all of them on the body.
Then care for them after they are removed with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On cauterizing in trembling
Chapter 60
When trembling occurs due to coldness in the nerve, or quartan fever, or any other cause: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five over the spines of the back, and between every spine with a cautery, and on his chest with a cautery, and on his stomach with a cautery.
For trembling ceases when cauterized with an oil-based cautery, and the health of the cold ailment hastens. On cauterizing Albatheir
Chapter 61
Sometimes harmful Albathir are expelled from the body, namely pustules, which arise from corrupted coarse materials.
Therefore, when they first appear, they should be cauterized with a fine cautery of myrtle wood at the head of each pustule while its end is burning with fire.
Or with the root of long aristolochia.
Or with a lenticular cautery And sometimes they are cauterized little by little at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method, and they do not increase; and the excess causing them is ruptured, and healing occurs from them.
But it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound
Chapter 62 Very often there is a flow of blood from an artery that is cut at a wound which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cautery of a member, and similar things. And it is difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly place your hand over the opening of the artery and put your index finger on it. And press it strongly until the blood is blocked under your finger and nothing flows out from it. Then place a small olive oil lamp on the fire, and many others besides, and blow on them until they are very well lit.
Then take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and location where the artery is severed, and place the cautery on that vein. Then quickly remove your finger, and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
But if blood is expelled when you remove your finger from the opening of the artery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared on the fire. Do not cease doing this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And beware lest thou burn the nerve which is there, and cause some other harm to the patient. And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it except by one of four methods, especially if the artery is large.
Or with a cautery, as we have said.
Or with ligation when it has not been ligated. For when it is extracted, its ends contract and the bleeding stops.
For when it is extracted, its ends contract and the bleeding stops. Or it may be tied with a strong ligature thread.
Or medicines of proper nature to stop bleeding should be applied over it, and it should be bandaged with a suitable compress.
But whoever performs the ligation or binding with a thread and constriction with cloth, or application of burning substances, etc., does him no good at all unless rarely.
But if such thing happens to someone and there is no physician present nor medicine, then one should begin by placing the index finger on the opening of the vein as we have described, and pressing it very strongly until the blood is blocked from above the wound and over the artery.
And do not remove the finger until the blood is chilled and thickened by cold water continually applied from above, so that it may be cut off. Meanwhile, one should consider what cautery or medicine is needed for it.
End of the First Part.
Albucasis' Book of Surgery, Second Part. Concerning Incision, Piercing, and Bloodletting in Wounds, and Similar Conditions.
We have already spoken in the First Chapter about every ailment in which it is fitting to use fire cautery and burning medicine, their occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. And there I set forth chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path, so that he who seeks may find what is sought. And before I begin this, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that what is in this chapter about cauterization is similar to what is in the first chapter.
And therefore it is necessary that caution be greater in this, for in the operation which is in this chapter, there often occurs evacuation with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which trembling and fear arise, and many of them result in death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for sometimes men of different kinds come to you with different ailments in this art.
For among them are those who become angry with their illness and find death easy to bear on account of the vehemence of what they have found from their ailment and the length of their suffering.
And with illness there is fear which signifies death.
And among them are those who offer their wealth and feast you with it, hoping for health, but their illness is deadly. Therefore, do not agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such.
And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and avarice.
And do not presume upon anything from him, except after certain knowledge which verifies it among you, with commendable success.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication concerning that to which health is suitably directed.
For in this there is for you assistance towards acquiring fame and glory, and remembrance and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on cautery, from the neck down to the feet; so that you may find easily what you seek from it and of which you stand in need.
Chapter: On the Treatment of Water which Collects in the Heads of Children
Chapter 1
Know that this ailment often occurs in children at birth or when the midwife squeezes the child's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens even from an unknown cause which is not known.
And I have not seen this illness in anyone except children, and death came quickly to all whom I saw afflicted with it. Therefore, it seemed to me necessary to set down the treatment for it.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and grew larger each day until he could no longer sit up on his own because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this fluid collects either between the skin and bone or beneath the bone over the brain.
And the operation for this condition is as follows: if there is fluid between the skin and bone and a small abscess has formed, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head, about two fingers' width wide, until the fluid flows out.
This is the method for treating hydrocephalus.
But if the fluid has greatly increased and there is a large abscess, then make two incisions according to this pattern.
But if the fluid is beneath the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head opened on all sides, and water appears when you press it with your hand, then make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after making the incisions, remove all the fluid.
Then apply a dressing of wine and oil to it from above until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage on the fifth day, and treat the wound with linen cloths and ointments.
And do not cease binding the head evenly.
And feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the size of the abscess appears and where water collects.
For sometimes it is more abundant at the back of the head, or on top, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore, make your incision where you see the abscess and the collection of water appear, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And beware that you do not cut an artery, lest there be a flow of blood and the patient dies from this bleeding along with the evacuation of fluid.
Concerning the Incision of Arteries which are Behind the Ears.
Chapter 2
When catarrh occurs in someone's eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and does not yield to medical treatment, then incision of these two arteries is the final course.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, you should have the patient turn their head.
Then wipe the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible.
Then the patient should tie their neck with any cloth they have.
Then observe where the pulse of the vein beats.
And their locations are the areas behind the ears which are sunken: and they are rarely concealed unless in certain individuals.
Then mark with a hot iron on both sides and cut each one with a sharp knife, cutting through to the bone, and let it be made across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula under the artery and cut towards its upper part with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood issues forth with a pulsating flow that leaps frequently towards the interior parts.
But if the artery does not appear apparent to the senses, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers.
Then mark with a hot iron and cut until it reaches the bone.
And what should be emitted from the blood is six ounces, but perhaps you may emit more or less than this amount. All of this according to the quantity that appears to you depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
Then observe the wound.
If there remains anything on the bone from the spatula, then cut it off so that no hot abscess occurs. Then bind the wound with linens made of linen cloth.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples
Chapter III
When it happens to a person that they have an old headache, or sharp catarrhs due to acrid humidity and heat in the temples, or old soda, violent, and similar things: and medical treatment is applied with methods of medicinal care but it does not help, then we have found in these conditions extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have described.
The method of operating for extracting them is: the patient should remove the hairs that are on the temples and expose the visible artery in the temple
For indeed it reveals itself to you by its own pulsation, and rarely is hidden except in a few people or cases of extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the patient should bind their head with any cloth they have, and then rub the place with a rough cloth.
Or heat the place with hot water until it appears to you in clear manifestation Then take the scalpel which I prepared earlier Then gently remove the skin with it until you reach the artery
Then insert a hook into it and extract it upwards until you pull it out of the skin, and make it emerge from all the tissues that are under it on every side.
If however the artery is small, then wrap it with the end of the hook
Then cut off from it as much length as its ends will stretch and contract without causing blood flow
For if it is not cut nor severed, the blood will not completely rise. Then squeeze out from the blood six ounces by means of a syringe up to three ounces
But if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a strong double thread made of silk or gut so that corruption does not precede the healing of the wound and blood flow occurs.
Then cut into the bulging area between the two ligatures.
Do this either immediately or at another time. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cutting cautery until its ends are cut off and the wound is closed.
And it is better to do so unless the patient has a fever or is of hot temperament.
For cautery is among those things that help to finish off moisture.
Therefore it is better for healing.
And after the removal of arteries, the location should be filled with cooked old salt; and a plaster made of flour should be applied over it.
And afterwards, treat it with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh and with bandages until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs from the artery during the operation, then quickly cauterize it with a hot iron or fill the area with lint and press your hand tightly until the bleeding stops.
But if neither of these is available to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood coagulates.
And cool the area with ice-cold water until the inflammation subsides and it is bandaged appropriately.
And for a lighter and easier method of removing the artery, use a cautery with two blades, each having a sharp edge like an almond.
But they are much less sharp than two blades.
For if they are as sharp as two blades, both will become cold quickly and will not cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore, because of their slight thickness, the heat of the fire is retained within them and flesh is cut quickly with this method, which is better than any other method, lighter, and easier to perform.
And let the space between two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger; after marking two places with cauterization: and place both burning strongly until they reach the bone, and cut into the vein at two points: so that what is between its ends may be elongated.
For they are not completely sealed with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Chapter: On the Treatment of Persistent Sharp Eye Pain
Chapter Four
When there are persistent tears and their course comes from veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head, and no cure is achieved with medications applied to them; and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead like the movement of ants; and the eyes are thin, wet, so much so that the lashes have been eaten away by corrosion; and the eyelids are hot from the sharpness of the tears: then ancient practitioners sought this operation for the cure of such cases, and they named it "the treatment with an iron.
And it is necessary to order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead.
Then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced along its length; let each incision be about two fingers long, with one being equidistant from the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second a little further from the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side. Beware not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides. And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws; let the distance of all incisions be equal to three connected fingers; and have ready a piece of sponge or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two pointed ends whose shape is as follows:
From the first incision at the temple to the second incision: and remove with it the entire skin that is between the two incisions along with the sinew which is above the bone. Then do this also from the middle incision up to the second incision.
Then extract this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument called the sharp scalpel, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other.
And this is its shape.
And place its sharp edge towards the attached flesh with skin and its blunt edge towards the bone; and push it until it reaches the median fissure; and cut away with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes except for what is connected by the incision up to where skin appears.
Then do this in the median fissure up to the other fissure.
And after an equal amount of blood flows out, express the places from clotted blood fragments. Then place strips of old linen in every fissure and put on top of them wool pads soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see to it that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day, dissolve the stitches and apply a generous lotion with warm water.
Then dress it with balsam ointment and other remedies used for wounds until it heals.
Chapter On the Treatment of Acute Lachrymation and Cataracts in the Eyes from Internal Head Conditions
Chapter Five
When acute cataracts occur to someone - sharp, persistent tears and you see their eyes are narrowed, small, and now weakened in appearance; eyelids ulcerated with hair falling out, and there is acute pain deep in the head causing coughing: then know that these materials and cataracts do not come from a few veins.
And this is the best treatment for them.
And it is necessary to order the patient to shave their forehead.
Then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to one side, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right; it should be cut down to the bone. And extend your hand away from the temples that move during chewing until the bone is exposed. Then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a hot probe or linen wicks.
Then bind it from above with bandages and moistened them with wine and oil so that no hot inflammation occurs.
And when you loosen it and see that the hot swelling has begun to decrease, then you must scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a dry regimen that promotes the growth of flesh, such as this: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to the place where flesh is growing in these wounds.
[On the Treatment of Earache] Chapter 6 All things that fall into the ear are of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, like water and vinegar and the like; or some kind of creature.
When a stone or some similar substance that does not adhere or grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then instill some violet oil or myrrh into the ear.
Then perform the extraction and cause sneezing with condimentum. Plug the nostrils during sneezing. After that, place wads of cloth or wool around the ear and pull the ear upward.
For it often comes out with this treatment.
But if it does not come out, then perform its extraction with the Gesti, that is, fine forceps; whose shape is as follows.
If indeed it comes out with the forceps, it is good.
And if not, then perform its extraction with a fine bent hook of little thickness. If even then it does not come out, then make a cannula from bronze and insert its end into the ear deeply, and plug what is around the cannula with softened wax mixed with oil so that there may be no way for wind except through the cannula: then extract it by means of your strong breath attraction. For often it comes out with what we have described.
But if it does not come out even this way: then take a little of helkalimbat or gluten prepared with which birds are caught: and place it on the end of the rod after you have properly wrapped cotton over it: then insert it into the ear opening gently, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have described, then hasten to make an incision before there occurs a hot boil or spasm.
And the manner of incising is thus: first perform bloodletting on the patient at the cephalic vein and extract from him a certain amount of blood according to his strength.
Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fat in the depressed place; and let the incision be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone: then remove it with whatever instruments are possible for you.
Then quickly suture the wound from your side with care, until it heals.
But if what falls into the ear is one of those grains which grow and swell up, then perform its extraction.
But if it does not obey you for coming out, then take a thin, fine spatula according to this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put in many pieces: then remove them with hooks, or with a fine probe, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction is eased.
But the water which enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at first: and now he has filled his ear with some warm old oil: and he lies down on that ear in which there is water.
If therefore it goes out through that (ear), it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and warm them briefly with fire, and let the patient insert one among them into the opening of his ear: and let him jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone on the one which is in the ear.
Therefore he should not cease doing this with stone and stone until all water comes out.
And now water comes out thus, so that you take one from a feather or from a reed and insert its extremity into the ear: and light fire to its other extremity until it burns much.
Then repeat with another reed and do this many times until all water comes out: and remove it with a cannula as was said before about the stone.
But in removing an animal entering into it, if it is of small body, like a louse and the like, treat it as I said in division.
But if it is of large body which appears to the sense: then administer its removal with a probe and hooks: and its matter is easier than all things held in the ear.
But in removing a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we said in division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun.
If therefore something from among worms appears there, then remove it with a hook, or with fine forceps.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, which has this shape: narrow below, wide above; and introduce its fine extremity into the ear according to how much it can tolerate it in the sick person: then suck out with strong suction through it.
Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then seal around the cannula with wax, as I said in the case of a stone.
But if they do not come out with what we said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have already proven effective in killing worms; and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring out of oil and medicines into the ear be done with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here.
As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below, having a small hole, wide above.
Therefore let the plug which fits into the hollow of the cannula be well-made of bronze.
And if you wish, take a rod and wrap cotton on its extremity with proper wrapping; then pour oil or juice, or whatever of these medicines you wish into the cannula, while it is in the ear; then introduce the rod with cotton from above, and press it gently with your hand until the oil reaches the concavity of the ear, so that the sick person feels it inside. And let what is poured into the ear be warmed for a short time over fire, and be careful not to pour anything too cold into it: for medicines do not tolerate that.
On the treatment of accidental perforation of the ear.
Chapter VII
Sometimes children are born from their mothers' wombs not pierced.
And it has happened to some people that the ear is perforated by an injury or a birthmark of flesh therein.
And this perforation sometimes occurs in the deep hole of the ear, which is not visible; and sometimes it happens near the outer opening of the earhole, and is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the depths of the ear, and which the eye cannot see, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And regarding that which is visible, you must place the sick person's ear in sunlight and examine it. If you see an apparent perforation, open it with a fine, pointed probe of such shape as follows: its tip should be slightly broad, with one part being sharp; the rest of the probe should have two smooth sides so as not to harm the ear.
If the perforation is caused by a birthmark of flesh in the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine hook and cut it off quickly and forcefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the perforation is deep within the ear, then take a thin, smooth probe and heat it slightly with fire. Then insert it into the ear canal.
If you feel the perforation with the probe and the patient experiences discomfort due to hearing loss, carefully attempt to open it; but beware lest thou wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place a wisp of linen into the ear according to the size of the opening you have widened, soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed.
Or take a wisp of linen, dip it into rosewater, and sprinkle upon it some ground iris powder; use this.
If you see that the ear is now inflamed, then remove the linen wisp and allow it to cool with another one wrapped in a dressing made with rose oil until the inflammation subsides. Then treat it until it heals.
If blood flow occurs, then dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear. Use the remaining treatment described in the treatise on distillation to stop the bleeding.
Concerning the Treatment of Swelling of the Eyelids.
Chapter 8 Eyelid swellings occur when they are moist or dry.
Therefore, hold them with forceps or tweezers and cut them at their roots using scissors.
Then apply crushed barley groats to the wounds.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize the wounds with a fine lenticular cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after cutting.
For they often return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Concerning the Treatment of Puffiness of the Eyelids.
Chapter 9
It often happens that there is something like hailstone (grando) in the eyelids due to its hardness and roughness, which is a collection of coarse humidity in the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, if it appears that there is a hailstone-like swelling protruding from the eyelid and moves easily in all directions, then...
Make an incision along its width.
Then strip it away gently from all sides until it comes out completely.
Then suspend it with tweezers and cut it off.
But if you cannot remove it unless after making a small incision into the eyelid, then that will harm the patient somewhat.
If the incision is large, then close it with stitches and treat it until it heals.
But if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For the ointment restores it and makes it flesh again.
And if there is a stone inclining towards the inner ear from the surface, then invert the eyelid and hook out the stone; apart from this you may need an incision, pressing it on all sides.
If the eyelid is elongated by the incision, no harm will come of it.
Then rinse the eye after removing the stone with salt water and treat the place with flesh-making [ointment] until the sick is healed.
On the care of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fatty substance that is produced in the tunics of the upper eyelid, which occurs most frequently in children. It weighs down their eyes and causes them to have morning catarrh, so that they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow upon them, and therefore you see them always lying on their faces and sleeping on them, with their eyelids moist under the eyebrows, which are now covered by swelling; and indeed the prominence of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the way to operate is for the patient to lay his head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare threads from it, and make from this thread a circle according to the size of that which contains Axirnath on all sides.
Then place it upon [the eyelid] and press with your fingers on all sides so that Axirnath collects in the middle of the circle.
Then make an incision in the midst of that moisture with a scalpel making cuts crosswise, and let not the cut be greater than that made in blood-letting in depth.
Or else it is necessary to incise the skin entirely until you reach Axirnath, for in many cases Axirnath proceeds from the cut like a slice of white fat.
Therefore remove it with a cloth which you have moistened between your fingers outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware that you do not add anything into the cut lest you reach with the scalpel to the eye and wound it.
But if Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should gently insert a little more until Axirnath comes forth.
Then remove it, as we have said.
Next immerse cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the location, and bind it with bandages.
And among men there are those who grind salt, and put it into the hollow of the incision so that what remains of that moisture may be dissolved.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if a hot boil appears in the place, then treat it with soothing plaster until it heals.
Chapter on Methods of Treating Styes (Ataxmir) of the Eye.
Chapter 11
When extra hairs are born on the eyelids of the eye beyond their natural course and adhere: then they harm the eye and cause various diseases to occur such as constant tearing, inflammation of the eyelids, and whiteness until it becomes a cause of destruction for the eye.
And styes (Ataxmir) of the eye are treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire.
Or with acute medicine, as prescribed in the chapter on cautery.
Or styes are treated by incision and suturing.
Or by cupping, as I will describe.
You must place the patient's head on your lap.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns, that is good.
And if it does not turn: insert a needle into it, where there is thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and cause the needle to penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, in which the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a spatula.
Then find inside the eyelid under the hairs added with a spatula incident from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton or cloth. Then mark above the eyelid with cauterization, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
But it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: because it varies greatly among people.
For those who require a large incision from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid. Then with the spatula find above the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal, and let there be one slit near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a needle.
Then insert a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then strip off all of it. Then bring together with sutures the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread: and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere that which overflows from the threads over the two eyebrows, with certain adhering substances if you wish to do so. And if not, do not worry about it.
Then leave the suture and threads for three days or four: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and cure it with that which dries and contracts it.
For the eyelid will be raised at the time of cauterization of the wound and its union: but the future one will be better.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients called Ataxmir.
But there is concern about the sick person in it, and it comes from a good action, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method according to Ataxmir: which is to mark on the eyelid a shape like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks according to this following shape. Then cut off what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this shape, with equal cuts.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and equalize it, then take a needle with thread on it and insert it into the middle of the shape. Then insert another thread near the larger lachrymal duct and another thread near the smaller one, and hold the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation and raise the skin above which is marked out, as we have described.
Then join the two lips of the wound with stitching and care for it until it heals.
But if swelling occurs at your incision or cut, cauterize it with caustic and similar medicines from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids become turned inward so that their hairs face outward.
 On the treatment of Ataxmir with reeds.
And it is to turn over the eyelid and split open the fissure that is inside, as I have described.
Then skillfully make two reeds or thin sticks. Their length should be equal to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of a fingerbreadth. And you have already cut them at both ends where you hold the threads.
Then gently place both of them on top of the eyelid's excess and tightly tie them at both ends with a strong knot. Leave it like this for several days. For the skin being bound will die, darken, and decay until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed [in falling off], then cut it with forceps.
Then care for it until it heals.
When it has solidified, raise the eyelid, and hairs will not sting [the eye].
And this is the shape of the two reeds that you should make according to this figure and measurement in length and width.
 On raising stinging hairs from the eye with a needle
Chapter 12
The operation is as follows: Take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of soft silk. Then tie its ends with two fine knots, making the length of the threads one palm [about 7-8 inches].
Then place another thin thread underneath it briefly and tie its ends if you wish.
Then have the patient place their head in your lap facing the sun so that the operation may be well lit since it is a delicate and precise procedure.
Then insert the needle with its thread into the root of the eyelid and quickly pierce it through until you extract a natural hair from above.
Then pull the hair up along with the thread and insert it into the thread. If there is one or two or three hairs, that's enough; no more than that.
Then pull your hand along with it until the hair comes out of the eyelid together with the thread and the natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled but no hair comes out with it, then pull the thread down along with the one you composed in it until the thread emerges from above and you see it through the eye. Then pull both the thread and the silk and remove them both, close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either attach a long hair made from natural hairs to it and raise them both together, or leave it alone until it grows longer, and then raise it.
On the Treatment of Silkworm Disease Which Occurs on the Upper Eyelid.
Chapter 13.
When this condition occurs in the eye, it is called "leporina" (rabbit disease).
And this silkworm disease is either natural or accidental.
Accidental silkworm disease occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or incision, cautery, and similar causes.
And the method of treatment for it is to find that consolidation and separate its lips, then place a linen wick soaked in oil between them, and bind it until it heals.
And do not use drying and constricting agents in its treatment, for if you do so, the silkworm disease will worsen. Instead, use softening agents such as fenugreek, and mix it with water in which marshmallow seeds have been cooked. Also, use dyaquilon ointment mixed with some oil and wrap a linen wick in it for treatment.
And the treasure of your treatment is to strive by every means possible that no consolidation occurs again according to its original shape.
And indeed this operation we have described is merely a correction of the silkworm disease so that its original shape does not return entirely. On the Treatment of Silkworm Disease Which Occurs on the Lower Eyelid and is a Wrinkle or Contraction Upward Towards the Right or Left.
Chapter XIV.
This, which occurs below, is truly called Alxatrati.
And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental kind happens from a wound, or a cut, or a burn, and similar things.
And the way to operate on it is: take a needle with a double thread and stain it with flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct until it reaches the right, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide-mouthed scissors.
If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it ought to be, then it is good.
But if not, take a rod and place it in the slit, and turn the eyelid with it. Then make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts meet to form an angle until they converge into this shape: which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount of its sharp lower edge from what follows the eyelid.
Then join the separated parts together: either with thread and wool.
Then care for it with what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until they heal.
And if alxatrati occurs from a cut or stitching or burning, then you must make a flat cut under the eyelashes, following what has gone before.
Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, as we have said.
And in summary, the treatment of alxatrati whether it is above or below is that the operation should follow the form of alxatrati as prepared.
For indeed it has many diverse forms, and a skillful artist prepares his ingenuity with whatever method is possible to him until he brings back the figure to its natural form or close to it, and himself weakens according to what suits him from the operations and instruments in many dispositions.
About the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Chapter XV.
It often happens that this solidification occurs in many people, such that the upper eyelid becomes solid with the whiteness of the eye and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you should insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid and lift it up or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a spatula that is not sharp at its edge but rather blunt for a moment: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and does not harm the eye with its sharpness. And your incision should be as if you are scraping off that adhesion easily until when the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion is completely healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, rinse it with water: or distill onto it from a sieve made by dissolving tin with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a linen thread: and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white: and after three days use it again, and with consolidatives until it is healed.
About incising the nail and the protuberance of tear skin.
Chapter XVI.
You should know that a nail is in two ways: Either nerve-like: and it is similar to the sinew of an ass, hard and thin.
Or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture which when touched by iron or hooked by a hook breaks off and the hook does not stick to it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the greater tear duct until gradually they reach to cover sight and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of operation for its incision is: that the sick person places their head on your lap.
Then open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand.
Then grasp a claw [forceps] with a small hook and extend it upwards.
Then take a needle and insert into it a thread made from horse, ox, or cow hair; make the thread strong and double the tip of the needle briefly, and fix it in the middle of the claw; then pierce through with the needle and tie the claw with the thread, extend it upwards; and scrape off with the thread the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you grasp it with the thread up to its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the lachrymal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lachrymal duct so that its course is not constantly disrupted by the incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended only with a hook or with a thread, as we have said.
Then scrape it off gently with a spatula, of which this is the shape:
And beware lest the spatula touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture or perforation of the pupil.
Then after the incision, sprinkle some powdered salt or sulfur into the eye and leave it until the following day.
Then treat it with what is necessary until it heals. But if the claw is not nerve-like and you cannot insert a needle into it or fix a hook on it, then this kind of claw is treated many times with medicines until it heals, as I have described in the division [of the book].
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a fine, gentle, blunt spatula according to this shape.
And scrape gently from above with precision.
But if you see that it is becoming hollowed out and broken up, and the scraping impresses upon it, then instill into the eye from your hourglass either of camphor or red lead, or ground salt; and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the same procedure until all of it is removed.
But if you find that there is a warm abscess in the eye, then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it heals. Then repeat the procedure upon it with caution until it heals.
However, if the prominence of the lacrimal caruncle is causing great harm to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and cut away from its part; but do not make the final cut so as not to interrupt the flow of tears.
Then instill into the lacrimal duct camphor or made from galbanum until it heals. On the Incision of a Pterygium and Fleshy Growth on the Eye.
Chapter 17.
A red fleshy growth sometimes arises in the eyes of certain people, covering or approaching the pupil, or drawing close to and even attaching itself to the eyelids, perhaps turning them outward; it resembles a mushroom.
And the procedure for this is that the patient should place their head in your lap.
Then open the eyes and gather up all of that flesh with appropriate hooks; hold it with forceps or tweezers.
Then cut into the flesh first until all of it is severed with a knife.
And be careful not to injure the eye during the operation; let your cut be either with a spatula, as described in the cutting of the nail, or with small forceps, with which the eyelid is held according to what will come later in this chapter.
After your cut is completed and the entire algaradenica has been removed, then fill the eye with ground salt or distill into it red powder and similar corrosive medicines. And place over the eye externally a poultice of cotton with egg white so that it may be secured from hot inflammation.
But if some of the algaradenica remains and you are troubled by hot blood and fear a hot inflammation, then leave the eye alone and treat it with what allays inflammation.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is healed.
And do likewise for any flesh that happens to be added in the eye of this type.
But it is necessary that you not undertake any operation on an unhealthy eye by the natural way or the accidental way using iron until you see that that member can endure that operation.
On the Extraction of a Foreign Body from the Eye.
Chapter 18 A foreign body is a red vein that covers over the eye and hinders its vision and weakens the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you to first examine whether the eye in which there is a foreign body is strong and not affected by any other ailment besides the foreign body. Then extract its foreign body.
And it is necessary that you instruct the sick person to place their head on your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks according to your discretion; and let the hook be slender and doubled in this shape, or let there be two hooks graduated on one body in this shape.
Then carefully grasp those veins with fine forceps and remove blood little by little until you see those veins removed from the eye and resolved. And be careful not to injure the eye with the edges of the spatula.
And let your operation take place at midday before the sun, and be very steady in your operation so that you do not prick except those veins.
And when you have finished, then drip into the eye either green or red [dye], so that its sharpness may corrode what remains of the sebaceous matter.
But if it is not possible for you to remove the whole of it in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that alleviates eye pain. And let him rest for several days until his pain subsides and he is secure from hot inflammation. Then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Chapter: Reduction of a Dislocation of the Nose.
Chapter 19.
The physicians call it 'Fistula,' which you treat either with a caustic or with burning medicine, according to its previous description.
And if it does not heal, then there is no cure for it except that you cut over the swelling at its beginning and draw out all the moisture and pus that is in it until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see decay or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose shape is as follows:
And it is called 'Aspersory.'
It should be made of hard iron, and its head should be round like a pea, which is pierced with a fine point either by a file or an awl. And place it on the corrupted part of the bone. Then revolve it between your fingers and press your hand gently until you know that the decay is scraped away. And do this several times.
Then revolve it between your fingers and press your hand gently until you know that the decay is scraped away. And do this several times. Then restore the place with drying astringent medicines.
If therefore the place is consolidated and flesh grows there and the flow of pus is cut off, and it remains for forty days without reappearing or swelling up, then know that it is already healed.
And if not, then there is no cure except to reduce the fistula to the nasal aperture according to this method.
And this is how you bare the bone with iron or with a sharp medicine. And when the bone is laid bare, then take an awl of this shape, its extremity being triangular and made of iron, and let its wood be tapered to a point as shown.
Then place it on the bone itself and let it be near the tear duct and extend your hand away from the eye a little bit.
Then turn your hand with the awl until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it. And this will happen when air begins to flow out from there while he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then dress the wound with drying astringent medicines as I have taught you.
But when flesh grows and the wound hardens, then the material that was flowing outwards will return to the nose. Therefore this is easier for the patient.
Chapter on the Reduction of a Protruding Eye. Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no harm to its sight or diminution, then you must treat the patient. Then perform bloodletting on him, after which apply cupping glasses to his neck without incising but with suction.
Then place over the eye an ointment made from acacia, aloe, olibanum, and sapricol.
Then bind the eye tightly over the plaster with many bandages.
And the method of the bandages is this: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each one over four times. Make many such folds. Then place them one upon another according to the amount needed by the eye. Then bind them tightly with a hard cloth using strong binding.
And perform cupping therapy without incisions.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye tightly bound day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loose again, it must be tightened greatly. Then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If you see that the eye has returned to its normal appearance, it is good. But if not, then repeat the poultice and bandages, and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter on Incision of the Vein.
Chapter 21.
When a break occurs in the vein, then it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of pomegranate, disfiguring the face. If you wish to cut it, then the operation is as follows: first insert a needle into the root of the vein from below upwards.
Then insert another needle on the lacrimal side with a double thread and make it pass through. Leave the first needle as it is.
Then cut the location of the double thread, tie the vein with it around the needle, and tighten it greatly.
Then remove the needle, place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and leave him until the thread falls off with the vein.
Then treat the eye with things that strengthen it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the vein is tied on all sides with a cloth circle until the eye swells greatly.
Then pierce it with a fine trocar that reaches deep into the eye until the aqueous humor flows out and the eye sinks down. Then immediately bind it until it heals.
A Treatise on the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
Chapter 22.
This disease called hemorrhoids is nothing but a collection of blood that forms in the eye like descending water, but it is not itself water.
And its treatment involves having the patient sit on a prepared or raised seat.
Next, take hold of his head with both your hands and move it until you see the blood flow down to below his eyes.
Then tie it off so that it does not flow down and the light is restored. If [the blood] does not flow down further, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the blood has not been prepared as described above, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine trocar and insert it slightly into the corneal limbus at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea until blood flows out.
When it does flow out, then instill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey. Or use water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey. Then treat [the patient] with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the Treatment of Water that Descends into the Eye or Cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already discussed the types of water and what is suitable for piercing, explaining it clearly. Then take that same substance according to its usefulness.
Then have the patient sit squarely between your hands facing the light near the sun. Tie up his healthy eye and press it strongly. Then with your right hand lift the eyelid of his left eye if it is the left eye that has water, or use your left hand for his right eye.
Then take an almond with your right hand if it is the left eye, or with your left hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the end of the almond near the crown at the thickness of the eye's radius where the white of the smaller lacrimal appears. Then push the almond with force and turn your hand with it until you feel that the almond has reached the empty part of the eye.
And the measure of the path of the almond into the depth should be equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness of the eye, which is the crown of the eye.
For you will see it clearly through the vision of the pupil due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the almond until it reaches the location where the water is.
Then press it down repeatedly, once after another.
If water comes out immediately, then the patient will see clearly at once what they opened their sight upon, and the almond will be inside his eye.
Then rest a little.
If water comes out, then place it again second time, except that the almond should not come out.
When it is stuck and does not rise up, then gently pull out the almand with your hand, turning it gradually. Then dissolve some clear salt of a gemstone in water and wash the eye with it inside.
Then place over the entire eye wadding or wool infused with rose oil and egg white, and tie it with the healthy eye.
We, however, and those of our time, place powdered cinnamon mixed with egg white upon it.
But if almagda does not obey you when entering the eye due to its hardness, since it is made from human skin and the eye is very hard: then you should take a spatula called Alberid, which has this shape.
Therefore insert it only with the joined tip, and do not put your hand through the hole; for there is nothing else to do but make a way for the almagda to its subtle place.
Then introduce the almagda, as we have said.
And when the operation is complete, let the patient's bedchamber be prepared neatly, where he should lie on his back in a dark room; and prohibit him from all movements, and coughing; and give him food that soothes his nature; and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain in its position until the third day. Then remove it in that dark room, and examine his vision; and make him look at objects.
Then replace the bandage until the seventh day.
But it is not necessary to do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, it is necessary that he avoid this, because water rises quickly through a vehement gaze.
If however an inflamed abscess occurs, then it is necessary to remove the bandage before the seventh day; and correct it with something that allays inflammation until it subsides; then without his knowledge, place over his face a bandage that regulates his sight for several days thereafter, while he remains in that dark room.
Then let him gradually leave the house and return to his usual habits.
And know that in surgery, the student is not always excused from seeing; then he may dare to attempt the operation.
And now indeed there has come to us one of those who are from al-Andalus, who said that a perforated tube was made in al-Andalus through which water is drawn.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has made it (the instrument): nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the kinds of tubes, so that one who does not know them may understand them.
Let them be made of bronze properly; and let their extremities be sharpened to this same fineness, and the tip be pointed.
Forms of tubes.
Chapter: On the treatment of flesh growing in the nose.
Chapter 24.
Sometimes different kinds of flesh are born in the nose, among which is some that resembles a many-legged scorpion, and from this there is fleshy tissue like stone, dark-colored; and there is also that which is soft flesh, not dark-colored.
Therefore, with regard to that which is soft flesh from these kinds of flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the ground, and open their nostrils, and insert a hook into those fleshes: then pull them towards the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a fine sharp spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
But if something remains from that which cannot be cut off: then shave it with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains of it.
But if blood dominates you (the patient), or if a hot abscess occurs: then apply to it what is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry in cauterizing him until the blood is stopped and all the flesh is removed.
Then pour vinegar into the nose after cutting, and water, or wine.
If however the nose opens and moisture comes forth from it to the palate, then know that he is now healthy.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh born inside the upper bones of the nose which the instrument did not reach with its incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness and many knots tied in it: place between every knot the quantity of a finger or less. And have the patient lie down so that he may put one end of the thread into his nose with a probe, or whatever is possible for him after having made it like this. And let him draw his breath until it reaches the back of his throat and comes out over his Adam's apple.
But indeed many boys do similar things to this in schools: and it is easy for him who wishes.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose.
And then have a pair of scissors ready along with the knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is caught with the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread and place into the nose, after wiping away the blood, a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian salve. Do this for three days or more until the salve has eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
If however treatment that dries is needed, use that.
For making a head-purge funnel through which oils and other medicines may be dripped into the nose, make it of silver or bronze, like a small lamp with an opening like a shell, and similarly shaped.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a head-purge should be full and open, with a handle at its end by which you may hold it when heating oil or whatever other liquid or flowable substance you wish.
And this is the shape of the instrument. On the treatment of a deviated nose.
Chapter 25.
A crookedness in the tip of the nose is often born and grows greater with time until its appearance becomes unsightly.
And therefore it is necessary that you cut off this growth at its earliest appearance and remove all of it.
Then place upon the site either a cautery or a burning medicine to remain in its place.
But if the incision is delayed until it becomes large, then consider whether it is stony, hard, dark in color, and insensitive; then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen that those who cut into such an ulcer suffer great harm as a result.
But if the ulcer is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be cut into entirely, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear or trembling; then treat the site with something that dries and contracts until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Chapter 26.
You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is severed, it does little good to operate on it unless in certain people.
Therefore, when something happens to someone such that one of these cartilages is severed, you should first consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood; then join the two sides of the wound together with stitches, and then treat it until it heals.
But if the lips of the wound are already separated and each part has healed on its own, then you must shave off all the skin that is visible until it bleeds.
Then join the two lips together with stitches and tie them down; powder dragon's blood and ground frankincense over it; place a piece of diafinicon plaster and another strengthening plaster on top; leave it tied for two or three days.
Then untie it and change the dressing until the threads fall off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is this: either join with a continuous suture or with interrupted sutures as we have described for abdominal wound closure; or join with a suture using thread as I have taught you.
On the Extraction of Swellings on the Lips.
Chapter 27. Many people often get hard lumps similar to grains of millet on the insides of their lips, some small and others large.
So you should turn over the lip and pierce each node with a needle; then suspend it with a hook and cut into it from all sides.
Then fill the space after cutting with powdered zedoary until the bleeding stops.
Then sprinkle it with vinegar and treat the area with it until the wounds heal.
On Incising Tissue Born on the Gums.
Chapter 28. Frequently, additional flesh is born over the gums, which the ancients call 'abulus'.
So you should suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; then let the pus or blood flow.
Then apply powdered zedoary or other drying powders to the area.
But if that flesh returns after treatment - for it often does return - then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after the cautery.
On Extracting Teeth with Iron Instruments.
Chapter 29.
Sometimes tartaraccumulates on the surfaces of teeth both inside and out, and between the gums there are rough, ugly, blackened, yellowed, or greenish layers until corruption reaches the gum and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore you should make the sick person sit between your hands and put their head on your lap, and scrape off with a file the tartar from the tooth where you see layers like sand until nothing remains of them. And do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned.
If you remove what is at first rationally possible, that is good. But if not, then repeat the process on another day, secondly and thirdly, until finally it achieves your desired goal.
And know that teeth require razors of various shapes and sizes according to what is prepared for your operation. For the razor used to scrape below the tooth is different from the one used between teeth due to their different shapes.
And these shapes of razors should be prepared by you as you see them.
Chapter on the Extraction of Toothache.
Chapter 30.
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain with all skill and be slow in extracting it.
For there is no substitute for it when extracted, as it is a noble substance. Therefore, until there is no excuse for extracting it, then it is necessary to extract the tooth when compelled by pain so that it may be steadied and assured at your hand.
For pain often deceives the sick person into thinking it is in a sound tooth and they extract it. Then pain does not cease until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen this through the practice of bloodletting.
When the painful tooth is assured at your hand itself, then you should circumcise around the tooth with a spatula containing some power until the gum is loosened on all sides. Then move it gently with your fingers or fine forceps gradually until it wobbles.
Then place the large forceps well on that spot and have the sick person kneel between your thighs; grasping firmly so that it does not move. Then pull out the tooth in a straight line to prevent breaking.
But if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it on all sides with ease. Then try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is pierced or eaten away, then you should fill that hole with cloth and bind it tightly with a fine thread so that it does not break during your tightening with forceps.
And you must carefully make incisions around the gum on all sides.
But guard your strength so that you do not break it and leave a part of it, which would return upon the sick person with greater pain than before.
And beware of doing what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and rashness, which exceeds what we have described.
For often they bring great ailments upon people whose teeth are difficult to break, leaving all or some of their roots, or extracting them along with certain jawbones. This we have witnessed many times. Then rinse it with wine or vinegar and salt after extraction. If bleeding occurs from that spot (which often happens), then grind some myrrh and fill the place with it. And if this does not suffice, cauterize it.
The shape of the fine forceps used to move teeth should be long at the ends, short at the handle, thick so that they do not double when pressed on the tooth. They should resemble the thick handles you see, so that when squeezed together with them, they do not cut themselves or double over. The ends should be short and made of polished iron or well-made bronze, straight at their tips. And there should be teeth on their ends which fit into each other and grip tightly.
And sometimes the ends are made like the shape of a bird's mouth called 'ciconia', and they have a strong gripping power.
Chapter on the Extraction of Teeth and Fractured Mandible Bones.
Chapter 31.
When extracting a tooth that is broken off at the root, you should first apply butter to the area for one or two days until it becomes softened. Then insert an elevator or forceps into the spot whose ends resemble the beak of a bird called 'ciconia'.
This is the shape of these forceps:
Their ends should be shaped like a file inside, or like an awl.
If the tooth does not yield to extraction with these forceps, then you should make an incision over the root, remove all flesh, and insert a small instrument called a 'Palanca' whose shape is as follows:
It should be short at the end, somewhat thick, and not hollow so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through this (instrument), that's good. But if it does not, you should aid with other instruments whose shapes are as follows:
The first one has a triangular shape at the end with some thickness.
The second has a thin triangular shape at the end.
And you should also aid with this instrument having two branches whose shape is as follows: And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the order of teeth.
And there is also aid with this instrument resembling a large hook whose shape is triangular at the twisted end with some thickness so that it does not break; and it should not be hollow.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth, nor are other instruments counted; and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds the instrument himself according to what operation and diseases dictate.
Because there are diseases for which no instruments have been mentioned by the ancients due to the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone breaks from the jawbone or other bones of the face or putrefies: then examine it carefully in its place with suitable instruments and forceps which I mentioned for tooth extraction, and assist accordingly. Its shape is as follows.
Let there be some thickness gradually so that it may grasp or hold the bone without slipping or escaping until the bone comes out; and restore the site with suitable medications.
But if there is a small amount of putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it away from its putrefaction and treat it until it heals.
On the extraction of prominent teeth above others.
Chapter 32.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it becomes unsightly thereby, especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, the venal ones.
For if a tooth has been born after another and does not fit, or its extraction is possible but not its polishing: then uproot it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows.
It resembles a small beak and is made of soft iron with a very sharp point.
And your incision should be made over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is moved.
But if it is prominent enough to be polished, then polish it with a file made of soft iron whose shape is as follows.
Let it be entirely of soft iron, and let its handle be thick with small holes like the file used for making needles. With this, the tooth should be polished gradually over many days with ease so that the tooth is not moved or falls out. Then gently scrape it, finally smoothing it with certain razors.
If it is a tooth from which a piece has broken off and hurts the tongue, then it is necessary to polish it with a file until the rough edge of the fracture is smoothed out and made even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor interfere with speech.
On the Extraction of Teeth using Gold Threads.
Chapter 33.
When there is concussion and disturbance of the anterior teeth due to impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite without the food falling out, even after treatment with astringent medicines, then it is advisable to fasten them with gold thread, because silver turns green and decays after some time, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium fineness and thickness according to the size that can fit between the teeth.
And the method of extraction is as follows: Take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth. Then tie it with both ends of the thread between the loose teeth, whether one or more, until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side.
Then repeat the tying until you reach the side where you began. And tighten your hand with gentleness and wisdom until it is not moved at all, and let your grip on the thread be near the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps and bend both parts towards each other. Hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth so that they do not hurt the tongue. Then leave it tied like this.
If it loosens or breaks, tie them together with another thread and it will remain stable in that way for the whole period of time.
This is the form of Teeth, and the figure of how to retain two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you see them.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after falling out, and are retained as we have described, and remain so. And this is done only by a skilled and experienced artist.
And sometimes a piece of the jawbone is prepared and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in its position where it supports and holds the tooth in place as we have said, and remains there for a long time.
On cutting the ligament that occurs under the tongue and hinders speech.
Chapter 34.
But if there is something hard and knotted in it, and this is from the healing of a wound, then insert a hook into it and cut through it from side to side until you have cut through the ligament and released the knot.
If however bleeding occurs, then apply powdered myrrh to the spot. But if blood overcomes you, then cauterize the spot with a lentigo cautery which is suitable for it; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. On the Extraction of a Cyst that Forms Under the Tongue.
Chapter 35.
It sometimes happens that a swelling resembling a small frog forms under the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally, and perhaps grows so large that it fills the mouth.
But if you see that it is of a dark or black color, hard, and insensitive to the patient, then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
But if it leans towards whiteness and has moisture, then insert a hook into it, cut it open with a fine scalpel, and free it from all sides.
But if bleeding defeats you during your operation, then apply powdered myrrh to it until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation until you remove it along with its base.
Then dress it with vinegar and salt, and treat it with appropriate care until it heals.
On the Treatment of Swellings of the Two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
And then you will pierce it; or it will burst by itself.
If it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then it is necessary to cut into it.
And the operation on it is that you should consider before performing it whether the swelling has completely subsided in its heat or diminished somewhat: then let the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head on your lap. Open his mouth, and have an assistant take hold of his tongue with both hands, pressing down on it from below with an instrument shaped thus: It should be made of silver or bronze, thin like a knife.
When you press down on the tongue with it and the swelling becomes visible to you, then take a hook and fix it onto the tonsil, and pull it out as far as possible without pulling along with it any of its coverings.
Then cut into it with an instrument shaped thus:
It resembles a pair of forceps; however, its tips should be curved such that the opening of each lies directly opposite the point of the other. Make sure it is made of annealed iron or steel.
But if this instrument is not available, then cut into it with a spatula shaped thus:
It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after cutting into one tonsil in this manner, cut into the other according to the same pattern of incision.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if bleeding occurs, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate peels have been boiled or with leaves of myrtle and other similar astringents until the bleeding stops. Then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes, besides the two tonsils, other swellings are born in the throat.
Therefore, cut them as I said in the cutting of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I had already treated a woman for an abscess that had grown between her throat which was pulling towards strangulation with few symptoms, it had almost closed off the throat. And the woman breathed through a narrow passage and had already been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have died within one or two days if left untreated.
And the abscess had risen so high that it sent forth two branches which came out over both nostrils.
So I hurried and fixed a hook into one of them.
Then I pulled it, and a large portion came out from it.
Then I cut off that part where it was gripped by the nostril.
Then I did to her what had come out of the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue. And afterwards, I fixed a hook into the abscess itself. Then I cut off part of it and only a little blood came out from it. Therefore, the woman's throat was cleared, and she began immediately to drink water, then took food.
So I did not cease cutting from that abscess many times over a long period until the abscess became too prolonged along with it.
I then ligatured and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
So it ceased from growing more. Then I left her side, not knowing what God did with her afterwards.
On the incision of a swelling on the cheek.
Chapter 37.
When catarrh descends to the cheek and swells up and is elongated, then it is called a perpendicular swelling. And if it is thick and round below, then it is called a wen.
When treated with what we said in division and the treatment does not help; and you see that a hot swelling has remained there and is thin, then it is necessary to make an incision.
And that which is gathered around it, round and without length, and is bloody or dark colored or black, and has no sensation, then you should avoid cutting into it.
For there is fear of harming the sick person in this.
It is therefore necessary that when you see it according to the manner which I said from its whiteness and length, you make the sick person sit facing the sun; and press his tongue with an instrument about which there will be a description; then insert a hook into the wen and pull it downwards; and cut it open with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the tonsils.
And you should not cut into it except what is added beyond the natural limit without adding anything.
For if you cut more than this, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use that which we have described for the incision of the tonsils; and treat it until it heals.
But if the sick person fears the incision, then you should use your skill in cauterizing it without fear or trembling.
And the method of cauterization on it is not except with sharp water; and this is how you should place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned.
Then take some of the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and dip a not extinguished lime into it; place it neither thickly nor thinly; and fill up the hollow of this instrument with it, which has this shape:
Let its extremity, where the medicine is placed, be concave like the concavity of a cooking pot.
And place the instrument with the medicine on top of his throat, and let the patient lie on his side so that the salty liquid from the internal medicine may flow out of his mouth, preventing anything from entering his throat and causing harm.
Then hold your hand containing the medicine.
And you should apply it to his throat in quantities of half an hour each until you see that the wound has been darkened and the bite of the medicine has subsided.
And if you wish to use a sponge and wrap it over the extremity of the stick and pour the medicine into the sponge and insert the stick with the sponge from above until the sponge adheres to the throat. Repeat this many times until you achieve your desired cauterization of the wound.
Then let it go; for it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
But if you need to repeat the medicine, do so; and after cauterization, wipe around the wound with a sponge soaked in butter, and cleanse it with what remains of the medicine around it; and rinse it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with embrocations, and internally with gargarisings until it heals.
This method of treatment is healthier than an incision and far from causing fear.
And sometimes the throat is also cured by something more subtle than cautery or cutting: for it is cured by fumigation in this manner.
Take some calamentum, and hyssop, and oregano, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs: and gather them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil; and the pot should be well-luted with mud: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument is placed in this manner.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and its extremity, where there is a pomegranate shape, should be inserted into the sick person's mouth until steam rises to their throat through the cannula until their throat becomes much obscured.
Then repeat this many times until it dries.
And beware, lest thou perform this cure at the beginning of an aposteme's onset.
For often it adds to an aposteme: and one should not do this unless when there is a decrease in the aposteme's heat.
But if this instrument is not present with thee, then take a reed and compose on its extremity the skin of an egg: so that the sick person's bone may not be burned; for the egg skin hinders the steam from burning the bone: and this is good treatment with health.
On the Extraction of Thorns and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or fish spine adheres in the throat.
Therefore, thou shouldst extract that which is apparent among them upon which sight falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument towards the sun, and it is declared unto thee what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear to thee and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to cause the sick person to vomit before digestion begins in the stomach.
For perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or let the sick person swallow a piece of cabbage leaf, or a radish root, or swallow a dry bread crust; or let him take a piece of soft dry marine sponge and tie it on a thread, then swallow it.
And when it reaches the place where there are spines, or bones, and is pulled out, then it comes out. But if it does not come out with what we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a finger for a moment, and at its end let there be a curvature which he introduces into his throat with ease; and himself have his head raised up.
And let him guard against touching his epiglottis so that he does not cough, and pushes with it the bone or spine, or the physician introduces it by hand.
But what the sick person introduces is better: because of his knowledge about the place where the thing is attached; and he pushes it downwards or pulls his hand upwards with the instrument, all that according to the length prepared for him until it comes out.
On the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter 39
When the leech is applied with what I said in division regarding treatment with medicines and it does not function, then examine the throat of the sick person before the sun, or after pressing its tongue with the instrument which I have told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with suitable tweezers skillfully.
But if it is not possible with them, then take a hollow cannula and introduce it into the throat of the sick person up to near his throat; then introduce into the concavity of the cannula a glowing iron with fire.
Do this many times and let the sick person abstain from water all day long.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water and open his mouth in it; and let him hold his mouth with it and not swallow anything from it; and move the water once every hour with his hand.
For indeed, the leech at once falls upon sensing water.
But if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the sick person with chameleons or with hens using the instrument that I have mentioned for fumigating the ear.
Do this many times until indeed it falls off.
And the manner of operation in fumigation is that you should take a pot with live coals inside and covered with a cover, in whose middle there is an opening; and place the extremity of the instrument upon that opening.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person place his mouth at the extremity of the tube, closing his mouth so that the fumigation may not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech.
For indeed, the leech will fall off immediately.
But if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the sick person endure thirst and eat salt and garlic, but do not let him drink water. Therefore it is necessary that he bring forth with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls upon sight.
It resembles tongs as you see; except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat.
And its extremity is like the beak of a bird called the stork, with the roughness of a file; when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
On the Incision and Treatment of Abscesses.
Chapter 40
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many different sorts, but the memory of only one or two will be recalled here in this book; and they differ in their piercing and incising from two methods.
One method is according to the kind of abscess itself and what it contains of moistures.
And the second manner is due to the places on the body where it occurs.
For an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring on the anus, and an abscess occurring in flesh is different from one occurring in joints; each has its own judgment based on its nature.
There are also abscesses that should not be incised except after the ripening of the pus within them and its completion. And there are those which must be incised while they are still raw and do not ripen as desired.
Like abscesses that are near joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and extends to the point where it causes corruption of the surrounding tissues, it may also damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint. Therefore, there is a greater risk of contraction of that limb.
Or an abscess on a major limb: if you delay its incision until it ripens, it will harm either that limb or the whole body through that main member.
Or it is near the anus; therefore, incise it while it is still immature. Do not incise a raw abscess that has not completed digestion unless it is near the anus, lest it becomes deep and extends to the internal parts of the anus, resulting in a fistula or a condition that does not heal. You should know the appropriate time to incise an abscess that has ripened completely by its signs, which include alleviation of pain, decrease in fever, reduction in redness and swelling around the abscess, dulling of its pulsation, sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other such indications. And it is necessary to make the incision on the lower and more prominent part of the abscess. The incision should be made along the length of the body if the abscesses are located on the hands, feet, arms, thighs, nerves, arteries, or any other equal parts where there is no reflection.
In those that are reflected upon, proceed with the incision according to that limb.
However, when an abscess is located in fleshy areas, it is better to delay the incision until its digestion is well established, as we have already discussed.
For if you incise it before that time, the course of the pus will be prolonged from it, and there will be much dirtiness and foulness, and perhaps its lips will remain open and its depth will not heal.
Some abscesses are incised across the width of the body when necessary, or according to the limb that requires it.
And it is necessary to make a small incision for small abscesses and a large one for large ones. Or multiple incisions may be made depending on the size of the abscess.
There are also abscesses in which it is necessary to hollow out the skin and make an incision when it has already become as thin as a cloth and has reached its peak ripeness, like those that occur in many cases of doubting and buboes.
And among them are those that should be incised with a three-angled cut.
Among these is one where the incision is made like the shape of a bay leaf.
As the groin abscess.
And among them are those where a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are made, as well as others that resemble these incisions.
But those without a head, such as soft superficial abscesses, should be incised with a superficial or flat cut only.
And when an abscess is thick and has already collected much pus, it is necessary to incise it slowly and not rush to remove all the pus at once, but rather to remove only a portion of it.
Then apply dressings to the wound until the next day.
Then extract some more pus again.
Do this gradually many times until all the pus has come out, especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly person; for the vital spirits are often spent along with the evacuation of pus, and sometimes the patient may die and you not perceive it.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
And after your incision to drain the abscesses, it is necessary to cleanse the wound and observe.
If the wound from an abscess is small or if the incision is straight, then apply a linen or old cotton wick.
And if the abscess is large and there are many incisions, then it is necessary to insert a wick into each incision until they meet.
And if you have removed a piece of skin from the abscess or hollowed it out around it, then fill it with old cotton or pack it like bandages without wetting it, and secure it for three days.
Then remove it, and treat the wound as necessary with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after they have been imbibed on cloths, many times to the place of the bleeding.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to apply medications and treatments and powders which are described in many places throughout this book and their divisions.
But if it is during winter and the abscess is in an area with many nerves, then pour powdered plant materials mixed with warm wine and oil onto cloths and apply them to the area.
And if it is during summer and the area is fleshy, then apply powdered plant materials soaked in water, oil, or a mixture of wine and oil, ensuring that all are cold.
Until the third day comes, as we have said, then you should drain the abscess and clean it, and administer appropriate treatment until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary to know universally about treating abscesses.
But following the path of distinction, I have already spoken generally about every type of abscess and how each one should be treated specifically.
On the incision of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Chapter XLII
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head and are of the type called "nodules," which are contained within sacs that resemble little pouches or wattles of a chicken.
And there are many types of them.
Among them are fatty ones, those containing mud-like moisture, those containing fried and powdered substances, similar ones, and those that are like stones in hardness.
And there is no fear in cutting into or extracting any of them, as long as an artery does not lie counter to the incision.
And when cutting into these, you should use an instrument called the "intromitter," the shape of which is depicted below, to determine what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it lengthwise along its surface like this: __|
Begin the incision from point B to point G, allowing the moisture to drain out. Then scrape out and remove entirely all that contains this moisture without leaving any residue.
For if anything remains of it, it will return many times over. Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is available; otherwise, use water and salt. Fill the wound with this mixture and leave it alone until the next day.
For what remains of the kystis will corrode it (the wound). Then repeat applying the Egyptian ointment for the second and third time, until you are confident that no remnant of the kystis remains. Then dress the wound with the ointment until it heals.
If the boil contains a fatty node, then cut it according to this shape, with an incision having the form of a cross. Then insert hooks between the lips of the incision and tear it out from all sides. And strive with all your might to remove the membrane that contains it.
But if an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And likewise, act upon a boil that is stony by making an incision and treating it in the same way as described above. The incision over a stony boil is easier because it contains little blood or moisture.
Sometimes there are certain boils that occur on the head of some people with absolutely no moisture present.
Or make a perforation in them always from their lower part, so that the flow of pus may be eased towards below.
Then treat them with whatever is suitable for their treatment.
On the Incision of Swellings in the Neck.
Chapter 42
Swellings often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they also appear elsewhere on the body.
And those that occur on the neck are one, and many; they originate from each other, and every boil among them is enclosed within its own skin, as in knots and swellings of the head, as we have described.
The varieties of boils are numerous.
Among them are stony ones; and among them are those that contain fluids; and among them are malignant ones that do not yield to treatment.
Therefore, if you see one among them that is well-formed to the touch, its color close to that of the skin, movable towards every part, not attached to any nerves or tendons, nor arteries, and not deep: then you should cut it open from above downwards along a straight line using a scalpel, and remove it entirely from all sides. Then extend the two edges of the skin using hooks, or many hooks if necessary, as we have described for swellings on the head, and extract it gradually.
And be careful not to cut any vein or nerve.
And let your scalpel be blunt rather than sharp, so that you do not harm yourself with the cut or disturb the patient unnecessarily by cutting something that is not needed.
But if you cut a vein or artery, or if it prevents you from performing the operation, then place powdered myrrh or some other absorbent powder on the wound to stop the bleeding, and tie up the wound. Then leave it alone until the inflammation subsides and the wound begins to heal or shows signs of becoming infected.
For blood is cut off by a bandage, therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
Then care for it [the wound].
If the boil is cut open entirely, then you should bring together both lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, once you see that there is no excess flesh remaining.
But if you see that there is excess flesh remaining due to the size of the boil, then you should proceed to cut its root and remove it, and perform the stitching that we have mentioned.
And if a boil contains fluids, make a superficial puncture in it so that you may see the location of its maturity. Then place the puncture below what follows next on the body, as we have said.
Then apply a bandage with ointment after the puncture and similar ones afterwards so that it may eat away at what remains of the corruption until you see that the wound is now clean. Then care for it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
On the Incision of the Epiglottis When Obstructed by a Swelling in the Throat
Chapter 43
The ancients have spoken of this procedure for the epiglottis, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it. This is what they have written about it:
But in those who have apoplexy, the incision of the epiglottis should be avoided because no benefit can come from it. This is because all the veins and lungs are weak [in such cases].
But in those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or on both tonsils, when there is no inflammation in the windpipe, it is necessary to perform an incision of the epiglottis in order to avoid destruction from suffocation. Therefore, when we wish to do so, we should cut the epiglottis under three or four circles with a small cut across its width where it is between the two circles. The cut should be made into the muscle, not the cartilage. This location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are far away from it.
But if the operator is fearful, then he should extend the skin of the throat with a hook.
Next, let him open the skin until he reaches the canal; let him avoid the blood vessel if he sees any of them.
Then let him cut the muscle which we have mentioned; and it is indicated that upon the cutting of the canal there will be an outflowing of phlegm from it along with what is torn apart, accompanied by loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the time of danger from suffocation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin and sew it up alone without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote flesh growth until the wound heals.
Says Albucasis.
The sum of this discussion which we have narrated is that it is not useful unless when they see that some of these swellings has already obstructed the throat of the sick; and if the sick person becomes elevated above death, and wishes to cut his epiglottis in order for the sick person to breathe upon the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and to be saved from death; therefore they have commanded that the wound should be left open until the mischief of illness is consumed, and its mischief lasts for three days or thereabouts. Then they have ordered that the wound should be sewn up and cared for until it heals.
And I myself have seen that a servant girl took a knife and put it into her own throat, and thereby cut into the opening of the lung.
And when called to treat her, I found her moaning like one who is about to die.
Therefore, I opened the wound and found that the blood issuing from it was scanty.
I realized then that she had not severed the vein nor tied it off; wind was escaping through the wound.
I then dressed the wound myself and treated it until it healed. Nothing happened to the maidservant except that her voice became hoarse; she returned after some days to better health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in cutting into the epiglottis.
Chapter on Cutting for a Goiter.
Chapter 43
This swelling called a goiter of the throat is a large abscess, similar in color to the body itself, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental. Certainly there is no inherent disposition to it.
An accident, however, occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to fatty tumors.
And the other way is similar to an abscess that results from a ligation of an artery.
And there is fear involved with this one; it should not be cut into with a knife unless it is small. Instead, probe it and examine it with an introducer.
If you find it similar to a fatty tumor and not suspended from any vein, then cut into it as you would a fatty tumor. If it is contained within a cyst, remove it along with the contents of the cyst; if not, then examine all of it carefully.
Then dress the wound with what is necessary for treatment until it heals.
Chapter on Cutting into a Swelling.
Chapter 45 There are many kinds of swellings (nodules), and I have already mentioned all their types in the division. Here, however, I will describe the difference between a nodule and an abscess, as there is often doubt between them. I say that when an abscess is hot and causes fever and severe pain until the bubbling of the excess matter subsides and the decay completes itself, then the fever and heat cease.
But when there is no heat or fever or pain and the swelling contains them like a cyst, which is its own sac and is colored like the body; and it begins like a chickpea and becomes like a grape, both large and small.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture.
And the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division [of humors]. Therefore, when you arrive to treat an abscess, it is necessary that you examine it and first inquire about it using the instrument called the Introducer, according to what will come forth regarding its shape in the following chapter.
And the method of examining boils and all abscesses is to take this instrument and insert it into the softer place that you find on the boil; and slowly turn your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then remove the Introducer and observe what emerges from its trail.
If, therefore, running moisture of any color comes out, then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said for other boils.
But if no moisture comes out in the trail of the Introducer, then know that it is fatty; therefore cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross, according to the form I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and remove the skin from all sides with ease: and guard the cyst if possible over it, so that you may remove it whole with the abscess.
But if the cyst breaks during the operation and it is not possible to remove it whole, for this happens very often; then remove it in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if something small or large remains of it, the knot returns again most frequently.
But if it defeats you and leaves only a small amount behind, then fill the wound at its completion with certain sharp corrosive powders, and bind the wound; then place something warm that attracts pus on top of it, and treat it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if there is a large knot, then separate its two lips and cure it along with what is fleshy. But if there is an opposing pulsating or non-pulsating vein, then hurry and fill the wound with triturated pitch, and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood stops; then return to cutting what remains of the knot.
Regarding external instruments for cutting and boring.
Chapter 46
Among these are the forms of Intromittentia, and they are of three kinds.
For among them is the large one, and among them is the medium one, and among them is the small one.
They should be made of iron with square ends skillfully crafted to facilitate entry into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Experientia, that is, boring instruments; and one of them is called "beris," that is, a borer; and they are of three kinds.
For among them is the large one, the medium one, and the small one.
They are suitable for investigating abscesses, fistulas, and boils by means of them that lie between the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and gentle like large needles with which seats are prepared, namely from citrus wood or from bronze, iron, or silver. And the best among them are those made from citrus wood.
And experiments are also done with black lead, which it is fitting to use for testing fistulas whose depth is such that reflections may be directed gently along with them.
And there are again three species of them. Because among them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size of the fistula's opening and its narrowing. The shape of the curettes, and they are of many kinds. For there are simple ones, namely those with one curve; and they are three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And among them are blind curettes: and they are of three kinds.
And among them are curettes with two curves, and they are of three kinds; and those with three curves, also of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their proper place.
And these are the shapes of knives used for cutting and scraping nodes and boils; they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Their tips used for cutting are sharp; the other tips are not sharp. And they are placed thus only so that with them there may be assistance in scraping nodes near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that by means of them the patient may heal and find temporary relief from burning which he experiences at the time of scraping a boil.
These are the magdas, and they are of three kinds.
They are made of bronze and resemble brass, with which alcohol is made. They have a broad extremity with hidden punctures like a sieve; through them it runs inward or outward as you please, as you see.
The shape of the spathulae used for concealing between the fingers during the puncture of boils; they are not perceived by the patient. They are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
The shapes of ventouses used for cutting off the flow of blood; they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
They should be made of bronze or glass, round in shape, somewhat elongated, as you see fit; and they should be made thin.
And it is necessary that you have these kinds of ventouses in your possession, both large and small, so that you may cut off blood quickly when needed, and especially when medicine is not readily available.
But do not use these ventouses for cutting blood in every part of the body; rather, use them only on fleshy places such as thighs, hips, forearms, breasts, belly, groin, and similar areas with moist flesh.
And sometimes other small instruments are made from them, resembling the bark of figs in shape; these are used for cutting blood when it flows from a phlebotomy site or an incision of a vein or artery. And sometimes they are made round like this:
On the treatment of breasts in men, which resemble those of women.
Chapter 47
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during REM sleep (that is, when they begin to dream), resembling those of women, and remain offensive tumors.
Therefore, whoever finds this repulsive should make a lunar-shaped incision over the breasts, as shown in the diagram, then excoriate all the fat.
Then fill the wound with a flesh-colored medication.
Next, approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
But if the breast points downward and becomes soft due to its size, as happens with women, then it should be incised on both of its upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions that meet at their ends to form a larger line containing a smaller one, as shown in the diagram. Then excoriate the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply sutures and powders as mentioned earlier for healing purposes until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision that you ought to make, due to the disturbance of the patient or because of bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and let it sit until it dissolves any remaining fat.
Then treat it until it heals.
Regarding the puncturing of an abscess, which occurs under the armpit.
Chapter XLVIII These abscesses that occur under the armpit are due to hard species of strophulants containing cysts and those that contain humidities.
Therefore those that contain humidities ought to be incised with a crescent-shaped incision following this form: from line b to line g. And when all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess is of the type containing hard strophanthus nodes, then incise upon it as we have described for strophanthus lumps equally.
But if the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then apply a cautery to it according to what was mentioned earlier.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an artery and vein.
Chapter XLIX
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, then often an abscess forms from it; similarly, this also happens with a vein, so that an abscess and swelling occur there.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are these: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and situated deeply in the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a hissing sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the surface of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, especially if it is under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large indeed.
Therefore, such abscesses should be treated without using a knife, and likewise those which are on the extremities or on the head.
Therefore, concerning that which arises from an abscess due to the dilation of the mouth of an artery, make a longitudinal incision in the skin.
Then open the incision with hooks, and afterwards the artery; and free it from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you concerning the tying of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a pointed cautery until all the blood which is there comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply treatment that produces pus until the ligatures fall off; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until it heals.
But if the abscess is due to a cut vein, then you should hold with your hand as much of the skin near the abscess as possible.
Then insert a needle under the place which you held with your hand and make it pierce through; and let there be a double thread on it until you draw it out from the other side.
Then tie it with the aposteme with good ligature: according to what I told you about tying a vein, from two parts with two ends of thread. But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert another needle with another thread under the aposteme throughout at the incision of the needle: press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the aposteme in its middle until when it comes out what is inside it: then incise the excess skin and let what is tied come out from it.
Then put on it powder which you have immersed in wine and oil.
Then apply treatment with linens and ointments until it heals.
On an aposteme which occurs from twisting of nerves.
Chapter 50
Just as an aposteme occurs in Artery and Vein, likewise an aposteme occurs in Nerves: which happens to them from a blow, or happens from excessive labor and similar things; and it mostly happens to them in the joints of the arms or the heel, and in any place where articulations move: and it is a grave apostema. Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is in most cases without pain: but when it is pressed violently, the sick person feels a kind of numbness.
And it is not an aposteme aggregated within the depths of the body, rather it is under the skin, and it moves in every direction, but does not proceed towards anterior or posterior parts.
Therefore what occurs from them in joints should not be approached with iron (i.e., surgery).
For perhaps contraction will occur.
But in that which occurs from them in the head or forehead, use a lancet to find the skin with a space between.
If therefore it is a small aposteme then hold it with forceps and cut it off from its root.
And if it is large then suspend it with a hook and scrape it out: then remove it and join the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
On the Incision of an Abscess that Occurs in the Abdomen.
Chapter 51. It happens to some people many times that in their bellies and other parts of their bodies, swellings called "Fungalia" grow, resembling mushrooms in appearance.
Their root is thin, but their head is large, with reversed lips.
And among them there are small ones and also those that greatly enlarge themselves.
And indeed I have seen a man whose belly had two swellings resembling mushrooms more than anything else: there was no difference between them except that they were white and had small roots, and their lips turned inward and joined together, and moisture continually flowed from them.
Therefore I cut them and found that one weighed about ten and eight ounces and the other about six ounces. And the operation for cutting them is as follows: first consider if the patient is humid and the color of the swelling is white, moist, with a thin root. Then cut it open with a broad knife, and have cauteries ready in the fire.
For often much blood is expelled at its cutting, therefore be prepared if you are overcome by the blood, then cauterize it.
But if you see the patient afraid and fearful of being cut with iron, then take a thread made from lead well made, and tie it around the swelling in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the tightening of the lead.
Do not cease tightening the lead whenever it presses into the swelling until it falls off by itself without effort.
But if the swelling has a large root then there is some fear and anxiety in its cutting, especially those that are in the belly.
However, it is possible to cut half of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
And beware not to presume to cut a swelling that is dark in color, has little sensation, and has an offensive appearance, for it is a cancerous abscess. And I will speak more on cancer after this.
On the Treatment of Hernia.
Chapter 52.
A hernia occurs due to many causes.
Or it may be due to tears of the diaphragm above the belly and through this hole, either the omentum or intestine protrudes, as happens in other ruptures.
Or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery, as has been mentioned before.
Or due to constricted wind (flatulence) in the intestines.
If it is due to a tear of the diaphragm and the hernial ring, then it has the appearance of an abscess with the same color as the body, it is soft without pain, and appears in different positions.
And if it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its position varies more widely than what has been described above.
When you press it with your fingers, it disappears and then returns. Sometimes there is a sound associated with this, and the swelling becomes very large at the entrance of the hernial ring, causing great pain.
But if it is due to fluid accumulation, it is soft and does not disappear when pressed by hand nor does it become hard or increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then along with these signs, an abscess forms that appears blackish-blue.
But if it is due to flesh (omentum) protruding, then the swelling is hard, large, and fixed in place with a definite size.
If it is due to wind (flatulence), its touch is soft. And the operation for this condition is to consider whether the hernia is due to arterial or venous bleeding or wind. If so, you should refrain from treating it.
For there is fear and fright involved, as I explained to you in the chapter where I discussed swellings caused by artery and vein.
But if the swelling is due to an intestine or bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand upright with their arms extended.
Then mark the entire circumference of the navel with a cautery.
Next, tell them to lie down on their back between your hands.
Then wrap a wide cloth around the navel at the point you marked with the cautery.
Next, extend the swelling upwards using a large hook.
Then tie it firmly around with thread or strong silk cord; let the knot be tied tightly.
Then open the extended middle of the swelling above the ligature.
If you find that it is already held captive by the ligature, then remove the tight tie and insert your index finger into it; push the intestine back inside the abdomen. If you find a bowel obstruction, take hold of it with the hook and cut away any excess fluid.
But if an artery or vein is opposed to you, then tie it tightly around.
Then return to your procedure.
And take two needles and insert into them two strong threads; insert the two needles around the opening you made around the swelling like a cross, making them penetrate.
Then tie the swelling at four points over the needles; if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the exposed flesh rots and falls away by itself, or cut it open when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
But if the swelling of the navel is due to fatty tissue or moisture, then hollow out the swelling as we have said.
And draw forth the blood or moisture that you find within it.
Then apply to it something which will consolidate the wound.
Chapter on the Treatment of CANCER Chapter 53
For I have not been able to cure anyone of this condition, nor have I seen anyone before me who has succeeded in treating it.
And the treatment for such a case when located as we have described is to make an incision and dissolve the diseased tissue with black bile, sometimes repeatedly.
Then perform bloodletting on it if you find it noticeably swollen.
Then prepare the patient for surgery and proceed with the operation accordingly.
Then cast upon the cancer hooks that are suitable for it.
Then hollow out the cancer from all sides along with its skin, carefully examining it until no trace of its roots remains. Allow blood to flow freely and do not cut it off hastily; instead, compress the area and remove thick blood using your hand or an appropriate instrument.
But if you encounter resistance from the flow of thick blood due to cutting an artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter on the Treatment of Hydrops
Chapter 52
Now we have spoken about the division of types of Hydrops and how water accumulates; signs of each type, and their treatments with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only the solitary type of ascites; it does not approach with iron the species of tympanites nor at all that of hypogastrium, for that is deadly.
When you have already treated this type of Hydrops with tympanites using medicines and your treatment has not helped, then consider
For if the patient has already become weak or there is another illness besides Hydrops present, such as coughing, diarrhea, or similar ailments; then beware of treating him with iron, for it is fearful.
But if you see the patient is strong and there is no other illness besides Hydrops alone; and he is neither a child nor an elder; then the way to operate on him is, having raised the patient standing between your hands, let your assistant press his belly with his hand, pushing the water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed spatula in this shape:
It has two pointed ends and is long with a sharp tip like a spatula.
But let it have some slight shortness little by little so that you do not pierce through to the intestine during the operation and hurt him.
Then consider
For if there is a generation of Hydrops from the intestines, then you must lengthen your incision from the navel three fingerbreadths downwards towards its lower part above the chest.
But if there is a generation of Hydrops due to an illness of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side; and it is also not necessary that there should be an incision on the side where the patient wishes to lie down, so that no overflows run towards that weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with an instrument.
Then insert your hand into that incision with a spatula between the skin, and scrape as if you were scraping it out: let the amount that is scraped out be approximately the size of a fingernail.
Then pierce the spleen until the spatula reaches the empty space; and that is the location of the water [peritoneal cavity].
Then remove it and insert into the opening an instrument of this shape:
And it is like a cannula: made of silver or bronze or brass, smooth and polished; at its lower part there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is cut in the manner of a reed, as you see; at its upper end there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, it sinks immediately onto the instrument; therefore, empty out half of that amount of water in one hour.
For if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, the patient may perhaps die within an hour due to a collapse of his vital spirits; or he may suffer syncope which approaches death.
But evacuate according to the amount of its strength, and according to what the conditions of the patient indicate to you from the strength of his pulse, and his overall constitution.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
Which is because it will be retained immediately due to the skin which retains the opening that is over the spleen: about which I have spoken, so that you may pierce it in that manner.
Then repeat the procedure on the following day if you see that the patient can tolerate it; and also remove a small amount of water from the peritoneal cavity. Do this for several days without fear, taking care not to err until only a little water remains in the peritoneal cavity.
But if you fear for the patient and let too much water remain, then care for him with hot sand burial and abundant sweat in a bath and sunlight, and wait until he is thirsty. Then treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize his stomach, liver, and spleen after the water has been removed, according to what I have described earlier.
On the treatment of infants born with incomplete urethral opening.
Chapter 56 When an infant is born from his mother's womb and the head of his penis is not perforated, or the opening is too small, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, you should immediately come to his aid with a very fine spatula made according to this shape.
Then place a thin lead pin into the opening and tie it; hold it there for three or four days.
When he wants to urinate, remove the pin and let him do so.
Then replace the pin.
And if you do not use lead, it is possible that urine flowing over the area will not allow the opening to close.
But one whose opening is too small should be treated with lead as described above for many days until it becomes wider.
Those who have an opening not in its proper place are harmed.
This means that in those who are born with the opening at the end of the glans penis, they cannot urinate forwards until they raise the penis by hand upwards. Nor can such a one reproduce because sperm cannot reach the womb correctly, leading to severe impotence.
The procedure for this is as follows: have the patient lie on his back.
Then extend the glans penis with your left hand using great force, and make an incision at its tip with a sharp needle or scalpel, like cutting the end off of a reed, so that the opening comes out in the middle as it should.
And be careful during your procedure to avoid blood flow.
For this often happens.
Therefore apply something to stop the bleeding and care for the wound until it heals.
Regarding cases of swelling in the foreskin and glans, as well as putrefaction, blackness, and adhesions.
Chapter 56.
Swelling often occurs on the penis, which is an enlargement of corrupted flesh.
And among these swellings, some are malignant and others are not.
So you should hang the benign one with a fine hook and cut it away until you have cleaned it entirely.
Then apply a compress soaked in Egyptian ointment on top of it And care for the wound afterwards with dye-finicon ointment until it heals.
But if the swelling is malignant and of foul color, then you should apply a cautery after making an incision into it and removing its cause.
But if the swelling is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person and part of it is inside the foreskin while another part is outside, then you should first remove the inner portion of the swelling until it solidifies, then care for the outer portion: because if you treat them both at once, the foreskin will not heal without a hole.
And now we come to cases of blackness and putrefaction occurring in the testes and foreskin.
Therefore you should hollow out everything that has already turned black or is about to rot or has already rotted.
Then apply over it a poultice made from beaten-up honey mixed with ground pomegranate seeds and sieved herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply a lunar-cautery cautery, according to this shape.
For the cautery is beneficial for two dispositions at once, namely for bleeding and when a wound becomes corrupted.
But if the head of the probe is consumed and destroyed entirely within an hour, then it is necessary to insert into the urethra a lead catheter so that the patient may urinate upon it.
Now concerning adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the probe, such adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision. And sometimes it occurs due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, you should remove it with a blunt spatula until the band releases and the head of the probe is freed on all sides.
But if it is difficult to distinguish them exactly, then you should remove some from the head of the probe and from the foreskin.
That is, because when the foreskin is thin, it may be quickly punctured due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the probe with a thin linen cloth that has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it solidifies. On the cleansing of infants and treatment for errors that occur to them.
Chapter 57
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity like other wounds, but since it is an operation performed by us willingly and used properly in children, it is necessary that we mark a better operation and an easier path leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws and it is only something that we have acquired through experience.
That is, because I have found that most artisans and bloodletters use cleansing by circumcising with a razor or forceps, and they also use cauterization and ligation with thread, and incision with a nail.
And indeed I have already proven all these methods, but found no better cleansing than that using forceps and ligation with thread.
Because when cleansing with a razor, the skin often slips away.
Because the foreskin has two layers of skin: therefore perhaps only the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer remains; so he is forced to make another incision to cut the other, causing future pain.
And with cleansing that is done by cauterization, that is, digitally, which surgeons use, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secure because perhaps it may enter its opening.
But with cleansing using a nail, perhaps the iron may slip out and spoil your procedure; indeed the skin of an infant is naturally short and many are born in such a way that they do not require cleansing, as I have seen.
But cleansing with forceps and ligation with thread has proven good to me because the forceps is proportionate to the incision; thus the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
Therefore when you press your hand thus, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and make one incision together at once; and a compression of similar shape is formed, enclosing the skin of the foreskin on all sides without any error.
And the method of operation is this: especially for a boy who understands little, you should make him understand that you are doing nothing but tying a thread around his penis; and you should leave him until the next day.
Then cause him to rejoice and be glad in every way possible for him, according to his understanding.
Then insert your hand toward his penis and blow on the skin and pull it upwards until the head of the penis emerges.
Then cleanse it from the filth that has gathered upon it.
Then tie the marked spot with doubled thread.
Then bind somewhat lower than this with another bandage. Then hold the place of the lower binding with your index finger and thumb with good tension, and cut between the two bindings.
Then lift up the skin quickly and extract the head of the penis.
Then let the blood flow gradually (for this is better), and put powder on top; then place a cloth on which has been spread the liver of a sheep cooked in rosewater, shaken with rose oil. And recently apply this good treatment until the next day; and continue the remaining treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing is as follows:
Let the two ends be blunt and incurved so that the branch of the claw does not slip out; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of the two handles equally.
The error that often occurs during cleansing is that perhaps the inner skin may slip away entirely or part of it at the incision. Therefore, you should stretch it out with your fingernail before cauterization and cut it evenly according to its length.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days pass and there remains something under the penis that is swollen with inflammation, then let it alone until the inflammation becomes hot; then excoriate it gently and cut it according to how it presents itself; but beware of cutting the head of the penis.
For this will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with the substances that we have mentioned in our book on powders that promote wound healing. But if by chance you cut too deep and damage any underlying tissue, it will not cause harm either.
Therefore treat it with what we have said until it heals.
On the removal of a retained foreign body in the bladder.
Chapter 58
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to blockage caused by a stone, congealed blood, pus, or flesh that has grown there, and similar substances resulting from the methods of treatment that we have mentioned earlier.
And if the urine does not dissolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone located at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be positioned on their knees.
Then position his feet over his back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back. Let the patient hold his breath as much as possible for him.
Therefore press with your finger on the neck of the bladder towards the back in order to expel the stone, whereupon the urine will be released.
But if it does not dissolve with what we have said and the situation is urgent for the patient, then you must perform its extraction using an instrument called a syringe. Its form should be as follows: It should be made of silver, thin, smooth, and concave like a quill's nib in its fineness; long like the length of one and a half hands' breadths; and it should have a fine cannula at its tip.
And the way to extract urine through it is as follows: Take a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton at its end with a good ligature. Insert the tip of the thread into the lower part of the syringe. If any excess wool protrudes from the syringe, cut it off with forceps. Then insert the cannula forcefully, like blowing through a straw.
Then fill the syringe with oil or butter and egg white. Make the patient sit on a chair, uncover their groin area, and apply olive oil and warm water to the penis along with the ointment.
Then insert the syringe into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then press upwards on both sides above the navel. Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached an empty space. This is not done according to this order unless there is a bend in the path through which it passes.
Then gradually pull out the thread with wool attached.
For urine will follow the wool.
Then remove it and allow urine to flow through its usual path. Repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient finds relief. On the quality of washing the bladder using a water clock.
Chapter 59
For it is closed at one end.
And there are three holes in it, two on one side and one on the other side as shown.
And the concave place where the thing that pushes is located should be according to its size without any addition so that when it is pulled with it some moisture is drawn from it. And when it is pushed with it, it should be expelled far away just like a water clock which throws out naphtha, i.e., Greek fire in battles.
Therefore, when you wish to throw moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the water clock into the moisture and pull with it what pushes upwards, for the moisture is drawn into the concave part of the water clock. Then insert its extremity into the urethra as we have described regarding the syringe.
Next, push the moisture with what pushes it, for that moisture will immediately reach the bladder so that the patient feels it. The shape of a fine clyster used to enema the bladder.
Then insert a strong thread through those holes as they revolve. Then gather the circle together like a drawstring purse; after which you place therein what you wish from moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it into the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by expressing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
Chapter 60 Now we have spoken about the division of kinds of stone and its treatment with medicines, and I have mentioned the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of each kind, and how to operate on it with the hand and cutting instrument. The stone generated in the bladder is particularly so, and also one that lodges in the urethra. And now I will describe this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore that a stone generated in the bladder mostly happens to children.
And among its signs are that urine exits the bladder like water in its fineness, and there appears in it white sand, and the sick person rubs his penis frequently, and experiences pain with it, and often hangs himself. Then he raises up, and something comes out with it from his anus in many cases.
And the cure of children is easy as long as they have not reached fourteen years of age.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
But in young people it is of medium difficulty, between these two cases. And the cure for one whose stone is large is easier, but if it is small then its cure is more difficult.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the sick person with a clyster that will remove all the feces that are in his bowels, for sometimes this prevents the discovery of the stone during examination. Then the sick person should be taken with his feet and shaken, and moved towards his lower parts so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder or falls from a high place sometimes.
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands under his hips so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards its lower parts.
Then examine him externally and touch him there.
If you feel a stone in the passage, then promptly proceed with incision above it.
But if it does not fall out with your touch at all, then you must cleanse your index finger with the oil of your left hand if the patient is a boy; or your middle finger if he is an adult, and insert it into his anus to search for the stone until it is under your finger, and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the exterior at the location where you wish to make an incision; and instruct an assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand while removing the skin that is below them at the place of the intended incision.
Then introduce the spatula-shaped instrument, whose shape is as follows.
And find the point between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but on the left side facing the births; let the incision be made upon the stone itself, with your finger remaining inside the anus, and make the incision transverse so that it is wide externally and narrow internally, according to what is possible for the exit of the stone from it not being greater.
Perhaps indeed the finger which is in the anus will compress the stone at the site of incision, and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that a stone with angles and edges makes its exit difficult because of this.
And one which is smooth, like a gland, and round makes for easy exit.
Therefore, if it has angles and edges, add to the incision.
But if it does not come out thus, then you must hook onto it; or tie it with a thread tied skillfully, whose end is like the crescent moon that will tie around the stone and not slip off of it; or introduce beneath it an instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot get over it, then widen the opening slightly.
And if something from the blood defeats you, cut it with a scalpel.
But if the stone is larger than one, then first introduce a large bougie into the urethra.
Then cut upon it.
Afterwards insert a small one after that; and do likewise if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, then it is ignorance to make an incision too small upon it.
For one of two things happens to the patient: either he dies, or continuous dripping of urine occurs because the location does not become completely consolidated.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or hook into its fragments with forceps until you extract them piece by piece.
And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood; and tie it, and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water so that the hot inflammation may subside.
Then make the patient lie on his back with his head supported, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, wash the location with water and much oil.
Then treat it with ointment of diaphanicon and ointment of basilicum until it heals.
But if inflammation with burning and similar conditions occur in the wound, such as if blood clots in the urethra and urine is prevented from flowing, and this is recognized by the exit of blood mixed with urine.
Therefore introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood.
For if it remains, it causes inflammation of the urethra and its decay.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply to it whatever is suitable for healing until it heals.
And it is necessary that during the time of treatment, you should tie two bandages together and attach them, so that the medicines placed on the site remain in place.
If there is a small stone in the urethra and it becomes stuck and obstructs urine flow, then treat it with what I have mentioned before you proceed to surgery.
For often you will be spared from surgery through this treatment, as I have proven it. And take a perforator made of iron with the following shape: triangular at one end and sharp, fixed onto wood.
Then take a thread and tie it to the urethra below the stone so that it does not slip back into the bladder.
Then insert the perforator into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone. Then rotate the perforator with your hand on the stone gradually until you make a hole through it.
For urine will be immediately relieved.
Then press your hand over what remains of the stone on the outside of the urethra.
For it will break apart and exit with urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not possible due to some obstacle, then tie a thread below the stone and another one above it. Then cut through the urethra above the stone between the two threads.
Then remove the stone.
Afterwards untie the thread and clean the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the stone unless to prevent it from slipping back into the bladder. And another thread above is not necessary unless when the thread is untied after the stone has exited, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound. Therefore, when tying the upper thread, you must lift the skin upwards so that it returns to its original position and covers the wound as we have said.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Chapter 61
Stones are rarely formed in women.
But if a stone happens to one of them, then the cure is difficult and hindered by many methods.
One among them is that perhaps the woman is a virgin. And secondly, because you will not find a woman who reveals herself to a physician when she is chaste or among married women.
Thirdly, because you will not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the manual operation.
And fourthly, there is the remoteness of the stone from its location, requiring a deep incision, and causing fear.
But if necessity demands this procedure, then it is necessary to take a woman physician who knows well; but such are rarely found.
But if you cannot find such a woman, then seek out a chaste, skilled physician and bring with him a midwife well-versed in women's matters or another woman who has experience in this art. And ensure that she is present throughout the procedure, especially when she performs all tasks according to your instructions regarding the stone examination. Firstly, have her examine whether the woman is a virgin; then she should insert her finger into the woman's anus and search for the stone.
If she finds the stone, she should hold it with her finger and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the weakened vagina and search for the stone after placing her left hand over the bladder and applying gentle pressure. If she finds the stone, then it is necessary that she gradually moves it from the opening of the bladder downwards with all her strength until she reaches its root at the hip.
Then she should cut above it on the opposite side of the midpoint of the vulva at the root of the hip from whichever side the stone presents itself, and sense the stone in that part; and her finger should not be removed from the stone while pressing beneath it; and the incision should initially be small.
Then she shall insert a speculum into that opening.
If she feels the stone, then she should increase the size of the incision according to the amount by which the stone protrudes from it.
Know that the shapes of stones are many. Among these there is a small one and a large one, smooth and rough, long and round with branches.
Therefore know the shape of it, so that you may understand by this which stone you wish to remove.
If bleeding overcomes you, then add spongy powder made from the skin of an onion and hold it in place for one hour until the bleeding stops.
But if the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the bleeding is coming from an artery which has been cut, then place powder on the location and tie it with a suitable ligature; do not move it; and leave the stone alone and do not attempt to remove it.
For indeed the weak woman may die.
Then dress the wound.
When the flow of blood has subsided after several days and the area has begun to putrefy, then return to your procedure until the stone exits.
On the Incision for a Hydrocele.
Chapter 62
A watery tumor is not present unless there is a gathering of moisture in the white sac which is under the skin containing the testicle; and this is called the tunica vaginalis. And sometimes it is in its own little bag, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the testis until it appears; this is like a separate testis, and is the skin of the testis between the white tunica vaginalis we mentioned earlier. This happens only rarely.
The formation of this collection occurs due to weakness that befalls the testicles; therefore, this material accumulates towards them.
And sometimes it happens due to a blow to the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. It may be yellowish or bloody-red in color, or dark and foul-smelling, or it may be white and watery. This last type is the most common.
If it is in the white tunica vaginalis we mentioned earlier, then the swelling will be round and not much elongated like an egg shape; and the testis itself will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
But if the moisture is in its own little bag, then the swelling will be round with a part of the testis, making one think that there is an additional testis.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testes and the white tunica vaginalis, then it will be felt by touch.
Therefore, if you wish to know the color of the moisture, use a square instrument to probe the swelling and observe its color.
Based on what comes out at the point where the instrument was inserted, you can judge what is inside.
When we come to the treatment using an iron instrument, then you should order that the patient be bled if possible, and observe whether his body is full.
Then he should lie on his back over a raised object slightly high, and put many cloths underneath him.
Then you should sit on the left of him and order your assistant to sit on his right side, who should stretch out his hand towards one of two sides of the skin covering the testicles, and towards the area below the navel.
Then take a wide spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length up to near the pubic hair: and make the incision according to the straightness of an equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white scrotum enclosing it: and tear off its foreskin and observe whether there is a wound or take care not to cut it; and let your tearing be on the side that hangs with the egg more: and examine it carefully with the tear according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then pierce the full scrotum with a wide piercing instrument and draw out all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks and stretch out the scrotum upwards and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut the scrotum however it is possible for you to cut it, either with its entirety or in pieces, especially its thin side.
For if you do not carefully examine, in cutting it there is no security that the water will not return.
But if the egg protrudes outside its skin during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the scrotum, push it back.
Then join together the two lips of the skin covering the testicles with stitches.
Then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
But if you find the egg corrupted by another blackness, then you should tie the suspending vessels, fearing blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension and draw out the egg: afterwards treat it as we said before.
If water is gathered in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did in the first one.
And if it seems equal to you, so that it is one operation, then do thus: afterwards wipe away the blood.
Then introduce into the sections wool dipped in oil or rose oil; and place outside wool that has been dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the navel; then put doubled cloths on top, which are poultices, and tie them up with a bandage that is six inches wide according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken and heated, and filled with powdered cinnamon according to this likeness: and their ends should be made of cotton or wet wool; and they should be attached together with the bandage at the flanks of the thighs; and one end should reach over the buttock up to the back, and the second to the breast; and two other ends over the two lower thighs, and two other ends over the two groins, and all the bandage should be gathered together at the flanks of the thighs.
And when this branch is artificially treated with a cautery instead of cutting it with an iron, then take a fine skinning knife cautery and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and heat it according to what we have described until when it is revealed that white foam containing water appears: then take the cautery in this form.
Greek letters are used here.
Then pierce that foam with it and heat it until all the moisture has come out.
Then stretch the foam with hooks and scrape it off with a fine heated cautery and cut into it as much as you can until you have removed all of it.
And beware that the fire does not touch the egg.
Know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding, and better than one involving cutting.
But if you encounter resistance during the hour of cutting or cauterizing, whether it be a hot abscess, bleeding, or anything else, then you must treat what is causing the resistance with the appropriate treatment, as previously described.
If the patient is fearful and does not eagerly await this procedure due to its frightening nature, then perform a puncture as I have described it.
Once you have confirmed through the signs that the stone is watery, then make the patient sit on a raised chair.
Then puncture the lower part of the abscess with a wide spatula and make the puncture along the length of the body; let the opening be large enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place a cotton pad on the wound and bind it; let the remaining water run off, then treat it until the wound heals.
If there is resistance to the outflow of water at the time you are puncturing it, and this is only because a white cloth causes obstruction at the wound's opening and prevents the water from exiting, then insert a feather into the wound or use an instrument for drawing out water from edematous tissues, whose shape has been previously described. Alternatively, wait briefly before resuming the procedure on the wound.
Know that the water will return and gather again after about six months.
Therefore, when it gathers again, puncture it in the same manner, and the patient shall pass their days.
 On the treatment of fleshly stones.
Chapter 63
Know that when cutting into this stone, fear often leads to harm in many situations.
Therefore, it seems to me that its removal is safer than the operation itself.
And I remember the operation performed on it and the appearance of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in bodies from which the testicles are composed; and this happens for many reasons, namely. Either due to acute or sharp excess fluid that flows towards the testicles.
Or from impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found; and it is a severe abscess.
And perhaps it may be a calcareous abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs from obstruction of the arteries and inflammation of them; as has already been mentioned above: or from inflammation of the veins.
Therefore, that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries can be recognized through the arrangement of the abscess when you press it with your fingers.
And do not touch it at all.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the veins does not disperse upon pressing with fingers. And now it is possible for an incision to be made on this kind of abscess and on the surrounding flesh; and it is necessary to separate the skin of the testicles.
Then raise up the testicle upwards and remove it along with its white sac; and free the suspensiony ligament from the vas deferens and ligate the vessels; and cut the suspensiony ligament after you have freed it from all sides of the testicle.
If the testicle is united with those born flesh, then it is necessary to draw out the testicle and cut into it. And if there is adhesions between any part of the white sac or what lies between the vessels; then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and make a round incision into it.
But if there is born flesh in the place of adhesion which lies behind; then it is necessary to cut all of that and remove the testicle as we have said. When your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, which is done using Vite.
Chapter XLIV
An abscess has formed wrapped around the scrotum like a bunch of grapes with swelling of the testes; movement and exercise become difficult, and walking is impaired.
And in treating this condition, care must be taken out of fear, due to the reminder of what preceded it.
But we must say that the operation for this is done as the first ones did. I say therefore that you should make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then cut with a wide, sharp knife horizontally across where the veins are located until the veins are exposed.
Then strip them from all sides, as we have told you regarding the extraction of arteries in the temples.
Then cut them in half lengthwise along the middle and remove what is attached by rotten fecal matter.
Then treat the wound with other wounds' treatment, ensuring that pus forms to make the veins nourishing one of the testes fall off.
For there is no harm in that.
But if hemorrhoids occur with all veins, then it is necessary to remove the testes along with their veins because otherwise, they would be deprived of nutrition due to the cut and become wasted or dried up without being beneficial.
On the Treatment of Internal Hemorrhoids. Chapter XLVI
Therefore, the intestines protruded from that rupture towards one of the testes.
And this rupture was either due to a cut or the extension thereof.
And these two kinds occur due to many causes. Or from a blow. Or from falling. Or from shouting. Or lifting of heavy objects, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is due to the extension of a cut.
It is that which happens gradually over time and not suddenly: and it is an equal abscess facing the deep part: because the cut compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it is due to a cut is that there occurs from the beginning intense sudden pain: and it is a different abscess appearing near under the skin: and this is because of the exit of the intestine and its course towards the outside of the cut.
And sometimes it emerges with the intestine: and this is called a 'Ramex' or 'intestinal hernial ring': and sometimes it occurs with wind.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and become trapped there: and this brings danger to the patient, because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in treating these kinds of illnesses with iron there is fear of injury: therefore one must be careful not to cause harm in this way.
And the method of operation is that you should instruct the patient to try to push their intestine back into its proper place with their own hand if it can be returned.
Then he should lie on his back between your hands and lift his legs up.
Then extend the skin that follows it upwards and cut all of the skin covering the testes along its length.
Then fasten hooks into both lips of the cut according to what is needed for opening it with them: and make the cut as large as possible so that an egg can pass through it.
Then scrape off the skin of the scrotum and what is underneath it until when the white sifach (sperm) is uncovered, hard on all sides: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white sifach, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second sifach, without adhering to that which is in the back part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand towards the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this stretch out the white sifach upwards with your left hand: and lift up the egg with the sifach to the part of the cut: and instruct your assistant to stretch the egg upwards: and you loosen the adhesion which is behind the completed solution.
And search with your fingers so that there is nothing there of the intestine wrapped around the hard white sifach.
If however you find something from it, then push it downwards towards the belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten strands of linen and insert it into the last sifach, that is the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the cut: then cut off the ends that emerge from the thread until there are four strands.
Then arrange some of them over others in the shape of a cross and tie them together with alsifach, of which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligament, until nothing can be sent from the vessels that nourish it to them lest an inflamed swelling should occur.
And place again a second ligature according to outside the first ligature, at a distance of two fingers from it.
And after these two ligatures let out from the sifach which is under the skin of the testicles a length equal to the size of a finger and cut off the rest entirely according to its roundness, and remove the egg.
Then make an incision on the lower part of the skin of the testicles through which blood and pus are flowing, as we have described beforehand.
Then apply wool immersed in oil to the wound, and also apply the ligature that has been mentioned.
And sometimes the white sifach which we have spoken of is cauterized after its incision is made, fearing bleeding.
For this happens frequently.
And let go of the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if its fall is delayed, then foment with warm water and place over it what we have mentioned until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the usual treatment of wounds until it heals.
On Removing a Foreign Body.
Chapter 66.
I have not seen anyone who dared to attempt the removal of this foreign body with an iron instrument.
And initially they said that it is done like we described for a foreign body that has grown into the liver.
That is to say, after the incision, tie off the vessels below it with ease, then cut through it in the middle and treat it afterwards with what opens it until the vessels fall out, and treat the wound according to what we have said until it heals.
On Dislocations of the Groin.
Chapter 67.
When a dislocation occurs in the groin, as we have mentioned, and there is a prominence but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: if something does descend it is not much and returns at all times. But if this continues over time, a tear forms in the sifach until the intestines descend into it.
And this happens because of the stretching of the sifach which is in the groin, as we have mentioned.
That is to say, because the sifach becomes stretched out, it then softens and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as has been told before.
Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is done so that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
Then cut the location of the ruptured inflammation and protrusion with a cut across its width, to the length of three fingers.
Then tie up the alsifak and what is beneath the skin until the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a hot iron, place it on the protruding location of the sifach, and press it down to the depth of the abdomen.
Then if there are two protruding locations on either side of the hot iron from the sifach, join one with the other using a suture; then remove the end of the iron.
And do not cut the alsifak entirely, nor stretch its opening nor anything else, as I have told you in treating a prolapse of the intestines. Then treat it with the care for wounds.
So when you cut the threads, cleanse them and restore the wound until it heals.
For the sifach contracts, and there is no addition of the protrusion rupture.
And a cautery is better for this location because it is closer to health.
 On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter 68
Often the skin of the testicles becomes softened in certain men, causing the flesh between them to also soften and resulting in a foul appearance.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is called upon to treat this condition to make the patient lie on their back and cut all of the softened skin over the natural skin. Then bring together the two lips with a suture; and if desired, first remove the excess softened skin with three or four sutures, and make a firm stitch.
Then treat the remaining wounds with care until they heal and the threads drop off.
Chapter on Castration.
Chapter 69.
You should know that castration is condemned by our religion. Therefore, I would have been allowed to omit it from this book of mine; and there is no need for its mention except for two methods.
One reason is that the medical knowledge of castration should be known when asked about it; and so that he may know how to treat its consequences if they occur.
And another reason is that we often need castration for certain animals to obtain useful things from them, such as rams, goats, cats, and similar beasts.
I therefore say that castration occurs in two ways. Either by rubbing.
Or by cutting and slicing.
In the case of castration by rubbing, the method is this: we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax, and hang down; then throw them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer visible to touch.
But in castration by cutting and slicing, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than that done by rubbing, for rubbing may leave some of the testicles behind, causing the animal to desire mating.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter on the Treatment of Hermaphrodites in Two Ways.
Chapter 70.
A hermaphrodite is a person with male genitals according to two ways.
One type is when a space appears at the scrotum or on the skin between the two testicles with a figure resembling a woman's vulva containing hairs; and sometimes urine flows from that area.
In women there is one type, which is the vulva of a woman above the pubis like the small testes of a man protruding externally: among them one is like the priapus of a man, and two are like the two testicles.
And the treatment for three types - two from men and one from women - is this: it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh until the indentation disappears.
Then treat them with the same care as other wounds.
But regarding the second type in men, from which urine flows and is located on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation or treatment at all.
On incising hemorrhoids and excessive flesh protruding from the vulva of women.
Chapter 71.
Hemorrhoids may sometimes be added to the natural condition until it becomes foul and ugly in appearance; and sometimes they are greatly enlarged in some women so that they become like those of men, extending even to intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold back the excess hemorrhoids with your hand or with a hook and cut them; but do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the depth, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the same care as wounds until it heals.
But the flesh that grows is the flesh that is born at the opening of the womb until it fills it; and sometimes it extends externally in the shape of a tail, which some people call the 'tail disease'.
Therefore, we should cut it like hemorrhoids and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of the hymen, which is the unperforated vulva of a woman.
Chapter 72.
The hymen is either the unopened vulva of a woman or a small opening.
And it is either natural or acquired [i.e., caused by injury].
An acquired one is due to an illness that preceded it; and indeed it can be either from flesh born attached or from one that is thin or thick. And it occurs either deep within the womb, or on its sides, or above it, or below it. And it prevents intercourse and impregnation, and labor, and perhaps it also prevents menstruation.
And its detection is made by the midwife's inspection if there is an obvious opening nearby.
If however it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the opening is due to a thin slit and is close to two lips, then hurry and tear it apart.
And there are some who place wool over both lips.
Then place the fingers of both your hands together and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart.
Then stretch the two lips with force until the thin slit tears open and the opening is revealed.
Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the site; and let the woman have intercourse every day so that the site does not become consolidated again.
But if the slit is thick and dense, then it must be cut with a broad, sharp knife like a laurel leaf.
But if the opening is due to flesh that has grown naturally, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; and have with you medicines that will stop the flow of blood without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and a mixture of incense with egg white.
Then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly. Keep it in place for several days and then apply a dry linen bandage, after which the usual treatment will be applied until healing is complete.
And sometimes the birth of a child occurs with other flesh being born along with it. Therefore, these should be cut according to this method; but there must be no contrast between the cancerous ulcer and iron.
Chapter on the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Bartholin's Warts, and Red Polypi in Women.
Chapter 73.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of vein orifices, until blood flows out from them abundantly and continuously.
When hemorrhoids become large, piles form; and as I have already mentioned in the division of their types and signs, I will now discuss which ones are treated and which ones are not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are at the opening of the womb and are not visible to sensation require no treatment with iron.
But those hemorrhoids that are at the opening of the womb upon which sensation falls are the ones that are treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to take the woman into a cold house.
Then extend Bartholin's warts with forceps or with a rough cloth and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder on them at the flow of blood from one of the incised wounds without cauterization, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and aloes, and similar substances.
Then push her feet against the wall for one hour.
Afterwards place her in cold water.
But if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and orange peel, and henbane, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a poultice for her back.
If blood does not flow with it, then attach leeches to her back and breasts without incisions.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of wormwood or the juice of henbane or the juice of the root of wild celery, mixed with Pontic wine, and apply it to the affected area.
After the boil has ripened, then treat the spot with ointments until it heals.
Aldabar is red and resembles the heads of flamingos. It is rough in appearance.
It is therefore necessary to cut off what appears from it, as I have said about the boil: treat it until it heals.
Chapter on the Perforation of the Uterus which occurs in the Matrix.
Chapter 74.
Many kinds of swellings occur in the matrix, such as cancer, and stone boil, and ulcers, and hard lumps, and soft lumps, that is, herpes, anastoma, fistulae, hemorrhoids, ragged sores, and boils, and hot boils.
And I have already spoken about all these diseases and their types, signs, and treatments in the division [of books]: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot boil which occurs in the matrix when it is from boils that gather blood, and you should know how its opening is done with iron.
It is therefore necessary to examine.
Then if the pain of the boil at its beginning is acute with percussion and inflammation and fever, and you see it becoming red: if sensation fails upon it, then do not rush to perforate it; treat it with that which promotes ripening until the sharpness of the symptoms has subsided.
Then it is necessary to make the woman sit on a seat that has two steps, and recline or lie on her back, and bring her feet up towards the lower part of her belly: let her thighs be spread wide apart, and let her arms rest under her knees, and bind each one with an appropriate band.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and assist in opening the mouth of the womb with the instrument.
The form of which is described later.
And when you wish to apply this instrument, ensure that it does not penetrate deeper into the woman's womb than is appropriate, lest injury be caused.
However, if the instrument is too long, then you should place cotton pads on top of the opening to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depths of the womb. And she should hold the instrument and turn the wheel at its upper side while the assistant revolves it until the mouth of the womb opens.
When the emergence appears and is touched by hand, and if it is soft and yielding, then you should cut it off at its head with a wide-bladed scissor.
After the pus is evacuated, then you should place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties, on the wound and remove the cut piece from within the womb.
And place outside over the womb, and over the public hair, clean wool soaked in water with boiled mallows.
Then treat it on the second day with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed with water and honey, then rinsed with water boiled with lily root or long birthwort. Then apply the ointment again.
But if the wound is hidden inside the womb, then do not attempt to treat it with iron, but rather use what was mentioned earlier for division.
Chapter on Midwifery: How live embryos that have exited unnaturally shaped are treated.
Chapter 70.
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the shape of a natural birth.
From these signs, you will know that when a woman is pressing downwards and wishes to smell the air, and feels relieved above her from labor pains, and desires for childbirth to occur quickly, then you should know that this birth is natural in shape. The embryo exits head-first with its secundine attached, either hanging or suspended by the umbilical cord. Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress her womb so that the embryo descends quickly.
Which however is different from this birth, is unnatural and reprehensible.
For sometimes the fetus emerges feet-first, and its body comes out before its head, with one hand or foot first; or the head and hands emerge; or the buttocks come out; and perhaps it turns on its neck, and other similar unseemly shapes.
Therefore, the midwife must be prudent and skilled in all these matters, and guard against error and deception. And I shall show every shape of them, how the spirit behaves in each one, what it signifies, and upon which part it stands.
When the fetus emerges head-first in its natural way, and intense pain seizes upon the woman, and her labor becomes difficult, and you see that her strength is already weakened, then make her sit on a chair, or have women hold her up. And apply vapor of rue decocted with fennel seeds to her vulva and inner thighs with moistened oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and rupture the secundine with it. She should cut off what is in excess of moisture with her nail until [the fetus] runs out. And press the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be administered a clyster of fennel mucilage with sesame oil.
Next, command her after the clyster to hold herself in and make her sneeze with mustard powder, holding her mouth and nose closed at once.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
But if both hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to gently push them back little by little.
But if it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up. Then shake the seat upon the ground, and have the woman hold on so that she does not fall during the shaking.
If therefore neither the hands emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remaining fetus. Tie her hand with cloth and extract it gently for indeed it will come out.
The exit of the embryo upon its feet.
When the fetus emerges upon its feet, then one must press them upwards; next, gradually turn the fetus; afterwards bring it out evenly.
Then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
When they have emerged up to the hips, then command her to hold herself in and make her sneeze with mustard powder. For it will emerge if God wills it.
And if it does not emerge as we have said, then gradually push the fetus back until you place it in its natural position.
For it will then come out with ease.
But if it is still obstructed by all that we have mentioned, then take some wheat bran mucilage and sesame oil and dissolved gum Arabic. Grind them well together in a mortar. Then make a wick with this mixture and insert it into the woman's vagina and lower belly.
Then have her sit in warm water until she sweats.
When you see that her lower parts are now warmed up, then apply a plaster of myrrh and place it on it.
When the plaster has held for one hour, then have him/her sit on a seat/chair.
Then make her sneeze; and close her mouth and nose; and press the lower part of her abdomen gently with pressure.
For the pus will come out immediately.
The fetus should be expelled onto the knees and hands.
When it comes out according to this method, then gradually insert your hands into it.
Then the woman is placed on her back with her feet hanging down towards the floor, and she lies on the bed with her hands folded.
Then press gently upon her abdomen gradually.
Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows until she is prepared below.
But if the fetus does not come out, then grasp her feet and move them forcefully.
Then press gently on what is above the hypogastrium until the fetus ascends towards the upper parts.
Then insert her hands and bring out the fetus gradually; and instruct the woman to press until the fetus comes out.
The fetus should be expelled hanging down between the hands.
Then put your hands back into place.
But if she cannot reduce it herself, then lift up the woman and make her walk around.
If walking is not possible for her, then lay her on the bed and shake her legs forcefully.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from mucilage.
But if the woman goes into labor, then make her sit on a seat/chair.
Then assist with the hands and bring out the fetus according to its natural shape; make the woman sneeze and instruct her to press herself until it comes out.
The fetus should be expelled onto her shoulders with hands spread wide, and its face towards the back of its mother's body.
It is necessary for the midwife to hold onto the fetus' hand, then gradually turn it and bring it out with ease.
After it has been brought forth, then place on its vulva that which we have spoken of made from oil and muclaginous substances.
Then instruct her to move slowly.
After you have done this, then make her sit on a seat and instruct her to lean towards her right side.
Then instruct her to hold herself back: and make her sneeze with condiments.
The exit of the fetus is prepared upon the side.
When it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner along with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is emptied from the moisture.
If however it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it at the navel so that it may not hold back nor cause death.
Then push the fetus into its place until you put it where it should be: and instruct the woman to hold herself back several times: for indeed it will come out easily through the exit.
Exit of Twins or Multiple Fetuses.
Know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born.
However this is unusual and rarely happens.
Five is against nature and they do not live at all: and although they multiply, they are contained by a single afterbirth: and they are separated by a membrane distinguishing between them which is tied at the navel of each one.
And sometimes they come out just like a single fetus comes out easily through its natural exit, but they also come out through the exit which we have described as praiseworthy. But if some of them are difficult at birth and come to that which we have described in unnatural shapes, then care for them as we have spoken: and let the midwife be skillful and do what she does with ease and slowness and let it be born according to every shape with that which is prepared for it by guiding it towards health.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, ten: and I have verified that a woman expelled seven at once, and on another occasion fifteen, all of them formed.
Which was done by measurement by the glorious wise man.
Therefore it is necessary for all this to be known in obstetrics. For perhaps something similar will happen to her; therefore she should oppose it with what is appropriate.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus and it does not emerge as said in division by medicine, and you are forced to use manual operation, then it is necessary that you consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident from which loss is feared upon her; then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on the bed with her back down and her head inclined downward and her legs raised: and a helper shall hold her on both sides or she shall be tied to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with slippery elm and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed. Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages; then insert it into the womb gently.
Then seek with it the place where the hooks will be placed on the fetus, and suitable places for that purpose.
Therefore consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend with its head first: then fix hooks in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or beard or collarbone or near the ribs and below the hips.
But if the descent is feet first, then grasp it by the comb and middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and place its curve on what is between the fingers of the left hand. Then introduce your hand gently and fix the hook in one of the places mentioned until you reach the empty space.
Then extend with equal force and not only in a straight line but also move it in every direction so that its exit is eased just like when extracting a tooth.
And what is between them should be softened to facilitate extension.
But if some part remains retained, then the midwife should anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from one side to roll it back out with her fingers.
If some part of the fetus emerges, then change hooks to a higher place and continue until the entire fetus comes out.
If the hand emerges first but cannot be pushed back due to its constriction, then wrap a cloth around it.
Then pull it out until the whole hand emerges, cut it at the ankle or elbow and do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the fetus's head is large or becomes constricted during birth or has fluid gathered in its head, then introduce a spaying hook between its fingers and pierce the head with it to drain water. Or break it using an instrument called Almisdac, the shape of which comes with the shapes of other instruments in the following chapter.
Similarly if a child is born with an oversized head then perform craniotomy or extract it using the Almisdac as mentioned earlier.
Then grasp and remove the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges but gets stuck at the fork, then pierce it until fluid from the chest is released.
But if it does not become entangled nor comply with delivery, then cut the head into pieces as much as you are able to.
If there is an abscess below the belly or it has hydrops (watery swelling), then pierce it until fluid flows out of it.
But if the fetus is presenting feet first, its extraction will be easy and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be straightforward.
But if it becomes stuck at the belly or chest, then extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand and pierce the belly or chest until what is inside flows out.
But if other parts are removed but the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, then insert your hand deep into the womb and search for the head with it. Then grasp the head with your fingers up to the mouth of the womb. Next, insert one hook or two hooks and extract the head with them.
But if the mouth of the womb is constricted due to a hot abscess that has occurred, then do not exert effort on it. Instead, administer warm fomentations and apply poultices. Also, sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is lying on its side, then it may be possible to turn it. In this case, what was said about a live fetus should be administered.
But if it is not possible, then cut it out piece by piece and remove it.
And you must not leave any of the afterbirth inside at all.
When you have completed your procedure, then apply what was said regarding hot abscesses that occur in the womb.
But if bleeding occurs, then let her sit in astringent water and apply further treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose fetus died within her womb; afterwards she became pregnant again upon it, and then another fetus also died.
Therefore, after a long time had passed, an abscess occurred at her navel and it swelled until it opened; and it began to discharge pus.
I was then called for to attend to her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
So I applied poultices of strong attraction over it, and bone came out from its place.
Then after some days had passed, another bone came out.
And I was amazed at this, for there is no bone in the womb.
Therefore, I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So I examined the wound and removed many bones while she was in better condition. And now she lives fairly well after a long time, and only a little pus is discharged from there.
And I would not have mentioned this strange thing unless it contained knowledge and help for that which the skilled physician performs with his hand in treating.
 On the shapes of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
Chapter 77.
Below is the shape of the Press, with which books are made even, having two windlasses at both ends on two wooden beams.
But this windlass must be thinner than the press itself and should be made either from ivory or boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is about two fingers, and the edge of each is about one finger, and their length is half a palm, and between the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, firmly attached on both sides, whose length is half a palm and slightly more, and the width of each is about two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it may open along with them when you turn both windlasses.
The shape of the windlass with which the uterus is opened.
Another shape similar to this one, thinner and lighter.
It should be made from ivory or boxwood, in the likeness of tongs.
However, at its end there should be two additions as you see above; and the length of each addition is about a palm, and their width is two fingers.
When you wish to open the uterus with this, then cause the woman to sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down, having opened what is between her legs.
Then insert these two joined additions into the uterus, and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with tongs, evenly according to the amount you wish from the opening of the mouth of the uterus, until the midwife does what she wishes.
The shape of another windlass which the ancients called 'Forma Impellentis', with which the fetus is pushed forth.
The shape of the Almisdac for crushing a small head. The form of the pincer having one spine.
Form of pincers with two spines
Shape of tongs with saw teeth, used to crush a fetus' head
Form of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head
Form of two spatulas also broader.
These instruments are all exercised, and the more various their shapes become, and the better they are prepared by the craftsman, the quicker is the operation itself, and the greater is its reputation among people because of its multitude.
Therefore do not disdain to have one of these instruments ready at hand.
For the need of them is inexcusable.
Chapter on the Extraction of the Afterbirth.
Chapter 78
When the afterbirth is retained at birth, then it is necessary to instruct the woman in labor to hold her breath.
Then have her sneeze with condis (a mixture), and place your hand on her mouth and nose.
If it comes out this way, that is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its cover. Place herbs that open the mouth of the womb in it, such as calamentum, ruta, anethum, camomilla, sseham, lignum aloes, and centaurea. Take all these herbs or some of them, immerse them in water, and put them on the fire.
Then place a reed bellows over the hole of the pot's cover and put its other end into the mouth of the womb. Hold it until steam reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then have her sneeze as we said before.
For the second will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or mallow mucilage. Then she should insert her hand into the vulva and search for it with care.
When she finds it, then she should take hold of it and pull it out gradually.
But if it is attached deep within the uterus, then insert your hand as we have described until you find the secundine. Then pull it out gradually in a straight line, so that the uterus does not prolapse due to strong traction. Instead, gently move it towards the right and left sides alternately before increasing the force of traction.
She will then obey and be preserved, and come away from its attachment.
But if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing and use a poultice with herbs cooked in oil.
But if it still does not come out despite all that we have said: be careful not to tire her with repeated attempts at extraction.
However, whatever comes out of the uterus must be tied to the woman's hipbone.
Then administer a suppository with the Tetrapharmakon ointment.
For it will rot her after several days and dissolve and come out on its own.
But when it begins to decay, a foul smell rises to the stomach and head, causing harm to the patient.
Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered to counteract this.
Some of the ancients have already tried fumigating with mustard seeds and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigation in cases of retained secundine and menstrual flow is as follows:
Make a vessel like an alembic or of earthenware; place its wide end over the fire and put the fumigation on top of charcoal. Hold it until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Regarding the treatment of unperforated Anal Fissures.
Chapter 79
Many children are born with anal fissures that have not opened up, which should be treated with a fine probe.
Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger using a fine probe; and if she cannot do so, she should use an acute spatula to pierce it. She must be careful not to touch the infant's skin.
Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if you fear that it will not open up, then place a lead cannula in the hole for many days, and remove it when the child begins to defecate.
And it happens that anal fissures also become closed due to scarring or accumulation of pus.
Therefore, the scar tissue must be cut away, and then treated with what we have said for treatment using lead. Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Chapter 80
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are knots and swellings that appear near the anus externally or in the space between its parts; there may be one fistula or several.
When that knot becomes inflamed, it opens up and white watery fluid or thin pus begins to flow from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the space between the bladder and the urethra.
And there are also fistulas that penetrate as far as the hip joint and as far as the coccyx node.
However, when recognizing a fistula that passes through to the anus, whether penetrating or not, it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus. Then, insert a thin probe made of silver or iron into the fistula. If there are no twists or turns.
If it is twisted, then insert into it a thin probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
If you do not feel the probe at all and there is no discharge from the opening, nor wind nor worms as I have said, then know that it is not penetrating. Therefore, proceed to treat it promptly.
And when a fistula passes through to the urethra or urinary bladder, its sign is that urine will come out of it. Its prevention is that the place should be consolidated with medications.
But if it passes through to the hip joint or the bone of the hip, then its sign is that the probe will reach there if there are no twists up to the bone. There will also be pain around that part and pus will always come out from it. And medication will not work on it nor will it consolidate with ointment.
And for all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; their treatment is useless and foolishness on the part of physicians who attempt them. But for one that is not penetrating and not old, healing can be hoped for with a seton. As I have told you, I myself have proven this method: and it should be done thus - let the patient lie on their back in your hands; raise their legs up to above their hips and incline their hips toward their belly.
Then insert a probe made of lead or silver if the fistula is twisted until you know where the probe has reached.
But if the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
Therefore, if you feel that the probe has already passed through on its own and detect it, aside from feeling it between your finger and the tissue or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating: therefore do not attempt to heal it, as we have said.
However, they say that flesh is healed in some people, and there is a remedy hoped for through medication, such as cauterizing with fire using a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously stated, and inserting it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus.
Then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the added and filtered flesh resembling a bird's feather has been burned.
Then wrap it with cloths soaked in butter until the burned flesh emerges; then dress it with ointments that promote tissue growth and consolidation.
If it heals, then that is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if the probe emerges and does not reach your finger which is inside the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue between them, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and continue cutting with the probe until you reach where the tip of the probe has reached, and the probe will be released and fall out.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh resembling a bird's feather so that none of it remains.
But if blood hinders you and dissolves between you and your operation so that you cannot cut those flesh, then it is better and quicker to cauterize it with fire or with an acid medicine.
For cautery with fire binds together good tissues, burns the added flesh, cuts off blood vessels, and dries out moisture.
Then apply it wrapped in linen soaked in butter or crushed onions until the wound emits pus and the burnt flesh comes out into the pus.
Then dress the wound with unguents that promote tissue growth and hardness; they are medicines with astringent properties and drying effects.
For when they are restored, then indeed it is healed: and do not fear repetition. But if the fistula has already reached the depth of the anus and is distant from the body's surface, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If you feel a band, and there is a membrane of skin or flesh between it and yourself, and it is close to penetrating, then do not operate on it except by the way of trust and hope.
That is to say, one of three methods is applied in such cases: either cauterize it as mentioned earlier; or cut it open until you reach its depth so that it is possible for you to insert a wick and treat it from close by.
And do not proceed too deeply with the incision, lest you cut into the muscle that holds the anus and accidentally cause involuntary bowel incontinence upon the patient. Then dress it with what we have said. Perhaps it will heal; or else you can extend that membrane and cleanse it after cutting it almost up to the anus, as mentioned earlier, either with a tent or some other sharp-pointed instrument.
Then cleanse the filtered flesh that is in the incision as much as possible through examination.
Then attempt to restore the entire wound with the incision and the upper orifice where it solidifies; leaving the fistula open in the interior part of the anus will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula follows this method: when you insert a tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus near the body's surface with skin and the margin of the anus, then take a tent with a pierced tip, like a bird's needle, that is, prepared leather in this shape.
And insert into it a thread wound around five threads and wrap it around it.
Then insert the tent with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If it passes into the inner margin of the anus nearby, then draw out the thread from that opening so that you insert your finger into the anus and bring out the end of the thread, and join both ends together; and tie each one tightly, and leave it for one or two days. And as much as the thread enters into flesh, pull it tight well until those tissues which are between the two ends of the thread become cut and fall off. Then care for the wound until it consolidates and heals.
For it is not proper for you to do this because of the side [of the body], so that you may not cut into it.
Then do with it as we have said until it heals.
The shape of the spiked probe used to incise the fistula is very sharply curved on one side and not sharp on the other side, so that it does not cut into what is not necessary, as you can see.
On sewing hemorrhoids from which blood flows after their incision, and the care of splits.
Chapter 81
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids.
Either they are inside the anus like charcoal or plum stones, or they appear like grapes themselves.
And among them there are small ones and large ones; blood flows from them continuously, either one or many.
And they are also found outside the anus, at its ends.
But these that are outside the anus are mostly few in moisture, from which yellow water flows, or little blood runs continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And its treatment that is inside the anus is, to advise the sick person to tie up: and express out, until it comes out of the anus, and appear to you.
Therefore also suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your nail.
Then cut them at their roots.
But if hooks do not hold on them due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth, or with a wick from doubled wool, and pull them out with your fingers.
Then cut them, and sprinkle on them after cutting some warm powders, so that they serve them instead of cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what precedes in the chapter on cauterizing.
Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not obey to the evacuation, then give the sick person a clyster with a little bite in it, so that it may wash out what is in the anus, and quickly obey to the evacuation when the sick person expresses himself.
But if piles are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: it is to take them with your nail or take them with a hook, and cut them.
Then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever shrinks from cutting with iron, then it is necessary to perform suturing of them in this manner.
Take a thread wound around and insert it into the needle.
Then draw out piles upwards and make the needle penetrate into its root from the other side; wrap two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, so that they are crosswise; and tie the pile tightly with a strong knot.
Then tie the thread, and remove the needle.
Do likewise with all piles, leaving one alone; do not bind it so that blood may flow freely from it.
Then place on the wound a piece of linen dipped in rose oil or cypress oil, and lay it upon it; and instruct the sick person to rest.
Leave him thus until he falls asleep.
When piles fall out, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they heal.
On the Treatment of Fissures.
For indeed fissures often occur due to dryness of feces and constriction of nature.
When they are opened and medicine does not help them, then it is necessary to scrape them with a spoon or your nail until they become moist, and remove the upper skin which prevents their healing.
Then treat them until they heal properly.
But if they do not heal, then repeat the process with greater vigor than before until they bleed much and are cleaned out, and then treat them until they are healed.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids Which Are Inflamed and Not Inflamed; and Dry Piles and Ants.
Then treat the wound; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said in its chapter.
From dry piles there is one small, rough, porous, round elevation on the surface of the body.
And such occurrences happen frequently in children's hands
Its treatment is to stretch the pile and cut it; or tie it with a silk thread; or with a hair, until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with caustic medicine; and now inverted piles are eradicated, and those not inverted without the instrument that I will mention. An ant hill is also a small, porous, thick elevation on the surface of the body, going deep into it. When cold finds it, one feels something like an ant bite in it, and this happens throughout the whole body, but especially in the hands.
Its treatment is to take a cannula made from goose or strong vulture feather and place it on the ant hill until its circle encloses it on all sides.
Then revolve your hand with the cannula until it cuts off what is around the ant hill; and put it into the depth of the flesh, and eradicate the ant hill from its root. And if you wish, do this with a cannula of bronze or iron, following this pattern.
Let the upper part of the cannula draw up towards the top, wrapped deaf-mute-like, so that its grasp and revolution may be eased upon the finger.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant hill according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery concerning the cauterization of piles.
On the shapes of instruments used for administering clysters in cases of disease of the anus, and for loosening the belly and colic.
Chapter 83
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver, or of brass, or of cast iron, or of hammered copper.
And sometimes they are made small and large according to those in which they are used.
Therefore, that which is used in the treatment of young children should be small; and for those whose anus is weak or painful, so should their clysters be.
Large clyster.
Small clyster.
The cannula of it, that is, the upper end into which the womb is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction so that the womb may be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be closed, that is, not open, very smooth, drawing towards fineness: and on one of its sides there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the threads, and a little thicker is better; and the womb in which medicines are placed should be made from the bladder of an animal or from the skin of a lamb, which should be in the shape of a small aspharot: whose root should be one palm.
When the womb is placed inside it, tie the head of the clyster tightly between the two differentiations with a strong knot.
Then administer the clyster with it.
And this is the shape of the circle and holes depicted here. But the quality of administering the clyster with it is that you should fill the womb or bladder with medicine which has been warmed according to the tolerance of the sick person; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
Then the sick person should lie on their back and raise their legs upwards; and place underneath them a mattress, that is, leather upon which people lie, or cloth.
Then anoint the end of the clyster with oil, or egg white, or slippery dock mucilage, or something similar.
Then introduce it into the anus gently.
Then let a servant take a jar with both hands at once and squeeze it forcefully until all the contents of the clyster pass into the intestine. Then remove the clyster, and the patient should raise their legs against the wall. But if medication causes him to need to go, then hold back as much as possible.
And if he sleeps with it all night long, it is the best in treatment.
But if you give him a clyster for intestinal inflammation and his bowel movement comes quickly, then repeat the procedure until he is healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or sores wounding the anus, then use a very fine, gentle clyster like those used for children.
And this is the shape of a fine clyster with a thin skin stretched over it.
Chapter on the Treatment of Head Wounds without Bone Fracture.
Chapter 84.
I have already spoken about the division of wound treatment suitable for this book; here I will discuss their treatment by hand and with medicines according to completion.
So I say that wounds are differentiated according to the cause of the wound and its location.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are caused are often such as being struck by a stone; cut by a sword or knife; pierced by a spear, wood, arrow, and similar objects from many sources.
But wounds that occur according to the location on the body are like those that fall upon the head, neck, chest, belly, or limbs, and others similar to them.
And I am describing the treatment of certain wounds so that I may set forth a reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the treatment of compound fractures will come up at the beginning of Chapter Three.
I therefore say:
When there is a simple wound in the head and no bone fracture exists, observe first whether it results from being struck by a stone or similar object, which has merely broken the skin: if it is a large wound and you fear an internal abscess will form due to heat: then act quickly, performing a cephalic phlebotomy immediately, and do not delay it: and draw off blood from him according to his strength: unless there is something preventing phlebotomy, especially if little blood flows out of the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And the patient should abstain from overeating and drinking wine or consuming heavy foods.
But if something prevents reduction, then reduce diet and avoid flesh and wines.
And place over the wound, if an inflammatory abscess occurs, cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with wine that has been thickened.
But if you are secure from an inflammatory abscess, then place over the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and has not changed color, powder which I will describe later: but if it has already changed color, then place over it some ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large or results from an incision with a knife or similar tool and its edges do not come together by themselves: then close it with stitches according to what I will describe concerning the suturing of abdominal wounds.
But if a wound is already exposed by bone and hangs open without retention unless held by a small suspension: then cut into it.
Then treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to consume foods that are easily digested such as chicken and cooked wheat groats until they can tolerate solid food.
If you find that the skin has begun to decay but does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of the decayed portion and cast it out. Afterwards treat the wound.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows freely and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then search for the artery.
Then if you find it uncut, cut it with a spatula or ligate it.
But if the necessity requires it and what we have said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
Method of the Incarnation Powder.
Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime. Grind all together very well and sieve it. Then fill the wound with this powder and bind it tightly until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then tie it above with bandages and leave it undisturbed until it is completely healed so that it does not break open.
For the medicine will not be removed from it until it heals.
Then treat the remainder according to usual care until they are healed.
On Wounds of the Neck.
Chapter 85.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and wounds of the head that are simple.
But if the neck vein or artery is cut: then if it is a vein, there is no treatment except to apply something that stops bleeding sharply, such as cineraria and zehir, and things like them.
For they harm nerves and cause them to contract.
And do not apply anything cold to the wound at all because the substance of nerves is cold and continuous with the brain, which is the most elevated organ. Therefore let what is applied for treatment be gentle medicines like chalk washed with sweet water infused several times with oil or rose oil, and tutty, also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones in this way, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then perform stitching: or press its lips together with lint.
Then treat it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or there is a cavity at its lower part where pus has already collected: then pierce it at its lowest point.
That if the artery is cut in the wound and its blood flow has begun: then separate or cut it and tie it: or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If however the throat has already been injured, or entirely [injured], and the larynx is saved: then approximate the edges of the skin with sutures over the windpipe, and do not touch the throat itself, rather preserve it, and return it to its natural shape.
Then bind it with a proper bandage, and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments which have the qualities of absorption and drying until it heals.
If however the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then investigate it: if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them or as many as possible; and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound rots, separates and its discharge is alleviated.
If however the wound is fresh, then sprinkle over it the powder which I have described [earlier].
But if bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with that about which there is mention in its own chapter.
Chapter 86.
If therefore air flows out from the wound when the sick person gasps, then know that the wound is mortal.
But if it does not have depth and is fresh with its own blood: then do not put the powder on it from the first hour nor bind it, lest blood be retained in its depths and return to the heart and kill the sick person. Instead, put an absorbent ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if the ointment is not present for you, then put a piece of old cotton on the mouth of the wound so that it may suck up what flows out from it in terms of moisture; and make sure the sick person sleeps on the wound so that what collects in it may flow [out].
But if three days have passed since the wound occurred, or more, and no spasms have affected the sick person, nor has there been a bad trembling of the heart, nor any constriction in breathing, and you see that all other conditions are good: then know that the wound is safe.
Therefore treat it with linens, and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if its healing is delayed, and it opens up again continually, then know that a fistula has formed.
Therefore treat the fistula according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife wound and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded in terms of suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and chips of bone have come out from it: then probe the wound and hasten to remove those chips, if they are separated.
But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound putsrefies, for it is easier to remove them [then].
The judgment regarding the treatment of other wounds that occur on the other limbs is the same as what we have said.
Chapter: On Abdominal Wounds, Exit of Intestines, and Their Repair.
Chapter 87.
A tear that occurs in the abdomen is either great, middle-sized, or small.
Therefore from a large tear sometimes one intestine or several intestines may protrude.
Thus their reduction and suture are urgent and difficult.
And a small tear is also difficult in another way.
Therefore the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not promptly perform their replacement to their place immediately: because they swell, open up, and become thickened; thus entrance becomes difficult.
Therefore it is better to perform the middle incision of disruptions because with this there is no difficult reduction of the intestine as occurs in these two types.
Know that the suture of a vein is done in four ways.
The first two sutures are common to the suture of the belly and the suture of other wounds of the body; and there are two other sutures which properly pertain to other wounds.
However they are more proper for the suture of the belly; and I shall explain each one to you with its exposition and description. Therefore I say that when a wound is small and some intestine protrudes from it, making reduction difficult, then that is due to one of the two methods.
Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said; or because there is swelling in the intestine due to the cold air.
When this occurs, then it is necessary that you warm it so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth only in lukewarm water.
Or boil with water of squirting cucumber and cypress and spice, and cover the intestine with it until the swelling is dissolved.
Sometimes wine that has been thickened does this, and it is better than water alone for dissolving swelling.
When you see that the swelling has dissolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea or marsh mallow has been boiled.
For by this means its entrance is eased with a small thing.
But if its return cannot be achieved after this treatment, then cut into the small disruption with an instrument used for cutting haemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than cutting; and there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part be sharp and pointed, and the other not sharp, and let its extremity not be too fine, but rather somewhat blunt, like a wedge.
When the wound is enlarged and enters into an internal organ, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its own natural shape in its proper place, if possible.
When the disruption is extensive in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head.
But if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then always place your purpose and attention on this: that the part where the wound is shall be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary to do this with both large wounds and medium-sized ones.
But in small wounds, place it however seems best to you.
Then make sure there is present between your hands a pious assistant who shall hold the entire disruption with their hand and bring together its lips.
Then remove from it for him who follows in sewing a bit after another, and this is the common method of one stitch.
And take up needle(s), according to the number corresponding to the width of the wound.
Then leave from the end of the disruption the quantity of a finger's breadth, that is to say, the width of a finger, and insert one needle into it after putting thread into both its ends of skin along with two endings of the sirac, which are beneath the skin from the inside, until you make it pierce through to the other side; and now you have brought together two edges of skin and two endings of sirac, making four layers.
Then tie with doubled thread around the needle repeatedly on both sides simultaneously until the two lips of the wound are brought together neatly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger and insert another needle into them; afterwards straighten it with thread as you did with the first needle.
Therefore do not cease doing this until you complete the closing of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium size between thickness and fineness; for fine needles wound flesh very quickly, while thick ones have difficult entry into skin. Therefore they should be of medium thickness and thinness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of skin near to each other much; so that flesh may not be wounded quickly, and wound open before its healing, nor become elongated even with stitching, lest it hinder wound from healing.
Then cut the ends of needles so that they may not wound the patient during his sleep; and place on them small pieces of linen from all sides which hold the ends of needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this kind of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds.
For one needle or two needles or about that number suffice in stitching them.
The second kind of stitching is common, as you sew together with one stitch the four ends: two ends of skin and two internal ends together with one needle on which is wound thread of equal thinness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with needle these four ends, bring back the needle from the side whence thou didst begin, so that the thread may fall on the upper part of wound; so that it may be a stitch like a stitch in cloth wherewith clothes are sewed together, and place between every stitch the thickness of a little finger.
This kind of stitching men know.
And with this stitching I myself closed a wound which happened to a man in his belly; who had been wounded with a knife and there was a disruption of the wound more than one palm; and two palms of intestines had come out from the middle intestine, and there was disruption in the midst of the belly.
Therefore I returned it after twenty-four hours, when his intestine stood outside of the wound.
The wound was healed in about fifteen days; I treated him and he recovered: and he lived many years afterward, living his usual life.
And the physicians judged that it would not be cured.
But by miracle it happened that I did not heal it with ointment.
For I was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicines were to be found.
So I placed an old cloth on the wound twice a day and washed it continually with honey water until it was healed.
Two kinds of stitching I shall now describe according to the spoken tradition.
And thus you should begin with a sharp stitch: and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
When the needle has pierced the skin and gone through the flesh according to the length and width of the whole body: let go the end of the thread on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce through to the other end from inside out at another point nearby.
When you have done this, then make it pierce back through the same point from outside to inside: and let go the end of the thread which is on that side, and make the needle pierce through to the other end from inside out, following your usual penetration, until it reaches the whole.
Then begin again on this same side, and with the end which is out on the other side, and pull out the needle from the skin that it pierced.
Then bring it back into that same skin, and with the end of the thread which is on the other side, pierce through again at another point nearby: and pull it out from the skin on its side, and do this alternately, once upon another, until you have gone all around according to that example.
And the end of this stitching is like that of the stitching of tanners when they sew hides together, so that you pierce with the thread once on one side of the skin and let it out again on the other side, until it is complete.
The second kind of proper suture which Galen called the 'running stitch'.
This manner of stitching is described so that the wound may be drawn together like those made by some physicians, such that every part is brought close to its corresponding counterpart naturally: and the point of the needle is applied to one end of the wound, and the eye of the needle to the other end.
And this is done as I have described to you.
It is necessary that you insert the point of the needle into the edge of the eye near to you from the outer part, and make it pierce through to the inside in just one place: and let both ends of the thread come out.
Then turn the needle around, and make it pierce through from the outer part to the inner part at both ends of the thread, that is on either side.
Then turn each one around again, and make them both pierce through from the inner part to the outer part at two other points of the eye which are on the opposite side.
And this manner of stitching is a better stitch than the common easy one, and it is the stitch which was mentioned before.
This is therefore also Galen's speech.
And some have said,
The suture of the belly should be done with two needles.
That is, insert into each of them one thread and begin with the insertion of the needle from what is near you, and make it pierce through to the other side according to the stitching of those who sew hides evenly.
And know that when a disruption occurs in the middle of the belly, its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
But the judgement concerning the treatment of wounds is the same for all wounds.
That is, because when you encounter a fresh wound with its blood, before the air alters it and reduces the intestine, and brings it back to itself and adapts it, then place upon powder of carpenters' incense.
But if the air has already altered the wound, then place upon it certain ointments which are present with you until they cause pus and remove threads and bring about healing, both sihlq and mirrak.
Then treat it as other wounds are treated until it heals.
But if the medicines are not present with you, then place upon it immediately, from where it begins to discharge pus, cotton soaked in old wine and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals.
But if you fear that the wound might communicate with the principal members in injury, then it is necessary to immerse soft wool in oil of moderate warmth or rose oil and place it around the regions which are between the thighs and under the armpits.
That if it feels pain or punctures or putrefaction in its bowels (for this happens very often), then administer a clyster to it with astringent black wine, warm; especially if putrefaction has already reached the intestines and there is penetration of it into their cavity.
And know that that which comes from the large intestine is easier to heal and that which comes from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
However, the intestine that is called the ileum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which comes from its veins, and the greatness of them, and because of the fineness of its body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is a worm, and you seek it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
But if a space has passed and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place that has been darkened by it so that blood flow does not occur.
For in the worm there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that bond and place two ends of thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its attraction and extraction may be alleviated upon you at the time of pulling out the worm, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
 Memory aid for wounds that occur in the intestine.
When there is disruption in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible that it may be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance wound, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and a fistula had formed, and there was discharge and wind from it.
I therefore applied treatment until I was confident in its healing: nor did I cease to probe it until it was healed and the location consolidated.
After I saw that the location was already consolidated, I feared over the sick man that some bad occurrence might happen to him in his belly: and no bad occurrence happened to him from it.
And he remained in better conditions than before, eating and drinking, and copulating, and entered the bath, and engaged in his usual exercises.
And some surgeons have said that when an injury occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner.
And there are large-headed ants available.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth over them.
But when it takes hold there, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks fast and cannot be dislodged.
Then place another ant near the first one, and continue doing this with ants successively according to the total length of the wound.
Then close it up and dress the wound.
For those heads remain attached to the intestine until it heals, causing no further harm to the patient. And now it is possible also to tie the intestine with a fine thread; this has been demonstrated on an animal's intestine, after being attached to it when introduced into the wound.
And take one end of this thread from the intestine and burn it much.
Then tie a fine linen thread onto its tip.
Then introduce that thread into the wound together with the intestine.
Then bring it back together again at the point of separation. And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is only a matter of trust and hope.
Know that a large, wide wound, especially if it is on one of the small intestines, cannot be healed by any means.
On the Treatment of Hernias and Fistulas.
Chapter 78.
Know that any wound or abscess which becomes old and chronic, forms an ulcer, does not heal, constantly discharges pus, and is not incised, is universally called a fistula wherever it may be located; we call it zuchemen.
And truly a fistula is a hard, white, filtered knot without pain; like the hollow of a bird's feather. Some call it 'risati', meaning 'feather'.
At certain times it may be moist and discharge pus.
And perhaps the moisture may split open at some times.
Sometimes this moisture is abundant and sometimes scarce; it may be thick or thin.
And as I have already said in the division of wounds when I spoke about ulcers, any ulcer that does not heal nor has flesh growing on it is due to one or more causes.
Of which one is that there is a lack of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because between it and its edges there is hard flesh preventing the growth of new tissue; or because it has much foulness and dirtiness; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter discharged into it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or because there is a corruption falling in the region causing pestilence, as happens in Caesaraugusta where digestion of diseases is difficult and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone too many or one bone missing.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, as well as their treatments with medicines in the division; but here it is necessary for me to teach you the treatment of a fistula and zuchemen which are done by manual operation.
So know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body.
For there are fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, nerves or muscles; or the intestines, bladder or ribs; or some of the vertebrae or joints composed of bones like hands and feet; and there are those that approach the main limb and similar ones.
It is therefore difficult to heal these fistulas in this manner, and they do not receive treatment; dealing with them involves effort and ignorance.
But if there is a fistula whose depth does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you hope for its cure and trust in treatment, then take a probe made of silver or iron; if the fistula extends straightforwardly, follow it with this.
But if there is a windingness in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead.
Because lead with its gentle nature alleviates and curves around the windingness.
But if a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe.
Therefore, choose one of its openings from the openings themselves.
But the moisture with which you irrigate it will flow towards the other openings and run out of them.
Then examine carefully to determine whether it is possible for you to know which bone or nerve is there and how deep or close the cavity of the fistula is; or if it is a single fistula with many openings. Stand on all that with your utmost strength, asking the patient and discovering the pain upon compressing the area with your hand and similar signs and causes accompanying apostema.
When you have stood steadfast on all this, then proceed to treatment with confidence. Then consider whether the fistula is close and apparent or located far from a joint or nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned to you. Then cut the fistula according to what has been described in my account, remove what is inside it through filtration, and remove the decayed flesh that appears at its opening made of skin or fat and similar things; treat it until it heals.
If the fistula is deep and straight, then you must cut into it as deeply as possible.
Then cleanse it of all its decayed flesh.
Then apply a linen strip dipped in sharp medicines and insert it into the cavity of the fistula you cut with the knife. Do this repeatedly until the sharp medicine has corroded all that remains inside the cavity from decay.
Then dress it with ointments that promote healing of flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it according to what has been described.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then examine it and cut it according to what I have described to you. If nothing prevents you from doing so in terms of a vein, nerve, or main member, as we mentioned.
If you find bone and it has some decay and blackness, then scrape it until all its decay is removed.
Then treat it with what will flesh it over until it heals.
But if it does not heal and continues to emit pus as before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the decay.
Therefore, examine it again, investigate its cause thoroughly, and cleanse it with all your strength.
Then dress it.
But if it heals, that is good. And if not, then know that the decay is deep within the body and you have not reached it.
Therefore, you should leave it to its natural course.
If the little bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that fit it well.
But if there are many bones, then carefully draw them all out one by one, leaving none behind with your strength.
But if any moisture opposes you and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them, then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bone from its socket at once, then apply something that will cause it to decay over the wound and leave it until what is around those bones in flesh and moisture decays.
And keep the wound so that it does not heal over.
And let the incision you made during your operation be closed up tightly.
Rather, if you wish, apply over it cotton soaked in sulfur powder with oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some other virulent ointment.
For when those moistures decay and the bones separate from them, the removal of those bones and their drawing out are eased.
But if it is one bone of great size, such as the leg bone or hip bone and others like them, and what has decayed from it is a large part, then shave it away little by little until that blackness and decay are removed.
Then heal the wound.
But if what has decayed in it is a large part and the decay has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it up and cut it all the way down to where the decay has reached. Then treat it until it heals. And I tell you this case of Zuken which happened to a man in his leg so that you may use it as an example and help in your own operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his leg due to a cause that moved upon him from within the body, that is, from an internal source, until matter arrived at the leg, and there appeared a large abscess; and there was no external cause.
So much time passed with him in error on the part of physicians until the abscess burst open, and many materials gathered around it.
And its treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulous and many openings were made therein which all emitted pus and bodily humors.
So many physicians tried to cure him for about two years, and there was no wise hand in the art until I was summoned, and saw his leg, and the materials running out of those openings with great force: and indeed all the man's body had already wasted away, and his color was yellowish.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached to the bone.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they all connected with each other from all parts of the leg. So I prepared and cut over one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone, which I found to be corrupted: it was already eaten away, blackened, decayed, and perforated, so that it had penetrated even to the marrow.
I therefore cut away what I had exposed of the corrupted bone, and prepared it.
And I decreed that nothing should remain on the bone except that corruption which I cut off and removed.
I had already rooted it out.
Then I applied a dressing to the wound with consolidating medicines over a long period of time.
And it did not heal.
I then attempted its restoration.
And it was not restored.
Then I restored it with medications, and it was quickly consolidated and healed. And this repetition of the operation and sectioning would not have been necessary if not for the disposition of the patient's weakness, his scarcity of tolerance, and my fear for him regarding death, since a harmful syncope occurred in him at all hours due to excessive evacuation.
So he was healed with complete healing; and firm flesh grew in place of the bone, and his bodily condition became good, and his strength returned, and he resumed his usual activities, causing him no harm whatsoever in walking.
But if the bone protruding from the body is already broken, then it must be cut according to this method: take a bandage and tie it at the end of the projecting bone; then have someone else pull it upward; and place another bandage made of coarse wool over the first. Then tie it over the flesh that is below the bone and stretch its end so that you pull the flesh downward; and you expose the flesh at the place where you wish to cut, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place wood or a board beneath the lower bone appropriately, for when you do this, it prevents cutting through healthy flesh.
And the sawing must be kept brief over the corrupted spot so that there is not too much excavation of bone, which would appear unsightly and necessitate another sawing operation. But if the bone is corrupted and not protruding, indeed continuous with another part, and corruption is found in its middle or in one of its parts, then expose all surrounding flesh completely.
Then place wood underneath.
Next, saw it from the first part where corruption is until continuity of sawing reaches the other side; and let sawing be according to length barely away from corruption, as we have said.
But if corruption is at the joint, cut through the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues on the other side.
If however corruption is at the continuity of two joints, then there is no remedy except removal.
But if corruption is in the hand's bone or foot's bone: then the case is very difficult.
Yet you must investigate how corruption appears to you.
And abrade it and cleanse it according to whatever method is possible for you, and apply whichever remedy you can: provided that neither vein nor nerve opposes you.
And know that saws and blades for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness and thinness, their length and width, their hardness and rarity.
Therefore you must prepare an appropriate tool for each type of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the species of instruments you need when you are engaged in a prolonged study.
And knowledge of the methods of this art is witness to the methods of diseases; then indeed you will already find yourself what is suitable for each ailment among instruments.
The Shape of the Saw.
Shape of Another Saw.
Form of Another Saw.
Form of Yet Another Saw.
This form of the saw should be depicted appropriately. Let its top be curved, and its edge made of iron; let its handle be made of boxwood, and it should be properly fashioned in a pyramidal shape.
The form of the scalpel for joining.
Let the head of this scalpel be in the shape of a star-nail head; and let its points be like those of an 'elasticsearch'.
And it is not fitting except that it should scrape with the heads of joints when they are corrupted or the mouth is wide and large.
The form of the larger scalpel.
The form of the medium-sized scalpel.
The form of the broad scalpel.
The form of the scalpel with a concave edge.
The form of another fine scalpel.
The form of another scalpel with curved tip.
The form of the small, fine, pointed scalpel.
The form of the scalpel used for cutting bones.
Also the form of the large scalpel.
This resembles a chisel, and its tip is like a saw; it is shown in many places due to the reason of bones.
The form of the scalpel suited for the purpose of cutting through bone.
Its tip is triangular and sharp at both ends.
It is made from Indian iron.
And similarly it is necessary that all the things we have spoken about regarding scalpel blades and chisels be made of iron.
On the cutting of extremities and sawing of bones.
Chapter 89.
Extremities putrefy either due to external or internal causes.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicinal treatment and the treatment is ineffective, and you see corruption spreading to the limb without encountering any resistance, then it is necessary to cut off that limb where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be freed from death or from the serious harm which is greater than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of this is that the limb becomes blackened until it putrifies; either fire has burned it or putrefaction occurs after the blackening. When this corruption is cut away up to what follows the limb and creeps into the whole body.
Therefore hasten with the cutting of it and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the sting of some venomous creatures such as the marine scorpion, viper, asp, and others like them.
If therefore corruption or injury is at the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space for corruption to proceed up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut off the hand at its root of the forearm and do not give space for corruption until it reaches the elbow.
And if it invades there, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint. But if corruption passes through and you see that it is around the elbow, then death for the patient is there.
And administering anything beyond that in treatment is useless effort.
And similarly do with the foot when corruption invades a toe; then cut it off at one of its joints. And if it reaches the arch of the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
That if corruption has already reached above the knee, there is no treatment for it except abandonment and leaving the patient to die.
And the method of cutting a limb or closing it is to tie up the ligament below where you wish to cut and tie another ligament above that place.
And let one assistant pull down the lower ligament while another pulls up the upper ligament upwards.
And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed.
Then it should be cut or tied.
And it is necessary that you place linen cloths from all sides and that they do not touch the healthy place lest additional injury occur and a hot abscess form.
But if blood flow occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or apply to it certain powders that stop bleeding.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with an appropriate bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you that what happened to a man's foot, the same thing can happen as I am telling you.
What happened is that blackness occurred in his foot with a burning akin to fire-burning, and this corruption first occurred in his toe until it began to affect the whole foot.
So the man removed it from himself after he saw that the corruption was spreading vigorously, causing him pain and burning. He cut it at its junction and it healed.
And after a long time had passed, he again suffered the same corruption in his right index finger. He came to me and I attempted to remove the surplus with what I placed on his hand after cleansing his body. But the surplus was not removed, and corruption began to spread to another finger until it reached his hand.
He called for me to cut off his hand. But I refused to do so, hoping that the surplus would be removed by me without needing to cut off his hand. And I feared that he might die from cutting off his hand.
Because the man's strength was greater than his ailment.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his land. And I was told that he had hurried and cut off his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have not related this story except as a help for what can happen regarding this kind of ailment, and as an indication of how it should be treated.
Chapter on the Treatment of Sinuses and the Nature of Enemas with Medicines.
Chapter 90.
Chapter 90. When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, then it bursts or is pierced, and what is inside it comes out through pus, and a hollow space remains as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is over it is like a cloth that has already become thin; and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, neither impressing on bone nor nerve nor ligament, then it deserves to be called a Sinus, and it is not called a Fistula. However, if its space extends until corruption impresses on one of these members, then it is called a Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is that you should cut away all of that skin as it curves and especially when it has become thin like cloth; and you trust that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not lead to ultimate corruption, and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with an Enema, considering the Sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out from it has a foul odor, then perform an enema on it with Egyptian medicine which is made up of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and zinc oxide, mixed together in a vessel; and boil them over a fire until the medicine thickens like honey.
Then take from that which you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and use it to perform an enema on the sinus; and close its opening and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
Then remove it with suction: do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes it is washed out with water containing ashes, when this medication is not available. It is also possible to take the ash of vine wood or oak wood and sprinkle it on the water.
Then boil it and wash out with it until you are confident that the sinus has been cleaned out.
But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water with ashes, then wash it out with water and honey mixed with some crushed cinnamon.
Or wash it out with a mixture of honey and wine, since honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has been removed, then wash it out with something that promotes the growth of flesh there.
And it is also possible to take some of the plaster called diaphoenix, dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or wash it out with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties are written about in my book on ointments.
But if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot admit a catheter for irrigation, then dilate it with an iron probe briefly, or place a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or balsam ointment into it until it is dilated.
And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then gather its lips with a suture and allow only so much of it to remain that the catheter can enter without any additional pressure.
And similarly, if the opening from which the pus is flowing is elevated towards the top, then cut it in a lower place so that the pus may flow downwards. For when pus is restricted to the depths of the sinus, it hinders the growth of flesh there.
But if it is not possible for you to cut around the lower part of the sinus according to your wish, then cauterize it, so that you may prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows out easily as you prepare it.
Cauterize so that no pus remains within it at all; and take consolidated medicines to be applied over the wound, suitable for what you intend.
And spread them out on a linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such size that it covers the whole sinus.
Then cut with forceps a small opening directly at the mouth of the sinus, slightly larger than the mouth of the sinus.
Then spread out some soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening and place it over it at a distance from the mouth of the sinus so that the discharge of pus may be eased; and do not remove the large cloth except once every few days.
But the one placed over the mouth of the sinus is that which you remove at every hour so that what collects there from pus may flow out; and so that you may know whether the discharge from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And besides this, also consider the place of the sinus itself: whether its owner feels pain there, or not; and whether there is an abscess there, or not.
When your medication is applied thus and you see the matter that comes out over the mouth of the sinus, then know that the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adherence. Then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment. But if a thin discharge continues to come out from the sinus over a long period of time, then do not despair about its adherence, for its healing approaches. For there are among men those who delay the growth of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to that.
But if undigested pus continues to come out from the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then increase the drying medicines. But let them be moist in substance and dry in power, like ointment diaphoreticum when it has an excess of addition from zeug.
And among the last things to be done is this: Take ointment diaphoreticum and dissolve it with rose oil. Then pour upon it equal wine that is old in substance.
Then mix it with it and use it.
And it is similar to this action when you do not have ointment diaphoreticum present: Use honey when you cook it until it thickens.
Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense. Grind all of them together and powderize them over the honey while it is on the fire.
Then take a linen cloth and tie it over the sinus. Then spread on it the honey that you have cooked until it has thickened. Powder spices over it and place it on the cloth, then bind it.
And sometimes aristolochia longa is given with it, and the roots of lilium caelum, which is also called lily. And also flour of barley, and centaury.
Use them separately or combined, grind them and sieve them. Then powder them over the honey that I mentioned earlier and use it.
But if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that there is corruption in its depths. Or else it has already made an impression on the bones or other hard parts or ligaments. Then treat it according to the method of fistulas as was previously stated. On treating panaritium, rubbed nails, and the addition of a digit, and its amputation.
Chapter 101.
A panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot: and perhaps it may arise on other fingers.
When this condition is prolonged and neglected in its treatment, and an abscess forms from a hot one or becomes corrupted and emits pus until it rotts the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone until there is a foul odor. And the tip of the finger becomes swollen, and its color becomes black.
But when you treat it according to what we have said about division, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cut away with a knife all the excess that remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
For cautery is very beneficial.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, but the additions of the nail are compressing the flesh inside and beginning to prick it and harm it, then you should place a fine probe under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh and push it upwards. Then cut through the flesh easily and apply to what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until everything is removed.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has already made an impression on the bone, then you should cut into that bone and remove it. For it never heals while the corrupted bone remains.
But if you see corruption and decay spreading into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints according to what was previously stated about its remembrance.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if there is injury to the nail, or percussion: and there occurs intense pain in it, then it is necessary that bloodletting be performed on the patient first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp spathulum (i.e., scalpel) using a transverse incision from above towards the sight.
And guard against the cut reaching the flesh that is under the nail, for thereby you will cause intense pain to occur upon the patient and be the cause of additional flesh growing in its place.
Then treat the place with something that alleviates pain.
But the finger that grows on some people's hands may be entirely fleshy; and in others there may be bones in it, and perhaps a nail; and some grow at the root of the joint, or their growth occurs on certain joints of the finger.
Therefore, that which grows on certain joints of the finger does not move; but that which grows at the root of the joint may perhaps move.
Thus, the cutting off of that which is fleshy among them is easy.
That is, cut it at its root with a wide spathulum (i.e., scalpel).
But the treatment of that whose growth occurs at the root of the joint is difficult.
So avoid cutting it.
But in that which grows on the finger at its last joint, then first cut its flesh with a round incision down to the bone.
Then saw off the bone with one of those saws suitable for it.
Then care for it until it heals.
Fusion (or union) that occurs between fingers often happens either by nature of the person himself, that is, he is born with it; or from a wound's healing, or from burning by fire, and similar causes.
It is therefore necessary to separate this fusion until the fingers return to their natural form.
Then place between them strips of cloth or linens soaked in rose oil: so that they do not quickly fuse again, and separate them. Or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the location heals as it should.
And similarly, if fusion occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that fusion according to how it is prepared and fits the figure of the member.
Chapter: On Incision.
Chapter 92.
There are veins that are twisted, thick, and full of superfluous melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body; their main occurrence is in the legs, especially those of travelers, workers, and porters.
It is therefore necessary to perform strong purgation of the body with black bile from time to time.
Then perform a bloodletting on the patient at the basilica vein.
The cure for them by iron is according to two ways.
One of them is that they should be cut open and black blood extracted.
And the other way is to raise up the vein and remove it entirely.
The manner of its cutting is as follows:
First embrocate the leg with hot water much until the thick dirty blood is loosened.
Then bind the leg of the sick person from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage.
Then cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then cut the nail downwards until such an amount of blood flows out as you see fit and as the strength of the patient can tolerate.
Then bind [the wound], and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile. And repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, for it harms the patient.
The elevation of this is as follows:
Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs on it.
Then immerse the patient in a bath or rub his leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins become visible. Or use vigorous exercise if there is no available bath to heat the limb.
Then make an incision along the length of the vein or at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and strip off the vein from all sides until it is visible. And at its appearance you will see that it has a reddish hue turning to black.
And as it comes out of the skin, you will see it white like a string.
Then insert a probe under it until when lifted and drawn out from the skin, suspend it with a gentle hooked instrument.
Then make another incision three fingers away from that one.
Then strip off the skin from above the vein until it appears.
Then lift it with probes as you did before, and suspend it with another hook as you did initially.
Then make another incision, or several incisions if necessary.
Then lift it and cut it at its final point near the heel.
Then extract it up to the incision above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from all higher incisions so that it comes out completely; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you to extract and elevate: then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie it and pull it out; or insert under it a probe: and roll your hand around every part until it comes out.
And be careful not to cut.
For if you cut it, it becomes difficult for you to elevate it greatly, and injury comes upon the sick from it.
Therefore when you have extracted it entirely: then place over the wound area wool soaked in wine and rose oil or oil: and care for it until it heals.
But if the vessel is constricted, having a winding course with coils to its parts, and not being straight as we have said: then it is necessary that you dissect over it at every part of its winding and places of its coiling.
Then suspend it with hooks until you elevate it completely: and be careful not to cut or wound the vein near your dissection on it; for it will become difficult for you to elevate or extract it.
So preserve your caution.
The form of incision by which the vessel is healed:
The form of the blind hook:
It does not have a curve like other hooks, nor is its end sharp so as to wound the vein: and it is thickly curved gently; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness: nay, let it be excessively thick, as we have said.
On extracting a vein of the leg: Chapter 93
This vein is generated in legs in hot lands, such as al-Andalus and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands with little fertility, that is, where no grass nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its generation is from corruption that occurs under the skin, as happens within the bodies of snakes and worms such as ascarids, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign that this vein is about to occur is that inflammation happens suddenly in the leg.
Then the area is cauterized.
Then the vein begins to exit from that spot of cauterization, like a plant's root or an animal.
When therefore its extremity appears from it, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one dram up to two drams and tie it there; and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
So whenever something emerges from it towards the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it.
But if it lengthens greatly, then cut off its part and wrap around the remainder.
And do not cut it off entirely before it has emerged completely.
Because if you cut it off entirely, it will retract and enter into the flesh; and it causes inflammation and corruption to occur at that place and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be handled gently and drawn out gradually until it emerges from its end, and nothing remains of it in the body; and indeed from this vein emerge in some people things that are five palms long and ten.
And it has already come to my attention that for a man it has emerged twenty palms.
If however it happens to you during your time of treatment: then insert a probe into its opening and pierce it with a long probe along its body until all the matter within it has been evacuated; and treat the corruption of the place with medicines for several days. Then cure it as you would an abscess.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself; and many openings occur for it and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore treat it as we said in division, along with what has been previously mentioned.
Regarding the cutting of a boil caused by worms and it is called 'the sickness of an ox'.
Chapter CIXIV.
This sickness is called 'the sickness of an ox' in a certain land among us because it often occurs in oxen and there is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and its movement is perceptible from limb to limb until it bursts out wherever it bursts through the skin.
And its generation occurs from the rotting of certain humors.
As happens with worms and serpents, that is, tapeworms and roundworms in the intestines.
And it is feared due to its harmfulness.
For when it moves through the body and rises to the head and reaches that place: then perhaps it breaks open there and emerges and destroys the eye; and this happens very often.
Therefore when you wish to treat him and extract it, then that can only be done at the movement of it and its appearance to sensation.
It is therefore necessary that you bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong binding constriction.
Then cut over it and extract it.
But if it is buried deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then apply a cautery with fire to that place until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said. But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind beneath it a good tightening of the eyebrow.
Then cut over it and extract it.
And the patient must use bodily cleansing with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter on the Incision for Nasal Hemorrhage.
Chapter 105.
This affliction is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs; then it moves from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen this myself, as I am describing it to you now.
I was called to a sick woman in certain villages.
And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after remaining there for one hour, I saw one swelling move like a worm ascending to her shoulder more swiftly than is possible: as when quicksilver flows from place to place.
Therefore the pain left that spot and became fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat there for one hour, and it ran through the rest of her body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it had rolled around throughout her entire body, as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from limb to limb.
But I had never before seen this ailment with my own eyes in this manner.
However, I have seen many who found that pain moves from limb to limb; but I did not see it with my own eyes as clearly as I saw it in this woman.
And I do not think that this is anything other than what happens because the woman was one of those who are from villages with dry bodies and prominent veins; hence it appears to me that this windy movement has changed.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain - then if it is apparent to your eye as we have said, then tie around it both above and below it quickly, and cut above it until that windy movement comes out compressed; then cauterize the spot.
If however you do not see it with your eyes - then treat it with rubbing of the body, and with that which drives out windiness, and burn them with foul pills, and pills made from serpentine stone, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Chapter 96. Arrows are distinguished according to their types and according to the places where they fall out of the body.
And among them there is diversity in that some have large and small points, concave and blunt ones.
And among them are those which have three angles.
And among them are those with tongues.
And among them are those that have stars.
But those which fall according to the limbs where they fall are of two kinds.
Either those limbs are from the main hollow ones such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, entrails, bladder, and similar things.
But when it falls into any of these limbs and you see signs of death which I will tell you about later, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from them for death follows him who has it in many cases.
And when you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
For the signs of an arrow having fallen into the brain and pierced the bone, and exited from the fontanelle atop the brain are: sudden convulsions occur, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of mind, and vomiting bile.
And perhaps blood may also exit from the nostrils or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off and voice is destroyed.
And a white moisture resembling mucus exits from the wound.
And fluid like that of flesh emerges from it.
If these signs appear to you, then desist from treatment and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
But the signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast and feels as if it is stuck in something hard, not something empty.
And perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse beat: and black blood flows from the wound.
And thereafter follows coldness of extremities, cold sweat, and faintness.
Therefore know that death has certainly come.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the exiting of frothy blood from the wound and swelling of the vessels in the neck, and change of color in the patient.
And breathes out a large, high sigh, and seeks cold air to breathe.
If the arrow falls upon the pericardium, which is in the chest, then it will be near the ribs and cause a great sigh with violent pain, and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food will exit from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is stuck there, some feces or wind or already ruptured intestine will exit from the wound.
Therefore there is no hope for treatment nor removal of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out, and something else proceeds to the outside, and there is greater pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the rest of the limbs, such as face, neck, throat, shoulder, aid, spine of back, collarbone, thigh, leg and similar parts from other members are cured according to many methods when the arrow does not strike an artery or nerve nor is it poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may indicate it above your treatment.
Which is to say: "An arrow struck a man's eye at the root of his nose.
Therefore I pulled it out on the other side under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, nor did any harm come to his eye.
And I pulled out another arrow from a Jew which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only reach its small tip with which it adhered to its wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turks, with a soft iron tip, in which there were no ears.
So the Jew was healed, nor did any evil befall his eye. And another arrow was pulled out from a Christian's throat.
And it was an Arab arrow, which is one that has ears.
Then I sewed over it between two ligatures, and it was already submerged in his throat.
And thus I teased with it until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die because of it.
After thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I sewed over the arrow and made incisions above it and pulled it out: and he was healed, nor did any evil befall him.
And I saw a man into whose back an arrow had fallen, and the wound over it had healed.
After seven years had passed, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman into whose womb an arrow fell, and the wound hardened over her, but the arrow remained within her; and no change occurred in any of her dispositions, nor did she find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man into whose face an arrow fell: and the wound hardened over, and remained, causing him little pain; and there were many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a man among the princes of the King, which had fallen into the middle of his nose and had begun to incline somewhat toward the right side; and the whole arrow was concealed.
And I was summoned to treat him after the arrow struck until three days had passed.
Therefore, I found the wound of the arrow very deep.
I probed it with a fine probe and did not find it; but he himself felt piercing pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Therefore I thought that this puncture was due to the tip of the arrow.
So I applied a plaster at the site where there was attracting and digesting power, confident that it would draw out the pus and reveal to me a sign of the arrow so that I could cut over it; but this did not happen at the place indicated.
So I applied the plaster to him assiduously for many days; but nothing happened, and meanwhile the wound healed over. The patient remained ill regarding its extraction for some time until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose.
And he told me this.
So I applied an acute and corrosive medication to the wound for many days until it opened; then with a probe I probed it and felt the thin tip of the arrow attached to wood.
Then I continued to use this acute medication to open the wound until we could see the tip of the arrow visibly. This period lasted about four months with him.
Then after the wound had healed and I could insert forceps into it and move it without it obeying to come out. Then I did not cease to refine and experiment with various methods until one day, using well-made forceps as described at the end of this chapter, I was able to extract it.
Then I healed the wound.
And indeed physicians say that the cartilage of the nose does not regenerate.
So I restored it, and the wound healed over firmly, and he recovered his full health without any harm to him at all.
And I tell you about the method of extracting certain arrows so that it may serve as a rule and interpretation for what has not been said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions cannot be contained in a narrative, nor does this book contain all of them. But a skilled craftsman compares little with much, and what is present with what is absent, and discovers new operations and new instruments for things that happen outside of this art.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out from the limbs to which they are fixed unless by two methods. Either by being drawn out from the place where it entered.
Or by going in the opposite direction of another part.
And those that come out from where they entered are either arrows proceeding in soft flesh and are drawn out and exit.
If it does not come out from the moment it falls, then you should leave it alone for a few days until the flesh around it becomes putrid and its attraction and exit are eased.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey your efforts to extract it, then leave it alone for a few days and repeat the attempt every day with pulling and moving until it comes out.
But if after several days it does not yield to your efforts, then you must bore around the arrowhead on all sides with a fine trephine until the holes are large enough.
Then pull it out and remove it.
But if the arrowhead is lodged in the bone of the head and has already entered into one of the brain's ventricles and some of the symptoms I mentioned are apparent in the patient: then abstain from attempting to pull out the arrowhead and leave it alone until its condition improves after several days.
For if the arrowhead reaches the brainstem, death will follow promptly.
And if the arrowhead is not embedded deeply enough to reach the brainstem and only sticks into the body of a bone, and the patient remains alive for several days without suffering any of those symptoms, then try to pull out and remove the arrow.
But if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your efforts at extraction, then use trephines around the arrowhead as I have described. Then treat the wound until it heals.
But if the arrowhead is hidden deep within the body and cannot be located by sensation, then search for it with probes.
If you find it, then pull it out using appropriate instruments suited to its extraction.
But if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in that location: then expose it until the wound is large enough for its removal.
But if the arrowhead has barbs that prevent its removal, then free the flesh attached to them on all sides using every method you can. If necessary, use forceps to bend and twist the arrowhead until it comes out.
And when you perform the extraction of an arrow in any location, use twisting of your hand along with forceps on all sides until it comes out. Be careful at the end so that the arrow does not break and make its attraction and extraction difficult for you.
But if you cannot remove it all at once, then leave it alone for a few days until the surrounding flesh becomes inflamed.
Then try again: the flesh will have softened. But if there is resistance due to bleeding, then apply what was mentioned under its chapter regarding treatment, and guard against cutting a vein, nerve, or tendon.
And use every method possible to extract the arrow, doing so with ease and calmness, or slowly and firmly as I have described for you.
And when you pull out the arrow, make sure to do so in a manner that follows its original path and shape upon entry.
For it is more beneficial.
But if you are unable to do this, then use whatever alternative method you know how to perform.
However, if the arrow emerges from the opposite side or has already partially exited, or if you can feel a bulge at its tip beneath the skin and see it protruding, then cut along it, making sure that the forceps can grasp as much of it as possible.
Then pull it out: for this will make it easier to remove.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to its curvature until the arrowhead presses against the bone and expands slightly. Then pull it out.
And if not, leave it alone for a few days and then try again until it emerges.
If there is an arrowhead inside it, then push the arrow through with it.
If the shaft has fallen out and you wish to administer a push, then insert a hollow instrument into it so that its concavity enters the end of the arrow; then push it through with it.
If the arrow is hollow, then push it through with an instrument inserted into it.
For the arrow will be eased thereby.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around it wherein lies the poison, if it be possible for you.
Then treat it with whatever is suitable for that purpose.
But if the arrow has fallen into the chest, belly, bladder or side and is close to what you are touching with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and draw it out.
Then if there is a wound, see to it, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are drawn out.
Let its ends be like a bird's beak, made in such a way that when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are made from them many kinds, large and small and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, its thinness, the width of the wound, and its tightness.
Form of Hollow Pusher
And form of solid pusher
This is the form of a blunt end like a radius (forearm bone), so that its entrance into a hollow arrow may be eased, and it may be pushed through with it.
The end of the hollow pusher is concave like a bird's feather, so that entry into the arrow may be eased and its thrust.
On Bloodletting from Veins
Chapter 97 The veins that are commonly used for bloodletting on the body are thirty.
There are sixteen of these veins on the head: two pulsating veins which are behind the ears and are called "the Two Herbs"; two arteries that appear in the two temples; two veins that are located in the two lachrymal canals of the two eyes, known as "the Watchful Ones"; a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose.
And two Jugulars which are in the neck.
And two veins that are on the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins that are on the lower lip
These are the veins which are called Alghecherich
And two veins that are under the tongue.
But the veins that are used for bloodletting on the arms number five in each arm
One of these is the Cephalic vein, which is on the outer side of the arm and is commonly called the "vein of the head.
And the Dark one
And there is the Median vein, which is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, commonly called the "vein of the body.
And the Basilic vein, which lies on the inner side of the arm, is also known as the Titillaris.
And commonly called the "vein of the belly.
And the Brachial cord vein, which is situated above the elbow and is the one used for bloodletting; it appears prominently above the thumb.
And the Salvatella vein, located between the annular and the small veins, has two branches.
And there are three veins on each leg and foot
One of them is the vein that curves under the thumb on the outer side of the hand
The second one is the Saphenous vein, whose location is at the heel on the inner side of the leg
And the Ness vein, which is located at the heel on the outer side of the leg.
And there are three similar veins on the other leg
 On bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
Bloodletting from the two veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for treating chronic coughs, headaches, epilepsy, and long-standing ulcers on the head.
And its method of bloodletting is as I have described.
And it should be done thus: the head of the sick person should be shaved, and their occiput rubbed with a rough cloth at the location of the two veins using good friction.
Then the patient should tie a bandage around their neck until the two veins appear.
And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head.
Therefore, search for them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse beneath your finger, mark that spot with a hot iron (encaustrum).
Then take the bloodletting knife called 'Incidens'.
Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the blade reaches the bone (os).
Then lift your hand up with the vein and skin towards the top, and cut the vein along with the skin using an incident (cutting) motion.
And let the length of the cut be about two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then bind it with lint and leave it alone until it heals.
And now we have completed the beginning of the book by describing their incision and cauterization.
 On bloodletting of two arteries in the temples
Bloodletting from the two arteries that are in the temples is beneficial for treating chronic headaches, palsy, and persistent ophthalmia, as well as acute inflammation of the eyes due to excess humors. And their method of bloodletting is as I will now tell you.
Let the patient tie their neck tightly until two veins become visibly apparent, and show you their pulse beneath your finger.
Then mark those spots with a hot iron (encaustrum).
Next, raise the skin above the vein with your index finger and insert a phlebotomy needle below it, then raise the vein upwards.
And cut into it as you did with the other two veins; let blood flow out according to your need. Then release the tourniquet from the patient and place your finger on the vein for one hour.
Next, apply over it a dressing of cotton and wool, then bind it firmly above with a bandage; leave it alone until it heals.
And thus ends the reminder of them [the veins], their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
Chapter: On Phlebotomy of the Forehead Vein after the Cephalic Vein Phlebotomy.
The indication for phlebotomy of the forehead vein is after the cephalic vein has been phlebotomized, for chronic facial ailments such as headaches, redness, and foul ulcers.
And here is how you perform it, as I shall describe to you:
Let the patient tie a band around their neck until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument called the "fossoria.
Its shape is as follows:
Place the protruding point at the top of the fossoria on the vein and strike it with a pestle or another object in this manner; let blood flow according to your desired amount.
Then release the tourniquet from the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it opens with a wide-bladed scalpel.
But it should not be pointed like other phlebotomes, rather it should have a broad edge.
And perform the phlebotomy across the turn of the vein because the bone is nearby, and perhaps the phlebotome might break if it is too fine.
Chapter: On Phlebotomy of the Two Tear Veins
The indication for phlebotomy of the two veins located near the tear ducts of both eyes is for eye inflammation and redness, styes in the eye, and facial ailments.
The manner of performing this phlebotomy is as follows: let the patient bind a cloth around his neck.
Next, perform the phlebotomy on them while you are standing above the patient's head.
Make the incisions transverse and about half an inch long, using a small phlebotome that is slightly broadened. This area does not have much flesh.
For if the phlebotome's tip is too fine, it may break.
Then make as much blood flow out as you deem necessary.
Afterwards, apply a poultice to the incisions and bind them tightly for one night, then release them.
Prologue: On Phlebotomy of the Nasal Veins
Phlebotomy of the nasal veins is beneficial for treating acute fever and violent headache, as well as facial ailments such as migraine and persistent facial redness.
The method of performing this phlebotomy is as follows: let the patient bind a cloth around his neck.
Next, hold the patient's nose with your left hand and take a fine, long phlebotome. Insert it into the middle of the bridge of the nose, between the two parts that divide it lengthwise.
Since the vein is not visible there, and because blood begins to flow immediately upon insertion.
You must hold your hand with the phlebotome for a moment, and make as much blood flow out as you deem necessary.
Then bind it tightly for one night.
For it heals quickly.
Prologue: On Phlebotomy of the Jugular Veins
The indication for phlebotomy of the two jugular veins is for shortness of breath, initial signs of leprosy, melancholic ailments, eczema and malignant ulcers, and corrosive conditions such as herpes zoster.
The technique for performing phlebotomy on these two veins is as follows: the patient should have a bandage tied around their neck under both ears. The operator should stand behind the patient's head while the patient sits on a chair.
Then make an incision for venesection of about half an inch length using the phlebotomy scalpel.
Then draw out a moderate amount of blood, or according to what is necessary for the condition being treated.
Then do likewise with the other vein.
Afterwards, untie the bandage and press both veins with a tight dressing to prevent excessive bleeding.
Leave it like this until morning.
For the wound will heal.
On Phlebotomy of the Veins called 'Algeberich'.
The vein called 'Algeberich' is beneficial for phlebotomy because it helps with mouth sores, gum disease, malignant ulcers, cracks in the lips, and ulcers around the nose.
The technique for performing phlebotomy on this vein is to have the patient sit facing you and tie a bandage around their neck.
Then turn up the patient's lip and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and one on the left. Both can be identified by their dark color.
It is true that there are small, dark veins around them.
Therefore, make an incision on both veins simultaneously. But if you are uncertain and do not know which one is which, then aim for the larger of the two veins, as it is more prominent.
Similarly, perform phlebotomy on the two veins found on the upper lip and it is customary to do so. Also, make incisions on the two veins found on the lower lip.
Regarding bloodletting: The vein under the tongue, after bloodletting of the cephalic veins.
The bloodletting of the two veins under the tongue is beneficial for: treating hoarseness in the throat, and ailments of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
The quality of bloodletting these veins is such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun. Extend their tongue and observe under it. On one side you will see one vein, on the other side another vein. The color of both veins should incline towards darkness.
Therefore, perform bloodletting on both veins and be careful not to let your hand slip while bloodletting them.
For underneath these veins are arteries, and it is possible that bleeding may occur from those arteries.
Regarding the three veins in the elbow.
The three veins that are bloodlet from the elbow are ones whose bloodletting is customary for all people.
And their bloodletting is done according to two methods.
Either by pricking with a wide myrtle bloodletter or by slicing with an olive oil-soaked lancet, or by cutting with a scalpel bloodletter. This is called Alnesil.
This is its form:
Thus, Alnesil is suitable for cutting.
And among them are wide and narrow types according to the width of the veins and their thickness. The form of the myrtle bloodletter should be wide, as you see.
And it is suitable for opening hollow veins that are full, protruding, visible, thick, and those that contain coarse, turbid blood.
This bloodletter is of lesser width and more refined at its tip.
And it is suitable for bloodletting fine veins that contain clear, yellowish blood.
Regarding Bloodletting at the Temple.
But among these three veins, it is especially useful for bloodletting to choose the one at the temple. For it draws blood from ailments that are below the throat and neck, extending to the chest and stomach. And the vein suits a bleeding practitioner because he can avoid causing fear [by not drawing attention] since there is an artery beneath it.
If however he errs and adds too much pressure during bloodletting, he will strike the artery, and abundant bleeding will result.
Therefore, let him not pierce it with a lancet when performing bloodletting, but rather cut it with an artery forceps.
But if the Temple does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to seek out other veins and exchange them, or else find some of its branches. Otherwise, one should perform bloodletting on the arm instead.
Indeed, this vein is prominent, and cut it with an artery forceps using the method we have described.
But if you wish to perform bloodletting on this same vein, then before applying the tourniquet to the arm, touch the spot until you recognize the pulse point.
Then mark the spot with a cautery, afterwards apply the tourniquet to the arm, and cut the vein with a concave artery forceps using the method we have described.
And take care not to strike too far from the location of the artery.
And when you see that as you tighten the bandage, there is swelling at the spot you marked with a cautery, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery. Therefore avoid it.
But if you see blood rising during bloodletting like urine from a child, and it is thin, red blood, then know that it comes from arterial blood.
Then quickly place your finger far above it, afterwards remove your finger.
If blood is severed (for it often happens that it is severed), then tighten the arm and let go. And caution the patient against moving too much, and cause him no fear.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
But if blood is not severed and binds you, and there is no medicine present at your moment of need, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
For its ends are contracted, and blood is severed.
Or take half a fig and wrap it around the place where the vein is tightly bound with bandages and lint until the next day.
Then if blood is severed, that is good.
But if not, then treat it with what preceded this remedy for stopping the flow of blood. And its bloodletting will not be difficult in many cases because of the small size of the wound and the ease of tying off the arm.
On Bloodletting from the Dark Vein.
The Dark Vein is useful for bloodletting because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body. This is because it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And the bloodletter should fear bloodletting from it because underneath it lies a nerve.
So if the bloodletter adds too much pressure during the puncture and encounters a nerve, paralysis occurs and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it may not heal at all.
And this nerve appears often to the touch.
But if it is hidden in certain individuals and is thin and not apparent, then you must perform bloodletting carefully with a sharp instrument, avoiding the nerve as best you can.
If the vein lies between two nerves, then bind it lengthwise.
On the Cephalic Vein.
The Cephalic Vein is useful for bloodletting because it draws blood from the head and carries it to diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this vein, if you wish to use a fleam with an olive-oil lubricated fleam or a myrtle-oil lubricated fleam, since it is the safest of all veins because it has no underlying artery nor nerve. However, when performing bloodletting, you should avoid striking the head of the humerus with the fleam and seek a gentler spot. It does no harm if it is not found on the first strike, so that it may be struck again several times with the fleam. But sometimes a boil may form in some people when bloodletting is not done on the first strike, but this boil does no harm.
Chapter: On the Usefulness of Bloodletting and Precautions to be Observed Therein.
The quality of bloodletting and its results from it require your consideration for their correction.
Firstly, you should know that bloodletting is not administered except for the sake of preserving health and maintaining its constancy with caution against the onset of illnesses.
And that bloodletting should be performed on one of the three veins found in the elbow, namely the cephalic, dark-colored (fuscus), and basilica.
And bloodletting should be performed at the beginning of spring after a fast, during summer and autumn, and winter after meals when signs ofpletion appear.
And bloodletting should be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed since the previous meal.
Bloodletting performed for illnesses does not have a fixed hour but should be done whenever the situation and necessity demand it, day or night, at any hour, and at all times.
And children should not be bled until they reach the age of fourteen years.
A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month.
Nor should the elderly, who have already exceeded sixty years, be bled.
Therefore, when someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins do not draw putrid harmful excesses from the intestines during phlebotomy, which harm the principal limbs.
And the patient should not be bled if they are full or suffering from nausea; nor one who is drunk or coming out of drunkenness until that state has passed.
Nor an invalid with dropsy (hydropsy).
And let phlebotomy be avoided again after an attack of colic, vomiting, abdominal flux, excessive sexual activity, hard labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and all things that dissolve the power from the body or animal.
Then consider the fineness of the humors before that (i.e., phlebotomy), if blood is thick due to foods and drinks, and medicines: whether it is possible for him.
Then he should take a bath if nothing prohibits it, or engage in some exercise to make the blood thinner.
And perform phlebotomy on him in the chest around the third hour of the day, as we have said; and strive that his chest be emptied that day from all accidental passions of the soul, such as constriction, anger, fear, etc., and from all corporeal accidents, such as labor, punishment, superfluous coitus, etc.
And let him have present in his dwelling things with which people are accustomed to use fragrance, pleasant smell, joy and similar things according to what is possible.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a high chair that is higher than the chair for phlebotomy; afterwards he should draw out his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his hand.
Then tie the ligature with thread and wrap it around twice.
And let the binding be balanced, for if it is uneven, either through excess in the binding, then it obstructs the flow of blood, or in softness, it likewise obstructs the flow of blood.
Then after binding, the one to be bled should rub his hands together until the veins are filled and become visible.
Then the phlebotomist should cleanse the vein with a little old oil.
Then he should place his left hand's index finger on the vein itself under the spot where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, gently so as not to make the vein flee and avoid striking.
For there are veins that flee like a string when you attempt phlebotomy, and others that are full of wind; thus when you place the phlebotome on them they contract beneath it and deceive the phlebotomist so that he does not open the vein or if he opens it, it is constricted. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be steadfast and careful in all these matters.
Then he should remove the phlebotome.
But if not, then repeat it once or twice more beneath or above that spot with haste so long as the location does not become blunted.
But if the location becomes blunted or the patient becomes faint, then let him go for one or two days and do not apply a ligature.
For perhaps it will draw out an abscess.
And he should not enter a bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if desired.
But if the opening is small or blood flows finely, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out as desired, then repeat the phlebotomy in the same spot but along its length, adding a little to the procedure.
And do this quickly before the site closes up, for many people find that a closed-up site hinders a small operation.
If you see that it has already closed up, then do not repeat the procedure on it at all, for it will not help you any further. And place over it some olive oil feces to ease the flow of blood.
It is better for this purpose than olive oil itself or any other oils.
And similarly use olive oil feces for all your phlebotomies when veins are opened to control blood flow. Tyrians, Alpharachs, and sages do this when they apply one of these remedies to the site.
For fine blood is made subtler and more fluid when it is thick.
But if a large hematoma occurs at the phlebotomy site, as it often does, especially when someone is not regularly bled or when there is only a small vein opening, then promptly place on the site a sponge soaked in warm water and salt for an hour to dissolve it.
And you should do this after blood has flowed out of the vein itself, or from another vein.
And indeed, hematomas and swellings often occur during basilica phlebotomy.
Therefore, place your hand on it. If you find softness upon compressing it, then that swelling is bad.
So be careful not to apply any of the remedies we have mentioned to it.
For perhaps blood from an artery may flow forth from it.
But make a plaster for it with that which has astringent properties so that the spot hardens.
Then treat the wound itself along with the rest of its treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to withdraw from every person blood according to the quantity of its power.
And that which appears as a victorious color over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it as thick: then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp: then let it flow out until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and in need of bloodletting to undergo phlebotomy once, so that the blood vessel may be widened and the phlebotomist's arm may become strong. But in one who is weak, it should be done conversely.
And it is necessary to withdraw it at intervals and that the opening be narrow. And what is better administered in bloodletting from a vein is that it be a transverse incision, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting nerves. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting through width and length.
And whoever is accustomed to fainting during bloodletting should take beforehand some bread soaked in pomegranate juice or cooked dates, and have blood withdrawn from them at three or four intervals.
And if their temperament is cold, then let them take beforehand bread soaked in pomegranate syrup or in fragrant honey syrup seasoned with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is a great loss of blood, then it is necessary to take water of flesh as a drink and thin fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with aloe and anoint the chest with it; and use the rest which we have mentioned in the division concerning fainting from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to discharge his arm and dissolve his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to gradually dissolve blood little by little over continuous days according to the amount of his strength.
Whoever wishes to discharge his arm and dissolve his blood a second time, but has a robust body, then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite part from which it inclines should be evacuated on the second or third day.
In the case of a body with much blood already heated and corrupted causing fever to occur, it is necessary for blood to be let out in one sitting and a large quantity to be drawn out until fainting occurs. After you have observed all conditions of bloodletting, place your hand over his pulse at the course of the blood so that death does not happen instead of fainting.
For it often happens thus when the bloodletter is ignorant and carelessness occurs.
But when you wish to discharge the arm and dissolve blood a second time, it is not necessary, if the vein's opening has already closed and blood exits with difficulty, to press upon it forcefully and suddenly stretch out the limb.
For that is very harmful indeed; rather, leave it alone until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with care the blood clot that has formed at the vein's opening and place upon it some salt dissolved in water.
And apply over it some of theriac of Alfaruch or senna, and apply gentle pressure until blood flows out.
But if the vein has already formed an abscess, then let it be and do not cover it until the swelling subsides.
If necessity demands a second bloodletting and there is no excuse for avoiding it, then perform the bloodletting either at that same location or on another arm vein.
The bracelet used for bloodletting is located instead of the Cubit and Basilica veins if they are not found because it is composed from them.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until it becomes reddened and the vein appears clearly.
Then tie a bandage tightly around it midway.
Then perform the bloodletting gradually across, not wide nor long: and let the opening be large, and make your bloodletting like those who perform it slightly above the hand joint.
And especially is the course of bloodletting in warm water placed during wintertime.
And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all others because there are no pulsating veins or nerves beneath it.
But bloodletting from the Salutatella vein of the right hand is beneficial for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of bloodletting from it is that you should tie a bandage around the wrist of your hand with your hand or compress it until the vein swells and becomes distinctly visible.
Then perform the bloodletting across it.
And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm him at all.
But keep your hand away from the phlebotome while closing.
For beneath it are nerves of the fingers laid bare from the flesh.
Then repeat hand-washing with warm water, and allow blood to flow into it.
For if you do not wash your hands again in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and impede its flow.
Having drawn out the necessary amount of blood, then apply oil and salt over the vein to prevent rapid clotting.
And similarly you should do with every cut branch.
But the tourniquet for this bloodletting is on the left hand because it corresponds to diseases of the spleen. And similarly do likewise with its bandaging as you did with the second.
However, the tourniquet for bloodletting from the saphenous vein is used for ailments in the lower part of the body such as disorders of the womb, retention of menstruation, weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and perform friction upon it until the veins become prominent. Then tie above the junction of the foot with a bandage.
And indeed, the location of the vein is at the heel appearing towards the thumb and it branches out into many branches on the surface of the foot.
Therefore perform bloodletting from its larger branch or at the heel where it congregates because this is better and safer.
But if you perform bloodletting on its surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bloodletting vessel diagonally across it, as if you wish to cut into it; and let the bloodletter be a vein called Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is obstructed, then again immerse his foot in warm water; and allow blood to flow into it until it is emptied.
But if the bloodletting vein errs on the first attempt, then repeat it with bloodletting towards the upper areas briefly, for the place is safe, and do not fear harm from it when you are cautious about the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly when using the great saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the inner side.
And the benefit of bloodletting it is for ankle pain when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its bloodletting is such that the patient enters a bath and hastens; and bind his leg on the side of the ankle up to above the heel with four fingers using a long, thin bandage: for nothing else appears except for this.
When it appears, then perform bloodletting on it according to whatever method is possible for you, either diagonally or by making an incision or by cutting it.
For its location is safer, and indeed it is very hidden in many people.
But if you do not find it and it does not appear at all: then perform bloodletting on one of its branches, which is that which appears on the back of the foot and turns towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then release the binding, and place skin over the location of the bloodletting and bind it.
For it is healed quickly.
On Venthouses [Fistulas] and their Nature.
Chapter 98.
A ventouse is made from horns, from bronze, or from glass.
And Venthouses are applied in two ways.
One way is with scarification and bloodletting; the other is without scarification. And this ventouse which is performed without scarification is done in two ways.
Either it is performed with fire.
Or it is performed without fire.
And there are fourteen locations on the body where ventouses are used with scarification and bloodletting.
And among them is the ventouse of Alnocrati, which is at the back of the head; and Alkhehel, which is in the middle of the neck; and the ventouses called Alhagdahim, which are two plates on either side of the neck; and the ventouse of the chin, which is under the jawbone below the mouth; and the ventouses of the two shoulders; and the ventouse of Alachosos at the end of the buttocks; and the ventouses of the two flanks, which are in the middle of the two arms; and the ventouses of the two thighs; and the ventouses of the two calves.
And indeed, a ventouse does not draw blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not lose its strength like bloodletting.
Nor is it necessary to apply a ventouse with or without fire in any condition resulting frompletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
But if there is a necessity to apply a ventouse due to illness or habit, we perform it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, whenever it may be appropriate.
This is because there are people who have so much blood accumulate within them that they require its removal by means of a ventouse; such individuals experience headache and dizziness.
And among them are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck.
Among them are those who find itching in their face, forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And among them are those who scratch the place of their baldness. And among them is one whose laughter is multiplied.
And among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth, or the tongue becomes affected and spews forth blood.
And among them is one whose sleep is multiplied.
And among them are those who see in their dreams blood and redness, slain persons, wounds, and things similar to these. Therefore, when we see something of these [symptoms], and especially if it occurs in the middle of the month, we then advise shaving, after two or three days have passed. But shaving the nape of the neck is beneficial because it relieves heaviness in the head and promotes discharge to the eyes.
