AFTER completing this book for you, O Sons, which is the last of medical science with its complement and having reached its end through its explanations and elucidations, it seemed fitting to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is part of operative practice, that is, surgery by hand.
BECAUSE the practice of manual operation has been prostrate in our region and time, and perhaps its science has perished and its trace has been cut off, and there remain from it only brief descriptions in ancient books which have been altered by hands, and errors and hesitations have happened to them until their intentions were closed and their way was made distant: It seemed fitting to me to revive it with the ordering of this Treatise in it according to the way of position, elucidation, and abbreviation: And that I may come with forms of instruments of cautery, and other tools of operation, making additions from explanations and providing what is necessary.
THE reason why there is no good artisan of this manual practice in our time is because the art of medicine is long and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen described until he knows the ligaments of members, their forms, their conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, their exits, and the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, their locations, and outlets.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that "a name with a name is much, but with work it is little, and especially in the art of manual practice.
WE have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
FOR he who is not acquainted with what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error, which leads to the death of men, as I have seen many of those who claim knowledge of this science without true understanding and experience.
And this is because I saw a foolish doctor who incised an ulcerous sore on a woman's neck and accidentally cut some arteries thereupon blood flowed from the woman until she died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from a man who had had it for many years, and the stone was large. So he approached him and removed the stone along with a piece of his bladder. And thus the man died on the third day.
For I had been called upon to remove it, and seeing its size and the patient's condition, I knew that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid by a certain Duke of our land for his medical services, and there happened to be a black eunuch in his household who broke his leg near the heel. The doctor rushed in with his ignorance, strapped the fracture over the wound with bandages and tight bindings, not allowing the wound to breathe.
Then he discharged him according to his wishes. After a few days he sent him away and instructed him not to loosen the bandage. Thus he remained until his leg became gangrenous, and so did his foot, leading to his ruin.
I was then called for him and hurried to remove the bandage, and thereupon he found peace and was freed from his pain.
But by that time gangrene had already taken hold of the limb, which I could not prevent.
Thus corruption spread throughout the member until he died.
And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous boil, and it became inflamed afterwards to such an extent that the master of the house was affected by its evil.
That is to say, when a cancer is pure and comes from black bile, then it should not be approached with an iron tool at all unless it is on a limb that can tolerate amputation of the entire affected part.
And therefore, O Son, it is necessary for you to know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely, operations with which there is associated health; and operations with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already indicated in every place of this book where an operation comes about that is fraught with fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of this and to keep it hidden so that fools do not find a way to speak and bring disgrace upon it.
Therefore take the measure with care and caution, and your patients with gentleness and steadfastness, and use the better way to lead them by the grace of God towards health and praiseworthy success. Leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and banish from your minds whatever causes you fear so that doubt may not enter your faith and your ease.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and loftier in this world, and ultimately better for you.
For already Gallienus has said in certain of his writings. Do not treat an evil illness, lest you be called a bad physician.
And now I have divided this Treatise into three chapters.
Chapter One
On the subject of branding with fire and branding with caustic medicine, arranged and ordered from head to foot, together with the forms of instruments and tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter Two
On the subject of cutting and puncturing, phlebotomy and wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all arranged and ordered with forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration and dislocation, the treatment of dislocations, and similar things, all arranged from head to foot with forms of instruments.
But before discussing operations involving cautery, it is necessary to speak about the qualities of its benefits and harms, and which constitution it should be used on.
Therefore, I say that the discussion about the qualities of the benefits and harms of cautery is a long and subtle matter requiring knowledge and secrecy.
Many wise men have spoken about it, but they disagree with each other. I will mention only a little of what they say, so as not to prolong this discussion unduly.
Therefore, I say that cautery generally benefits all constitutions whether they have matter or not, except for two constitutions: the hot constitution without matter and the dry constitution without matter.
But in the case of the hot and dry constitution with matter, opinions differ. Some say that cautery is beneficial in this constitution. But others said the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness resulting from heat and dryness, because fire is hot, and it would be inappropriate to treat a hot and dry illness with something hot and dry.
And he who holds the opposite view says that cautery benefits all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies because when you compare a human body and its moistures to the constitution of fire, you find that a human body is cold.
And indeed I say through his words that it has been proven true for me many times by experience.
However, it is not necessary for everyone to undergo cautery, but only those who have been proven and trained in the final chapter on cautery practice, and who know the diversity of human temperaments, the disposition of illnesses within themselves, their causes, accidents, and duration.
But with regard to other constitutions there should be no fear on your part, especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all physicians have agreed upon these [illnesses] and have not disagreed about the use of cautery for them.
And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its benefit on cauterization surpasses medicine burning [i.e., medication], because fire is simple and its action reaches only to the limb being cauterized; it does not harm other connected limbs unless there is slight harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches also to what is far from limbs and perhaps causes an illness that is difficult to heal or even kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it overflows.
But we have learned this through experience because of the length of our service and study with this art and our standing on the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech.
And if this were not so, because my book does not permit it, I would bring you the hidden secret of fire and the quality of its operation on bodies in driving out its expulsions, which expels illnesses by philosophical demonstration that would sharpen your minds.
And know, O sons, that they disagree concerning the time when cautery should be performed, and they prefer different times according to the seasons.
But I say that cautery is fitting at all times; for the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit which is attracted with cautery. And especially if cautery is performed on account of pains from necessary, strong, and urgent causes which do not tolerate delay; for it is feared that some greater mischief may arise from them than the small harm incurred by time.
And do not let this thought enter your minds, O sons, that only the common people and foolish physicians consider, namely that there is no recurrence of the ailment which is cured by cautery. This consequence does not follow, nor is the matter as they suppose; for cautery is employed only instead of medicine which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities which are the cause of pains.
But cautery prevails over medicine by the swiftness of its efficacy and the power of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion; and it is possible that the ailment may return at some later time according to the constitution of the patient, and the location of the ailment, and its strength; and what is prepared in the body from an excess of superfluities therein; and what arrives at it through acquisition from foods and similar causes; but if there be no illness in which cautery is administered.
A subtle ailment in a member of few superfluities and humidities, such as toothache on account of pain, and the like, it is possible that such pain may not return. But this occurs rarely.
But the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is true, but not for the reason they intend. For they believe that there is no cure to be found after cautery has been performed or any other treatment afterward.
The truth of the matter is quite contrary to that, and the intent behind saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not what the common people or many physicians understand. For when we administer methods of treatment for certain ailments and those remedies do not help, then in the end we apply cautery, which does help. Thus it becomes apparent that cautery is the last resort of medicine, but not as commonly believed.
Ancient authorities have said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the equality of gold's weight and its sublime nature. They also stated that cautery with gold does not cause pus to form at the site of the cautery. But this is not absolutely true: for I have proven and found that it does not apply to certain bodies without other considerations.
And cautery with gold itself is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat cautery with fire made from gold, it is not apparent to you how much heat you desire on account of the redness of the gold. And when it cools down quickly and if you add more heat, it liquefies in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the artisan is delayed by this [gold cautery] and for that reason we use cautery with iron more quickly and conveniently due to its suitability for operations.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to its sections, from beginning to end, so that anyone seeking information on the subject may easily find what they desire.
Chapter 2.
Chapter 2: Here is cauterization for the expulsion of superfluous cold and moisture from the head; which two are the causes of sod (i.e., epilepsy), abundance of flow of humors to the eyes and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, sore throat, and generally all ailments caused by coldness, such as paralysis, dropsy, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The method of cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to evacuate with a purgative medicine three or four nights beforehand, according to the patient's strength, age, and usual customs.
Then order him to shave his head clean with a razor. Then have him sit before you on a square seat so that he places his hands upon his chest.
Next, place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with cautery.
Then heat the olive-oil cautery over a fire; its shape is as follows:
Then place it upon the marked spot with gentle pressure, while you gradually tighten your hand and turn it. Then quickly lift your hand away and examine the site.
If you see that a sufficient amount of bone has been cauterized or that the zeuherb has been burned enough, then lift your hand away. But if not, repeat the cautery with the same iron or another one if it has cooled down until you see the bones that I mentioned to you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water; pour this over the wound and apply it to the site, then let him rest for three days.
Then put upon the same wound, soaked in butter, and leave until the burn is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with Tetrapharmacon ointment until healed.
It has been said that the more open a wound remains, the more pus it emits; therefore, it is better and more beneficial to close it.
Some have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone and hold the cautery until some thickness of bone is burned.
Then it should be scraped away after what has been burnt from the bone; then treat it.
Others say that one must reach the end with a cautery until it makes an impression like a brand on bone, so that the bone falls out like a letter in wax or the instrument women use for impressing letters on dough. They believe that vapors from the head are thereby expelled and that the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then treat it until it heals solidly.
But to me these two methods of cautery seem useful only in certain people who are afraid.
And leaving him to rest with his health preserved is better, according to me.
For the head is weakened by breaking its natural continuity; as we have seen with other limbs, especially when the head is naturally weak. The first method of cautery seems safer and better to me, which I use; therefore, operate with caution for the sake of health.
BOOK THREE
When chronic headache occurs and persists for a long time despite the use of diuretics, purgatives, head washes, oils, and plasters. And especially if the headache has already been treated with the cautery method we have described once without improvement; then consider. For if the head of the patient is of strong constitution by nature and not weak, and it finds itself subject to violent cold; then cauterize with another cautery slightly below that spot. Then cauterize the very top of every horn of his head with the cautery without piercing the skin too deeply and exposing as much bone as we have mentioned. And cauterize him with the cautery once on the back of his head, at a point called the "vessel," which is where the windpipe is placed; elevate your hand in this location but do not expose bone. For the patient finds relief from that severe pain distinct from the pain caused by other cauteries on the head.
And I shall call this cautery the "Vessel," and it is necessary that it be a cautery used for cauterizing the horns of the head and the back of the head more finely, which is also used for cauterizing the middle of the head.
CHAPTER FOUR.
When pain occurs in part of the head with congestion or extends to the eye and is treated with cleansing medications for the head, along with other care as mentioned in the sections on diseases, but there is no improvement; then cauterization is indicated in two ways: either cauterization using burning acrid medication or by means of iron.
The cautery using burning acrid medication is as follows: Take one tooth of garlic, peel it, and cut off the ends on both sides. Then make an incision at the location of the pain on the temple using a wide lancet until there is a space under the skin large enough to hold the garlic tooth.
Then insert it under the skin until it is hidden. Then tie it in place with a suitable bandage and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove the garlic and allow the wound to heal for two or three days. Afterwards, apply butter-soaked cotton to the area until pus forms. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, do this with certain cauterizing medicines which I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery of it with iron is done in this manner. The shape of the cautery used for fire is like this.
And it is called a "Claw" because its head has the shape of a claw, with some curvature and a small prominence in the middle.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand steady while you slowly turn the iron with speed. The amount that is cauterized should be as thick as half of its own thickness in the skin. And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned, and thus avoid excessive bleeding.
Then soak the cotton in saltwater and apply it to the area, leaving it for three days. Then apply butter-soaked cotton followed by treatment with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second tip of the scalpel-shaped cautery. And beware of cutting the artery in this half of the head, especially not an old one.
About the method of cauterizing in an old half of the head.
When treating a half of the head, if previous treatments and divisions of diseases do not suffice, and you see that the condition requires further intervention beyond the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then use the scalpel-shaped cautery heated over fire until it turns white. Mark the location of pain with a line about half a finger's length or slightly longer. Then place your hand once and press firmly until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful to avoid damaging the lower jawbone that moves during chewing, lest the side or the nerve controlling it be burned, causing spasm.
And be mindful of caution and care regarding blood flow from the cut artery. For in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who is ignorant of what he does and is neither studious nor experienced. For such a person should not undertake this operation first.
And I will come with a reminder of managing blood flow after an arterial injury according to its nature and location, in this book.
If you find that this cautery is not sufficient for the condition and observe that the patient's body cannot tolerate further cauterization in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, use the cautery described in the chapter on arterial ligation with a cautery having two blades. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
ON THE METHOD OF CAUTERIZATION FOR EAR PAIN
When pain occurs in the ear due to coldness and is treated with remedies and other treatments mentioned earlier but the pain does not subside, then use a cautery heated over fire. This type of cautery is called "The Point," and its shape is as follows:
Then apply this heated point around the entire ear, or around both ears if pain is felt in both. And extend the cautionary [cautery] from the root of the ear slightly afterwards, after you have marked the places with caustic; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, like those.
Then treat the spots until they heal.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Torment.
CHAPTER VII
The torture that is treated with cautery is only of those kinds which arise from humors, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterizing species that arise from drying out and nerve spasm.
When you treat this kind of torture with heat, and purgatives, and gargarisms, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its own tympanum, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part. For softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you should cauterize with a cautery on the direct extremity of the upper ear beneath the horn of the head, and another on the tympanum; whose length shall be according to the length of a thumb. And hold your hand with the cautery until it burns through half the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of scalpel, whose shape is as shown above; but do not make it too delicate, as you see; rather, let there be a little extra thickness on the blade.
Then treat the spots with what preceded until they heal.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Ancient Apoplexy
When apoplexy becomes chronic and you treat it with what we have said, but your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and one in the middle of the head, as we have said, and one at the back of the head, according to what has been mentioned before; and the manner of cautery shall be according to what has been mentioned before.
Also, cauterize with a cautery on the stomach bone: this is the last resort.
Then treat him according to what has been mentioned before.
CHAPTER IX
It is necessary that the patient be given first a large draught of barley water and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place upon his occiput a plaster made from treacle, as described in the treatise on plasters; and apply it repeatedly.
For this is the manner of cautery: and do it according to the same order which I have mentioned above.
If therefore he is healed thereby, it is good. But if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of his head, running from the top of the head down to the bottom of the eye; and place a thickness equal to a finger's width between each cautery.
Then treat the cautery with what has been mentioned before.
But if you wish to add more and the patient is able to endure it, then make a cautery in the middle [of his head]. If you wish to add more, then cauterize him on both horns.
Then treat him until he is healed; and let the cautery be oily according to the shape which has been mentioned before.
On the manner of cautering in Paralysis and Softening
CHAPTER X
It is necessary that you proceed with cleansing the head with barley water, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the patient; afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head, and with one on every horn of his head, and with one on the back of his neck, and three on the shoulders of the neck.
But if you desire to mollify the body by cauterization in many places, and the patient is able to bear it, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the shoulders of his back, and one last cautery, until the skin is burnt as much as possible; and raise your hand. Then care for him until he recovers: and thus conclude with the cautery of Oil.
On the manner of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
The epileptic is not to be cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore you should cleanse his brain first with hysop and with the remainder of the treatment which we have spoken of in division: when the patient is great or bears well the reception of medications.
But if he is a child who does not bear medicines, then give him gargarisms and cleansing chewings of the brain, before that for many days with good diet.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head, according to what has been previously stated in manner; and another cautery on his nape, and on every horn of his head one cautery. But if the patient is strong and bears well, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have mentioned in one having paralysis, and mollify the body with cauteries on the shoulders of the neck, and on those of the back: and let the cautery be of oil according to the manner previously stated.
But if the patient is a child, then place a thin cautery, according to this manner.
On the manner of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which we have spoken of in one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess leaning towards melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something that cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in division: then shave the head of the sick, and afterwards make a bandage decently made from linen like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and let the sick person sit squarely held on every side.
Then present the ointment. And it is more proper from old sheep butter. And heat it over a fire with moderate heating, such that the finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then pour it on the middle of his head in a circle, and let it remain until it cools down.
Do this for the sick person once each week along with his other good regimen until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small punctures on it except for where you hold the cautery: indeed let there be a pleasant smell.
For this type of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in butter or chicken fat.
ยง On the manner of cauterizing in water descending to the eye.
Chapter 13
When you have determined the beginning of water descending to the eye through signs which I spoke of in division, then begin and give the sick person something to drink that cleanses his head.
And protect him from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath for several days while fasting.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize him on the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over the two temples with two cauteries if there is a beginning of water descending into both eyes at once, or on one side if there is a beginning of water in one eye only; and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in width according to the temples; and take care against the flow of blood.
But if you see anything coming from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will forgive with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting off of them, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck under two bones with two cauteries brought out last.
On the method of cauterizing ancient lachrymal passages.
When the tears of the eyes are old and continuous and there are visible veins and arteries on the surface of the head above them, it is proved that this comes from cold and phlegmatic superfluities. Then cauterize with the same cautery as mentioned in the beginning of water descending, placing one cautery in the middle of the head and two on each temple, and two under the two bones in the neck. And if you need to add more, then cauterize along the entire side of the eye carefully with a small cautery at the end of the eyebrow.
On the method of cauterizing for bad smell of the nose
When you are treating it with what we have said about division and there is no improvement in the treatment, then hurry and give him three nights of chickpea gruel to drink. Then shave his head and cauterize him with a medium-sized cautery dipped in olive oil. Then cauterize him with the claw cautery using two cauteries on each eyebrow slightly under the hair.
And take care not to cut the artery.
And this is the shape of the claw cautery
On the method of cauterizing for softening of the eyelid
When the eyelid is softened by sickness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this crescent-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every part; and they will grow long in two times; and let the length of every cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not extend your hand too much with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that burns one-third of the eyelid.
On the method of cautering the eyelid when hairs turn inward and prick the eye
In this case, there are two methods of cautery: either with a hot iron or with a cautery that burns with medicine.
But before using the hot iron cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow out and become even if they are of the type that plucks them out. But if they prick him at their root, then constrain his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow out.
When they have grown out and become even, then place the patient's head on your lap; then mark the eyelid of his eyes with a hot iron brand, making the mark in the shape of a myrtle leaf, so that the beginning of the mark is near the hairs.
Then place cotton soaked in egg white or slippery elm mucilage on his eye.
Then take the cautery of this shape with fire
Then cauterize along the mark you have made gradually in many places until the surface of the skin burns and appears like the true figure of a myrtle leaf.
And the sign of success for your operation is: if you see that the eyelid contracts and the hairs lift up at the point where they were piercing the eye.
Therefore, raise your hand then: and let him be [for] three days.
Then place upon it a piece of cotton soaked in butter until the scab is removed. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
But if some of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft again, then cauterize that spot once more as you did at first.
But if the hairs are below: then cauterize them until they lift up to their natural place: and become even so that they do not prick the eye.
It is that you should instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they lengthen and become even. Make from paper or cloth the shape of a laurel leaf.
Then take from known soap and from lime that has not been moistened each one ounce or almost that amount. Then grind them together with good kneading quickly so that they do not cool. Then take from it and spread it over the paper you made in the shape of a laurel leaf, and place it upon the eyelid of one or two eyes. And place under the eye cotton soaked in egg white: and let the patient's head be on your bosom.
And place your index finger upon the medicine, and press it gently for a little while. And you should move it whenever the patient feels the biting of the medicine because its bite is like fire.
While therefore that bite which he felt continues, then leave the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid lift up as it lifts during contraction with fire or with incision, that is good: and if not, then repeat upon it with medicine on the spot where the medicine did not impress and did not darken until your operation succeeds and the eye contracts.
Then place upon it Cotton with butter until the burnt skin is removed. Then dress it with diaphanous ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary that you, during the operation, observe the last safeguard lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
But if the eyelid becomes soft after some days and something from the hairs fights in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that spot which is softened by the eyelid properly, as you did at first. Then dress it until it heals.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
And know that human eyes vary in size and delicacy. Therefore according to this should be your consideration: and the way of correctness is not hidden from him who strives in this art.
On the method of cauterizing a lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said concerning its divisions and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap and have a servant hold his head between their hands so that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then place cotton soaked in alum or in slippery elm mucus on the eye of the patient and then apply the cautery whose shape is as follows.
Let it be concave like the shape of a crow's feather quill at one end with which the cautery is made; and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other end, or if you wish it to be raised thus temper it.
However this concave shape is better for your purpose.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it out; and if it is not open, then open it and remove its pus.
Then place upon it a cautery that has been made very hot.
And hold your hand near the cautery for a short while from the eye toward the nose, so that your hand may not err or disturb the patient; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and burn it.
If therefore you reach with your cautery from its beginning up to the bone, it will be well done. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more if necessary; and leave it alone for three days.
Then apply a dressing with butter and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply to it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what comes up in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for fistulas which some first said: Pay attention to the location of the fistula and find it; then place in its fissure a fine camel-hair brush, that is, a fine cannula, which has this shape: And pour into it a quantity of melted lead equal to one drachm, and hold your hand with the cannula steadily, and do not let the patient move at all so that the melted lead does not run into his eye.
And it is necessary to place over the eye of the sick person a dressing soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead burns away the location of the fistula and heals it with wonderful healing.
But if the fistula is healed with what we have said concerning cautery and treatment, then that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to perform a nasal surgery, and reduce the fistula back into the nasal passage according to what comes up in its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing labial fistulas
Fissures often occur on the lips, which are called "hairs," and especially on the lips of children.
But when you are treating these fissures and the remedies we have mentioned in dividing them do not help, then take a small knife-shaped cautery and apply fire to it in this shape.
And let its hollow be shaped like the fineness of a knife.
Then quickly place it while hot on the actual fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
Then take care of it with a poultice until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing an oral fistula
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and then it bursts open, and afterwards becomes chronic, and pus runs through it, and a fistula forms, then you must cauterize it with fire using a cautery that fits into the fistula in size. Then insert it while hot into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches to the bottom and end of it. Do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
If the pus is cut off and it heals, that will be good. But if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes up at its head.
On the method of cauterizing gums and softened teeth
When the gum is softened due to moisture and the teeth are loose, and you treat it with medicines but they do not help, then place the head of the patient on your lap.
Then take a cautery with the shape that will follow, and place it over the tooth. Quickly insert the heated cautery into it while holding your hand briefly until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand; then repeat the cautery several times as desired.
Then let the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour before spitting it out.
For the tooth is strengthened, the gums softened are tightened, and corrupted moisture is dried out.
On the method of cauterizing for toothache
When toothache is due to coldness either because there is coldness in the tooth itself or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cautery should be applied in one of two ways: either cautery with butter or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is made by taking fresh butter and boiling it in an iron spoon or a bronze vessel. Then take some cotton and wrap it around the end of the heated cautery. Next immerse it in the boiling butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth, holding it until it cools. Then repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth. Then put hot iron on top of it until fire reaches the depth of the tooth cavity.
Cautery with fire is done by heating a bronze or iron tube And let there be something thick inside it so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then take a cautery heated over fire and place it on that tooth while holding your hand until the cautery cools.
Repeat this several times, for the pain will be removed either on the same day or the following day.
And it is necessary that in applying this cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery
Brand with whichever extremity you wish, as far as possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
ON THE METHOD OF CAUTERIZING WHARTS
When wharts are caused by phlegm and cold moistures, and are not amenable to digestion through medications, and it is desired to digest them quickly: then use a hollow cautery, the shape of which is as follows.
Having two open extremities, so that smoke may escape from the cautery at one extremity: and place it heated upon the whart once, and a second time if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the whart.
But if the whart is small: then apply the cautery according to its size.
Then leave it for three days, and apply over it a cloth infused in butter until what was burnt by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with toothpowder until it heals in the shape of a cannula.
ON THE METHOD OF CAUTERIZING IN HOARSeness OF VOICE AND CONSTRICTION OF BREATHING
When humidities overcome the channel of the lungs, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament: then it is necessary that the patient first evacuate with solvent medications.
Then cauterize it at night at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and be careful not to bring the cautery to the throat itself or to the skin except for a little bit of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra thereof, using a cautery shaped like a nail according to the preceding manner.
Then treat it together with what preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in illnesses of the lungs and coughing.
When coughing and lung illness are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor consumption, and the illness is chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries on top of the forked bone in sunken, soft, hollow places. And cauterize it with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be like a cannula according to the shape which preceded.
And if you wish to perform your cautery by pricking with a cautery called the "Point," the form of which preceded in the pricking of ear pain, then make the pricks from thirty up to almost forty.
Then treat it together with what preceded until it heals.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this shape. Therefore, the cauterization is alleviated when you make it with one cautery in place of three.
Chapter 27
When the head of the forearm is dislocated due to moistures and does not return to its original position within an hour after being reduced until it becomes accustomed to returning, then afterwards when it is dislocated by a sudden movement as we have already testified about this matter, then you must first reduce the dislocation. Then let the patient be placed on their back or on their healthy side. Then lift up the skin that is inside the tickling spot towards above with your left hand's fingers: and if the junction is dislocated towards the inside.
Then take a cautery having two branches and heat it in fire. Whose shape is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it reaches the other side, and you will get a figure resembling four cauteries.
And sometimes the cautery has three grooves, in which case the figure resembles six cauteries; the grooves are measured according to the fineness of the touch.
This is the shape of a cautery with three grooves.
And sometimes one more is added to this pattern, making eight cauteries in total.
Then place crushed garlic with salt on top of the cautery. Then keep the patient calm so that they do not move the limb at any time until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts, which rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a claw-shaped cautery or by making many punctures with cauteries.
For the union becomes strong, and the moisture is removed; and the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture accumulate in the stomach so that it is drawn away from its natural state and phlegm collects there, despite repeated treatments not improving, then the patient should lie on their back and extend their legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one beneath the collarbone of the chest, about the size of one's finger, and claw-shaped; and two below this on both sides, until you obtain a triangular shape resembling three cauteries. And lengthen them between the two so that they do not join together when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this pattern without addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this pattern: and let the cautery used for this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle following this pattern.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with this cautery: and it is as if you mark a point on the stomach according to the size that you wish with encaustum; then cauterize it with the puncturing cautery; then treat it with the treatment that preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing with a cold iron.
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness and moisture, or thick wind, until it departs from its natural condition through excessive discharge, and the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve; then the patient should lie on their back and mark with encaustum three cauteries according to this shape and size below the hypochondria where the elbow reaches. And the space between each cautery should be as thick as a finger, and the length of the cautery should be straight, and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the amount burned be half the thickness of the skin; and let the patient stand on their feet.
But if they cannot stand, then let them lie down with their legs extended and arms raised.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery when there is finesse and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far in cauterizing so that the entire thickness of the skin is burned, for then the whole body will be burned and it will reach the intestines. Know this.
On the method of cauterizing boils of the liver.
When an exitura occurs and you wish to know if the boil is in the flesh of the liver or its membrane; then if it is in the flesh of the liver, pain seizes the patient with heaviness but without sharpness. And if it is in the membrane of the liver, there is severe sharp pain. And now you see that the treatment of this has fatigued the doctors.
Therefore, the patient must lie on their back with their head raised. Then outline the location of the boil with a pen and ink; then take a hot cautery similar to a branding iron. And this is its shape. And cauterize with it once, until the skin is entirely burned and until it reaches the boil, so that all pus flows out; then treat it as an exitura until it heals.
And this method of cautery should not be used except by someone who has long studied the art of medicine and whose hands have often dealt with such ailments through experience. Only then may one dare to attempt such an operation.
But as for letting it go untreated, I consider that better.
On the method of cauterizing in Peritonitis
The ancients said that for cold peritonitis, a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be used in this manner. And it is that you should take from the dried roots of Aristolochia one root longer than the others, which is found amongst them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil and light it on fire. Then cauterize once with it between the continuation of the fork and the neck, and with two small cauteries slightly inclined downward towards that part which is under the beard.
And two more cauteries inclined downward towards the back a little between the fifth and sixth ribs; and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three cauteries from behind: one between the two shoulder blades, and two more on either side of the chest below that.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery, but let it smell openly the skin.
And some ancient ones have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron like a branding iron, and they heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, so that pus may come out, as we have described in the case of hepatic abscess.
But with this procedure using a cautery there is danger that either the patient will die immediately or a fistula will occur which cannot be healed.
Chapter 32: On cauterizing the spleen
When you are treating spleen disease, as we have said regarding its treatment among the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then there are three ways to use a cautery for it, all of which are correct.
One way is to make three or four lines with the cautery along the length of the spleen according to its shape, like those of the liver.
And let each cautery be as thick as a finger, or slightly more or less.
And the manner of cauterizing should be done equally as we have described for the liver.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie on their back with their face up.
And another way of cauterizing is: heat a cautery with two grooves, as described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder. Then elevate the skin that is directly over the spleen where the elbow of the left arm reaches. The elevation should be such that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two heated grooves very deeply until you penetrate the skin on the other side. Then remove the cautery, making four cauteries in total.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery having three grooves.
Then take care to allow the cautery to emit pus for many days after its use: it is more beneficial than all that preceded in treatment.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Hydropsy
A cautery is not applied to hydropsy unless there is proper dropsy.
When you treat hydropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the spleen, one behind the back between the shoulder blades, and one each on the chest and stomach direct: and let the depth of the cautery be nearly equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it may emit pus for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment after the cautery until two intentions have gathered to him; then healing will hasten upon him with the help of God.
But the shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a claw, according to its shape; and that for cauterizing the back should be olive-shaped, according to its shape.
On the Method of Cauterizing Feet and Legs
When there is an inflammation and filling with yellow water in hydropsy, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the junction between the little toe and the fourth toe; raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand again and do not repeat it at all.
For yellow water will be dried up thereby, and let the cautery have this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, one above the knee and another below it near the middle of the leg; and make two cauteries on the hip joint. Leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time so that some water may be dried up from it; then treat it with the other methods that we have mentioned.
On the manner of cauterizing in the case of an abdominal swelling
Chapter 35
When there is an abdominal swelling due to coldness and dampness that weakens the retaining and digesting powers of the stomach and intestines, and it cannot be cured by usual methods, you will find that the patient tolerates cauterization with excessive vigor. Then cauterize the abdomen with a large cautery above the stomach according to the previous method for cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery, and four fine cauteries around the navel using a small pointed cautery. Also cauterize the side of the liver with one or two large cauteries.
And if you see excessive dampness and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize the pubic region with a cautery, and also cauterize the whole hip joint. And perhaps you may add two small cauteries near the large stomach.
For this is a beneficial treatment whose assistance does not fail.
On the manner of cauterizing haemorrhoids
Chapter 36
When there are many old haemorrhoids or one large one in the anus, due to thick, cold humors or corrupted dampness, and they are treated with the method mentioned earlier without success, then cauterize three times on the lower spine near the buttocks in a triangular manner using three cauteries, and once below the navel about two fingers' width.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and his food undigested, and you see spots on his face, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as before, and once on his liver with another cautery and once on his spleen using a pointed cautery. Leave the cautery open for some time, then treat it until healed.
CHAPTER 37.
When you cut an artery, then heat the cautery that resembles a branding iron. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut artery until it reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice only.
If there are many arteries, then cauterize each one with the cautery as we have described. Then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the armpit, it is more beneficial as a last resort.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Quando tu vis fistulam in ano, tunc erige eam per digitos: et si non potes hoc facere, tunc introito bistorto introduce in fistulam donec adveniat ad eius capud: et uide utrum fiat exitus de altera parte fistulae.
When the patient does not obey a surgery and operation which we have described in its place, and fears it, perhaps he is cured with a cautery.
If it happens that someone develops a fistula and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and there are corrupted humors. Therefore, it is more fitting to probe it with a thin probe Then determine the depth of its aperture using the probe
Next, heat a cautery that resembles a skewer. Then insert yourself the heated cautery into the fistula up to the point where the probe entered
And repeat the cautery on it until all those corrupted bodies are burned, once or twice or thrice according to your necessity.
And beware of burning the nerve if it is there, or a large vein: or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all these places.
And do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is located in a fleshy place and you consider that it does not penetrate through.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
If however the opening closes and no more material comes out of it, and this continues for a long time: then know that it is now completely healed.
And if material does not stop coming out of it, then know that it is penetrating or there is a corrupted bone at its depth, or something else like that: about which you will learn later.
On the method of cauterizing Kidneys
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or thick wind, and the patient's condition worsens because of it, then you should cauterize him on the flanks above the kidneys with a cautery resembling a nail, once for each kidney
And perhaps we cauterize him again on the same flank. Therefore there will be three lines. So they will be more useful for relief.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to coldness and dampness, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize him on the lower part of the abdomen above the bladder, where pubic hairs begin, using a cautery on the right side of the abdomen and another on the left: let the length of this cauterization be equal to the size of a thumb joint. Also cauterize him with an inferior dorsal cautery or two if needed, and let it be according to what precedes the claw-shaped cautery.
On cauterizing the Uterus.
When coldness and dampness occur in the uterus, preventing conception and corrupting menstrual flow, delaying its onset and causing pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in cauterizing the bladder, and with a cautery on the lower back or two cauteries: let the claw-shaped cautery be used.
On cauterizing the Anus for dislocations
When mucus moistures drain into the anus and cause it to prolapse from its place, and the sign of this is that one thigh extends over the other when they are brought together, and the location of the dislocation is found empty.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient around the rim of the anus with a cautery similar in shape to a circle: after you mark with a hot iron around the rim as it revolves, so that the rim falls in the middle of the circle.
But if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three cauteries using a large olive-oil cautery, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the whole skin.
Then treat it until it heals.
**On the method of cauterizing sciatica.**
When pain occurs in the hip joint due to cold and dampness, and the patient is treated with what we have said in division but there is no improvement, then it is necessary to dissolve the thick humors by using foul pills or artificial pills and similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery is done in two ways: either with a cautery using burning medicines, or with fire.
A cautery with fire has many methods.
One method is to cauterize the hip joint itself with three triangular cauteries in this shape: โณ And make their depth good or bad. Let the space between each cautery be as thick as a finger's width, and let the cautery be of olive-oil.
Sometimes the cautery is made in the middle on top of the hip joint itself Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape is shown in the cautery for dislocation of the hip joint, then let it be one complete circle containing the whole hip joint.
And burn the entire thickness of the skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain is attached to the hip joint itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh, over the place where the pain is indicated by the patient, and make a fourth cautery four fingers up towards the groin, using a knife-shaped cautery.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient indicates that pain extends near to his toes, then cauterize him there where he indicates with one or two or more cauteries as needed.
And if the patient indicates that pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize him there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves or a large artery, and thereby cause harm to the patient or contraction.
I have indeed seen one and another among those who cauterized the groin too deeply, causing swelling in the leg until a tumor formed on the foot. The whole foot then became perforated and corrupted, followed by abdominal rupture and death.
If pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And wise men have said that this is the manner of cautery for sciatica. Make a similar one from iron, with a diameter of half the palm. Let it be thick at its opening like the thickness of a finger's bone or slightly less, and let there be another small one inside it.
And let the space between each of the cauteries be like the thickness of the joint of the thumb. Let them be open at two sides and have a height of about one or two joints. And make handles of iron suitable for the cauteries.
Then heat it in the fire until it glows red and sparks fly off. Then place it on a dish of hot coals and have the patient lie down on his healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauteries in place of one.
Then let him rest for three days. Afterwards, apply a plaster with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, "We have used this kind of cautery infrequently, because of the fearsome appearance it inspires and because few are willing to undergo it.
Nevertheless, it is among the good cauteries for one who endures it, and he will find its place.
The cautery with burning medicines is made thus: you make two hollow rings into which the iron or steel pin descends that serves as its handle. The height of the rings should be such that they each have two knots, or nearly so.
And the distance between them should be about the thickness of a finger, and they should be open at both ends. They should fit together snugly in this shape.
Then place it on a dish of hot coals while the patient lies down on his healthy side. And press your hand firmly upon the dish of hot coals. Then pour boiling water between the two rings that has been heated over the fire for a short time. Hold it there for about an hour while the patient endures its bite and burning. The pain will subside once the biting sensation stops.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe off the hot water from the dish entirely with fresh water. Then let it rest for three days.
And apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn disappears. Then leave it alone for several days until pus begins to flow from it. For it is the final step in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or thigh, make for him a plaster containing water, just as you did for the ankle joint.
And this is the method of hot water application, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines. Take an equal portion of quicklime and unslaked lime. Grind each separately and place them in a new pot with a small hole at the bottom according to the amount that will enter it. Place another earthenware pot underneath, and pour over the quicklime and slaked lime enough water from a stream to immerse both by one finger's breadth. Then press them with your hand using good pressure, and leave the pot until the sharp water drains into the lower earthenware pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over more lime. Repeat this process until the water becomes renewed (i.e., reaches a desired temperature).
For then it will be very strongly acidic, and is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other limbs. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among medicines with which ankle joints and also hip sockets are cauterized, honey of almonds and lime mixed with soap are used, each being mixed thoroughly.
And indeed, Galen recounts the story of a certain man from ancient times who was cured of pain in his ankle joint and sciatic vein by means of this treatment, which he greatly praised. And he said that he did not require any other treatment and that he was cured with one application only. He then said perhaps that after entering the bath carried by others, he came out of it already healed.
And it is to be taken from the green seetarag iris; and if not found green, take dry, fresh: and grind much with some fat, and apply it on achmus where there is pain, or leg, or thigh: and bind it, and leave it for a quantity of three hours, or until the patient feels relieved from the burning sensation. Then let him be put into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes moist, then let him be put on a seat. For the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that no one should use a cautery with these medicines unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscorides also said that goat dung, when cauterized with it, benefits the sciatic vein; and a cautery is made in this manner. Take wool and soak it with old oil, and put it on the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat this process. Do not cease doing this until the sensation reaches to the ankle and the pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called the 'Goat's cautery'.
ยถ On cauterizing a backache
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes such as accident or injury, or evacuation of excess matter and similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist matter. And cautery is indeed not necessary except in this particular case which arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with foul-smelling pills and similar things, three lines should be made according to the width of their back where the pain is. Then signs should be marked with a hot iron in every line five cauteries, or more depending on the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient's strength. And cauterization should be performed with cautery points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle nail cautery, in this shape.
Chapter: Method of Cauterizing at the Beginning of a Tumor
This ailment often occurs in young children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is that there occurs upon them a constriction with panting upon elevation and movement. And you will find on the last vertebra of the back and its nodes that it has already begun to rise above the rest of the vertebrae.
When you see this [tumor], and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular in this shape.
And let the cautery be placed evenly over all parts of the vertebra. And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with the cautery point two or three lines, and let the points be close together.
Then treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said.
And take care not to administer a cautery to a tumor that arises from nerve spasm.
Chapter: Method of Cauterizing in Gout and Joint Pains
When pains in the joints are caused by cold moistures which flow to any part of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call that Podagra properly.
Therefore, when Podagra is treated with remedies for cold causes and the pains are not removed, then a cautery removes them.
And it is, that one should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive-oil.
And if you wish to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery. But if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints and this happens often, then cauterize him on all sides of the knee with three cauteries or four, using the same cautery as before, that of Claudianus.
But if more cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize him accordingly. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then administer what we have said concerning the cautery in its own chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, then make points around the wrists as two lines revolve.
But if the pains remain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand.
If however the pains ascend after some days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both sides on all parts.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen or from taking medicines. For if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated, he will be cured with the help of God using this cautery.
About the manner of cauterizing in Ruptures
When rupture occurs in the groin and an intestine or a hernia descends to the testis, and it is just beginning to become noticeable, then you should order the patient to refrain from food on that day. And let him use gentle laxatives so that feces may descend from his belly.
Next, have him sit with his back on your hands: and order him to hold his breath until the hernia or intestine emerges or becomes apparent.
Then reduce it with your fingers and mark with a cautery below the rupture on the pubic bone, making a mark whose upper end is like half of a circle.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape, until it turns white and sparks fly off. Then replace the intestine or hernia into its cavity. Then have an assistant put his hand on the spot so that the intestine does not come out again: and you shall now spread the legs of the patient and place a cushion underneath him, and another servant shall hold down his thighs, while another holds his chest, keeping his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark with your hand holding it upright. And hold it there until you have burned through with it to the bone: or repeat the process again if you did not reach the bone on the first attempt.
And carefully watch during your cautery to ensure that you do not burn the intestine and cause harm or death to the patient.
Know this: if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation will be ineffective.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be thin according to their size.
Then dress the wound with the rest of the ointments until it heals.
And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the wound is completely healed.
It is necessary that you give the patient food during his time of recovery which will gentle his belly so that the intestine does not protrude during defecation.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then apply a well-made bandage and hold it in place for another forty days.
And let him be spared from labor, excessive eating and drinking, and violent coughing.
For when he follows this regimen, then he is healed with a complete recovery.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the belly and are beginning to grow worse, and you wish that they not worsen, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: let what is burned be like a third part of it. Then treat it with what we have said, and it will not worsen.
And some first authorities have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape:
After it is marked with the cautery, draw two lines across its width on the upper side of the rupture, and one line below that. And place your hand in the middle with a claw-like cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter: On the method of cauterizing pains caused by a fall or blow.
Chapter 48
When pain occurs in certain limbs due to a fall or blow and persists for a long time without being helped by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncture cautery.
And let the cautery be of a size suitable to the magnitude and thinness, weakness and strength, and location of the twist and pain caused thereby in each member.
If he is healed by the first cautery, that is well. If not, then repeat the cautery on top of it.
For it is customary for these pains to migrate from one member to that which approaches it. Therefore you should pursue them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
ยถ On the method of cauterizing in Leprosy
Leprous patients are sometimes benefited by cautery, a very great benefit. And especially the kind of Leprosy which is caused by the corruption of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore the Leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with what we said in division [of the book], and it does not go down nor remain still: and you fear that corruption will spread over the whole complexion of the patient: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the two horns [of the skull], and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And press your last hand with the cautery for a short time until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the skins are separated from it: so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from it, and cauterize the spleen also according to what preceded.
But if the Leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly: then you should cauterize with those cauteries which we said for the head, and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the two jaws, and two on the shoulders of the neck, and six on the shoulders of the back, and one large one on the buttocks at the great tail, and one above it in its hollow: and two on the hips, that is on all the hip with one, and two on the knees, one on each knee, and two on the arms, and two on the softness of his chest, and cauterize him on every joint from the joints of his hands and feet, and cauterize over all the heels of his feet and the palms of his hands.
And take care not to burn the nerves that are on the back of the heel.
And sometimes he is cauterized with a cautery over the breastbone, and another over the stomach bone, and another over the liver.
Know that the more you add to the cautery, the greater is its benefit and help.
And know that the patient does not find pain in the cautery as healthy people do; because his body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of such size and thinness according to the members and joints as has been mentioned concerning the kinds of instruments.
Then prepare the cauteries with flour of barley mixed with honey, and the rest of the preparation until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in stupor
When any limb is stunned and treated with medications, oils, plasters, and yet it does not heal, then cauterize the stunned limb with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
Make sure your cautery does not penetrate deeply into the thickness of the skin for too long. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes when a limb is stunned and paralyzed, it may be due to pressure on the nerves that move it, found at the exits of the spinal cord; cauterization can relieve this paralysis.
But let not one presume to perform this unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the exit points of moving nerves.
Chapter 51
When a hemorrhoid becomes old and does not respond to any medical treatments, then cauterize it with a deep cautery for a short time according to the thickness of its skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of barley and lentils cooked in rose oil, along with leaves of arnoglossa, dove's blood, and starling's blood; take equal parts of each ingredient, mix them all together, apply the mixture on a cloth and let it adhere to the affected area until it heals.
**On the Method of Cauterizing a Cancer.**
When cancer is just starting and you wish to stop it, then cauterize around it with a circular cautery, going all the way around it.
But wise men have said that it should be cauterized lastly in its center.
However, I do not think this way because I fear that it may ulcerate, as I have seen it happen many times.
And it is better to cauterize around it with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing in Adubelat.
When someone has an Adubelat and is delayed in its healing, either due to excess moisture causing it or because of the patient's age, if they are elderly with little blood, or due to time constraints wishing to hasten the maturation of the Adubelat, then cauterize around it using many small cauteries with repeated punctures. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten its maturation on its own.
But if you wish to make a hole in it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows.
And place it in the middle of the Adubelat until it pierces the skin: let the cautery be as long as the following finger of the patient, so that the flow of pure matter may be relieved.
Then care for it until it heals.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing in a Corrosive Evil.
Chapter 54.
Corrosion is nothing but corruption that moves about in a limb and consumes it, like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see a corrosion in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then heat many cauteries, both small and large, depending on what suits the location where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you erase all corruption, leaving nothing of it whatsoever.
Then leave it alone for three days, and apply ground sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all scabs and corruption are erased.
Then care for it with flesh-generating ointments.
If you see that after three days healthy flesh is born without corruption, then it is good.
And if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Sometimes rotting flesh is healed with sharp medicine. Indeed, it rises in the place of the cautery.
Yet, a cautery with fire is quicker to heal. I have already spoken of cauterization with sharp medicine for division; therefore take it there when you need it.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing claws and warts.
Chapter 55
It often happens in the lower parts of the feet that there is a painful condition: it is a thick, filtred matter that harms the foot.
And there are two methods for cautery in these cases: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Regarding cautery with fire, make a cautery like an auger similar to a vulture's feather made of iron according to the size that contains the claw from every side and has sharp edges.
Then place it hot upon the claw. Then roll your hand with the cautery around the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw, and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a plaster with powdered forest mallows mixed with salt, and leave it on overnight. For it will eradicate itself from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a fatty ointment for the flesh until it heals.
If they are not turned over and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet, then apply cautery with hot water. Take a cannula made of bronze or iron or from a vulture's feather and place it upon the claw orwart. Then pour a little hot water into the cannula and hold your hand while you roll it with slight pressure so that the edge of the cannula impresses upon the root of the claw, allowing the hot water to reach its depth. Let the patient wait for about an hour until the biting sensation of the hot water subsides.
Then let him go, for the nail will be removed with its roots.
Do this one after the other until you have come upon all those that are in his body.
Then care for them after they have been removed, using ointments that promote flesh growth.
On the method of cauterizing tremors
When trembling occurs in someone due to coldness of the nerve or quartan fever or any other cause, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five over the shoulder blades, one between each pair of them and also one on the chest and one on the stomach.
For trembling ceases with an oil cautery, and health hastens the recovery from cold ailment.
On the method of cauterizing a bathur
Chapter 66
Sometimes foul bathurs are expelled from the body, namely boils, which are caused by decay of coarse matter.
Therefore when they first appear, they should be cauterized with a fine cautery made of juniper wood, the tip of which is set on fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia Or with a lenticular cautery
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their eruption according to this method: and they do not increase; and the excess that causes them is broken up, and healing occurs from them.
But it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting
On the method of cauterizing bleeding from an artery wound
It often happens that blood flows from an artery which has been cut at a wound made externally, or during the incision of an abscess, or cautery of a limb, and similar cases; and it is difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly press with your hand on the orifice of the artery and place your index finger over it; and press it hard until the blood is blocked under your finger and no more flows out from it.
Next, place on the fire a small oil-soaked cautery, and many others; and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and location where the artery is disrupted, and place the cautery on that vein; afterwards quickly remove your finger and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
But if blood is expelled when you lift your finger from the orifice of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another one that has been prepared on the fire.
Do not stop doing this until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, lest another harm befalls the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities contract and the bleeding stops. Or it can be tied with a strong ligature using thread. Or medicines of appropriate properties may be placed on it to stop the bleeding and then bound with an appropriate compress.
But whoever performs the cutting of it with a ligament, and binding with cloth, or applying burning substances, and similar things, confers no benefit upon him except rarely.
But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present nor medicine: then he should begin by placing his index finger over the opening of the vein as we have described, and binding it very tightly until the blood from above the wound is stopped, and pressure is applied on the artery. And the finger should not be moved from above it with cold water of intense coldness until the blood is frozen and solidified and cut off.
Meanwhile he should consider what is needed by way of cautery or medication.
On Cutting, Piercing, and Bloodletting in Wounds and Similar Conditions.
We have already spoken in the First Chapter about every ailment in which it is fitting to use fire cautery and burning medicine, and their occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I placed there chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path, so that he who seeks may find what he is looking for.
And before I begin this, know this, O sons: that what is in this chapter about cautery is drawn from the fear of what was mentioned in the first chapter on cautery.
And therefore it is necessary that there be greater caution in this, because in the operation which is in this chapter, there is often evacuation along with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit wound, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of these trembling and fear arise, and many die because of them.
And I warn you that you may not fall into that which causes hesitation, for sometimes people with various modes of behavior come to you in this art along with various illnesses. Among them is the one who becomes angry with his illness and is light about his death: because of the vehemence of what he finds from his illness and the length of its wickedness. And there is fear along with illness which signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you his consent and stays with you hoping for healing, but his illness is fatal.
Therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you from among them whose way of being is such. And let your caution be greater than your greed and avarice. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after certain knowledge which verifies that his outcome has been successfully praised by you.
And use in the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication as to what is suitably healthful for them.
In that is your aid towards acquiring fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and may He not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on Cautery from the neck down to the feet so that you may easily find what you seek and need from it.
On the treatment of water collected in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
Know that this illness often happens to children at birth, or when the midwife squeezes the child's head without gentleness.
And it also happens sometimes for an unknown cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this illness in anyone other than children, and it quickly led to death in every one that I saw. Therefore, it seemed to me advisable to omit the operation on it.
And indeed I saw among them a boy whose head was filled with water and the head became larger every day until it could no longer sit up due to its size. And the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture collects either between the skin and bone or underneath the bone above the fontanelle.
And if the operation is necessary for this moisture when it collects between the skin and bone and there is a small abscess, then you should make one incision of about two fingers' width in the middle of the head until the moisture flows out.
This is the shape of the opening.
If the moisture has increased further and there is a larger abscess, then make two incisions following this shape.
And if the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head opened on all sides, and water flows out when you press it with your hand towards the inside, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this way.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then close the incisions with bandages and cotton wool. Then dress it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments.
And do not leave the head tightly bound unevenly. And feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to observe where the size of the swelling appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more at the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore, make an incision where you see the swelling and collection of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut an artery, lest there be a flow of blood and the patient dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Paragraph: On the Incision of Arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter 2
When catarrh occurs in someone's eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and not improved by medical treatment, then the last resort is to cut these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, make sure the patient shaves his head. Then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then let the patient tie his neck with any cloth he has. Then observe where the vein pulsates. And their locations are the areas behind the ears which are depressed: and they are rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark each with a cautery on both sides: and cut both with an acre-wide incision on either side until it reaches the bone: and let this be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula under the artery and cut it towards the top with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out in pulsing jets which leap frequently toward the interior.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers. Then mark with a cautery and find until it reaches the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from the blood is six drachms, but perhaps you emit more or less than this. All of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the wound. If there remains anything on the bone from the incision, then cut it off so that no hot abscess occurs; then bind the wound with linen bandages.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When a person has an old headache or acute catarrh due to acrid humidity and heat in the temples, or chronic soda and similar conditions, and it is treated with medical methods without improvement: then we have found that in these illnesses, extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, as we have described.
And the method of operation for extracting them is: shave the hair from the temples of the patient and expose the visible artery in the temple. For indeed it appears to you by its pulsation, and is rarely hidden unless in a few people or with great coldness.
But if it is hidden from you, then the patient should bind his head with any cloth of his, and then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or warm the place with hot water until there appears before you a clear manifestation. Then take the scalpel which I formed earlier. Then strip away the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then cast a hook into it and pull it out upwards until you have extracted it from the skin, and make it come out from its sheaths which are beneath it on all sides.
But if the artery is small: then encircle it with the tip of the hook. Then cut off from it a portion according to the amount by which its ends will extend and contract, and so that there is no bleeding. For if it is not cut nor severed, blood cannot be drawn out completely.
Then express from the blood six ounces up to three.
But if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread or animal sinew so that putrefaction does not come upon it before the wound has healed, and so that there is no bleeding.
Then cut off the excess tissue which is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour or another hour later.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone with a lancet cautery until its ends are sealed and the wound will remain in its place.
And this is better unless the patient has a fever or is of hot temperament. For cautery is one of those things which help to finish off dampness. Therefore it is better help.
And after the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that the place be filled with old wax and that powder made properly be placed upon it.
And afterwards, care should be taken with dry medicines which cause flesh to grow, and with bandages until healed.
But if meanwhile during the operation there occurs bleeding from an artery, then quickly apply a cautery to cut it off, or fill the place with wax, and press your hand until the bleeding stops. But if none of these is present to you, then put your finger on the place until the blood coagulates. And cool the place with water of intense coldness until sharp pain subsides and it is bound as necessary.
And for an easier and lighter extraction of the artery, use this cautery which has two blades: let the sharpness of both blades be like an Almagest. But they are much less sharp than the two blades themselves. For if they are as sharp as the two blades, both become cold quickly and do not cut flesh swiftly. Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of fire is retained within them and flesh is cut quickly. Therefore this method is better than any other, easier, and lighter.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
And let the space between the two blades be equal to the thickness of a finger. After you have marked two places with the cautery, place both burning blades until they reach the bone and cut the artery in two places so that it may lengthen between its ends. For they are not completely sealed by this cautery.
Chapter IV
About treating the frequent and sharp pain in the eyes.
When tears are frequent and their flow comes from veins on the outside of the skull, and no cure can be effected with medicines, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels a crawling sensation on his forehead like that of ants, and his eyes are wasted, wet, so that the lashes have become worn away by corrosion, and his eyelids are hot from the sharpness of the tears - then the ancients resorted to this operation for their cure, which they called "cure with the knife.
Then it is necessary to order the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead equidistant from each other along its length; let each incision be about two fingers in length. The first should be evenly spaced with the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly towards the temple, while the third is on the opposite side. Take care not to cut the arteries present on both sides. Keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, ensuring that the total length of all incisions equals the breadth of three joined fingers. Have a piece of sponge or dry cloth ready to absorb blood and wipe it dry.
Then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, shaped as follows: From the incision at the temple to the second one, scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions down to the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Next, remove this spatula and insert into the first incision another tool called a sharp scalpel with one side blunt and not sharp. And this is its shape:
Place the sharp side of it facing the flesh attached to the skin and the blunt side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes with it, except for those that continue along the incision up to where the skin appears.
Then do likewise on the other side of the incision.
And after an equal amount of blood has flowed out, squeeze out the areas containing clots of blood.
Then place a linen strip made from old cloth into every incision and put on top of them lint soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see to it that no hot abscess occurs.
On the third day, remove the stitches and apply a lot of warm water infusion. Then treat it with balsam ointment and other remedies used for wounds until it heals.
Chapter Five.
Chapter on the treatment of acute weeping and inflammation of the eyes coming from inside the head
When acute cataracts occur with sharp and persistent pain, and you see the eyes becoming thin, small, and their appearance weakened; and the eyelids are ulcerated, with hairs falling out from them, and there is sharp pain in the deep part of the head with subsequent sneezing: then know that these materials and cataracts do not come except from many veins.
And the best treatment for them is this: Moreover, you should order the patient to shave their forehead. Next, make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly broader on either side, and begin from the left ear to the right ear: let the incision reach down to the bone. Extend your hand away from the temple muscles that move during mastication until you expose the bone. Then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the wound using cooked wool or linen cloths. Next, tie above with cotton pads. Soak the cotton pads in wine and oil to prevent an abscess from forming.
And when you release it, if you see that the hot abscess has decreased, then you must continue to scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, like this: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to the place where the flesh has grown on these wounds.
Chapter 6.
And regarding its treatment if it falls into the ear.
Anything that falls into the ear is of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone like iron and glass; or it is from a plant like chickpeas and beans; or it is a liquid thing like water and vinegar and things like them; or some kind of animal.
When a stone or something similar that does not stick to nor grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then drip some violet oil or mustard onto the ear. Then perform the extraction and make them sneeze with powdered spikenard. Plug their nostrils at the onset of sneezing, after you place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear and extend it upwards.
For many times it exits with this treatment.
But if it does not exit, then perform the extraction using tweezers called 'Gestii,' that is, fine forceps. Its shape is as follows:
If it comes out with the forceps, it is good.
And if not, then perform the extraction using a fine crooked hook with few loops.
If it does not come out through that, then make a tube of bronze and insert the tip of the tube into the ear as far as possible. Then fill what is around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no path for wind except through the tube; then draw it out with your strong breath.
For oftentimes it comes out with that which we have described. But if it does not come out this way: then take a little of 'helkalimbat' or prepared glue used to catch birds, and place it on the tip of a reed that has been covered with cotton; then gently insert it into the ear after you have dried it.
But if it does not come out despite all that we have described, then hurry to cut into it before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of cutting is as follows: first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein and draw out blood according to their strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards. Make a small crescent-shaped incision at the root of the ear in the fatty tissue where it is depressed. Then extract with the instruments available what you can from the stone.
Then sew up the wound quickly and carefully until it heals.
But if there is something falling into the ear from a grain that grows and swells: then perform its extraction.
If it does not obey you to come out, then take a fine, thin spoon made in this shape:
And use it to cut off that type of grain that falls into the ear. Do not attempt this if you think that the grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear until you have placed many fragments on it; then extract them with hooks or fine forceps, or through suction as we have described, for its extraction will be alleviated.
But the water that enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing first of all. After filling his ear with some warm old cooked water, he should lie down on that ear. If it comes out through there, then it is good.
And if not, then take many stones of the length of a finger, thin and soft, heat them slightly with fire. The patient should insert one of these into the hole of their ear and jump on one foot on that side, striking the stone in their ear with another stone. So he should not cease doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now that the water comes out thus, take one of a feather or a rush, and insert its one end into the ear, lighting the other end with fire until it burns greatly. Then repeat with another rush and do this many times until all the water comes out. Then extract it with a cannula as described on the stone.
But in removing an animal that has entered into it, if it is small-bodied, like a louse, and similar ones, treat it as I have said in division.
But if it is of large body that appears to the senses, then use forceps and hooks for its removal. And this matter is easier than all those held in the ear.
But in the removal of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in sunlight. If something appears there from worms, then remove it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula of this shape - narrow at the bottom, wide at the top - and insert its fine end into the ear according to what the patient can tolerate. Then suck out with strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to exit, then seal around the cannula with wax, as I said on stone.
But if they do not come out with what we have said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have proven effective against worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring be such that when you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, its shape is as depicted here. Make it like this out of silver or bronze, narrow below where there is a small hole, wide above.
So let the pusher that is inside the concave part of the cannula be made of well-made bronze. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap cotton at its end in a suitable wrapping. Then throw oil or juice, or whichever of these medicines you want into the cannula, and let it be in the ear. Then insert the rod with cotton from above and press it with your hand using moderate pressure until the oil is forced into the concavity of the ear, and the patient feels it inside. And the medicine that is poured into the ear should have been warmed for a short time with fire, and be careful not to use something very cold to distill, because medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of accidental discharge from the Ear.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it has also happened that some people have had an obstruction in the ear due to a wound or flesh growing inside it.
And sometimes this obstruction occurs deep within the ear canal and cannot be seen, but at other times it occurs near the entrance of the ear canal and can be seen.
Therefore, obstructions that occur deep within the ear and cannot be seen are difficult to treat in most cases.
And for those obstructions that can be seen, place the patient's ear in the sunlight and examine it. If you see an apparent obstruction, open it with a fine, curved instrument whose tip has a small width with one part sharp, while the rest of the instrument is smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear.
If the obstruction is due to flesh grown inside the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine hook and cut it with great care until all of the flesh is removed.
But if the obstruction is deep within the ear, then take a fine, smooth rod and warm it briefly with fire. Then insert it into the ear canal.
If you feel that the obstruction has been reached and the patient feels discomfort in their hearing, then try to open it gently. Be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Next, place a linen pad into the ear according to the size of the opening you have found, soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are confident that the wound has healed.
Or take a linen cloth, soak it in rose water, powder it with ground frankincense, and apply it.
If you see that the ear is already inflamed, then remove the linen pad and let it rest with another one soaked in a plaster made with olive oil and rosewater until the inflammation subsides. Then continue to treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding from the ear, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear. Then use the other treatments mentioned in this book to stop the bleeding.
On the treatment of inflammation of the eyelids.
Chapter 8
Eyelid inflammations can sometimes be moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should hold them with tweezers or forceps and cut them from their roots using curved scissors. Then apply ground frankincense powder to the area.
If there is bleeding from them, then cauterize with a small round cautery.
It is better to cauterize after cutting. For often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
On the treatment of prolapsed eyelids
Chapter 9
Very often there occurs in the eyelids something similar to a hard lump or growth, which is called a "hailstone" because it is a collection of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, the operation is as follows: first consider whether there is a hailstone present that appears on the eyelid and moves easily to all parts of it.
Make an incision along its width. Then peel it off from every side with ease until it comes out completely. Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
But if you cannot remove it unless after piercing the eyelid with a small incision, then this will cause harm to the patient in some way.
If the incision is large, then close it with sutures and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come from it. For the ointment restores it and causes it to heal over.
And if the hailstone leans towards the inside of the ear on the inner surface of the eyelid, then turn over the eyelid and suspend the hailstone with a hook. Additionally, you may need to make an incision and press it from all sides.
But if the eyelid lengthens due to the incision, no harm will come of it.
Then rinse the eye after removing the hailstone with saltwater and care for the area with something that promotes healing until the patient is recovered.
On the treatment of "axirnath" (i.e., a sty) on the eyelids.
Chapter 10
A sty is a kind of fat that forms on the eyelid of the upper eyelid, and this happens most often in children. It causes their eyes to be painful and they suffer from morning catarrh and cannot look directly at sunlight because tears flow towards them. This makes them always lie down on their faces and sleep like that, with their eyelids moist under the eyebrows due to swelling. You can see the prominence of the sty and feel it between your fingers when you press the area.
The manner of its procedure is that the patient should place their head in your lap.
Next, take a linen cloth and prepare from it a thread, then make from that thread a circle according to the size that contains the sty on all sides. Then place this (circle) upon it (the sty), and press with your fingers from all sides so that the sty may gather in the middle of the circle.
Then make an incision with a scalpel at the midpoint of that moist area, splitting it lengthwise, but do not make the cut too deep as is done in bloodletting.
Otherwise, you must cut the skin entirely until you reach the sty, for often it protrudes from the slit like a piece of white fat.
Then extract it with the cloth that you inserted between your fingers on the outside and turn your hand to the right and left until it is completely dispersed. Be careful not to push too far into the slit with the scalpel so as not to harm the eye.
But if the sty does not appear at the beginning of the incision, gently push further into the slit until the sty comes out. Then extract it, as we have said.
Next, soak cloths in vinegar and water, place them on the area, and then bandage it with gauze.
Some people grind salt and put it into the hollow of the incision so that any remaining moisture may dissolve.
Then care for it until it heals.
If a hot abscess happens in the location, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Concerning methods of treating strabismus of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes relaxed causing the eye to squint as it should not.
Chapter 11
When hairs are born in the eyelids of the eye beyond their natural course and grow thickly, then they harm the eye and cause continuous tears, relaxation of the eyelids, and whitening until it becomes a cause of destruction for the eye.
And strabismus of the eye is treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as it was mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Or strabismus is treated by incision and suturing. Or by means of weights, as I shall explain.
You should place the patient's head on your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns well, that is good. But if it does not [turn], insert a needle into the eyelid where there is thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born. Then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with forceps.
Then find the extra hairs on the inner part of the eyelid using tweezers, starting from the greater lachrymal duct up to the lesser lachrymal duct.
Then pull out the thread and place a small cotton wick or piece of cloth under the eyelid. Then mark the eyelid with cautery in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it varies greatly among humans.
For there are those who require that much flesh be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is swollen by it.
Then with scissors find the midpoint between the two lines you have marked and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and make a single incision close to the natural hairs, so that it is as thick as a reed.
Then insert a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then peel off the entire skin. Then sew together the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread: wipe away the blood, and make it adhere by tying the excess threads over the eyebrows with some adhesive material if you wish to do so; but if not, do not bother.
Then leave the stitches and threads in place for three or four days, then care for it afterwards.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and treat it with something that dries and contracts it. For the eyelid will be raised during the cauterization of the wound and its closure, but it will be better afterwards.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients called Attaxmir.
However, there is carefulness over the patient involved in this procedure, and it comes from good practice, without fear.
And there is another method in Attaxmir: which is to mark the eyelid with a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then raise the eyelid with three hooks separated or joined together according to this shape: then cut off the excess with small scissors according to this shape with equal depth of incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not fit: then take a needle with thread attached, and insert it into the middle of the shape; and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct; and bring together the threads between your fingers with equal tension.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation and raise the skin over which the cut is marked, as we have described.
Then join together the two lips of the wound with a suture and care for it until it heals.
But if swelling occurs at your incision or wound: lance that swelling with a cautery and similar instruments using soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid also turns inward so that its hairs do.
Therefore you should use for this what we have said regarding incision, but especially an artificial suture for both (lips of the wound). Chapter on the treatment of Asthma with Cantharides
And it is necessary to turn back the eyelid and cut open the wound that is inside according to what I have described. Then skillfully make two cannulae or two slender pieces of wood: their length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of a grain of barley; and you have already cut them at both ends where you hold the threads.
Then carefully place both cannulae on what is protruding from the eyelid of the eye and tie them tightly at both ends with strong thread, leaving them in place for a few days. For the skin being thus tied will die, blacken, and decay until it falls off by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
When it becomes firm, lift up the eyelid; and hairs will not prick.
And this is the shape of two tubes which you should make according to this figure and size in length and width.
Chapter 12
Paragraph: On raising hairs that are causing irritation in the eye with a needle
The operation is as follows: take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, soft. Then tie both ends with a very fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place under it another fine thread and tie its ends if you wish.
Then the patient should put their head on your lap, near to the sun so that the operation may be clearer, because it is a delicate or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid and push it quickly through the eyelid until you draw out a natural hair from above.
Then pull the hair up above the thread: and insert that hair into the thread if there is one, or two, or three, but not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out of the eyelid along with the thread and the natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled and no hair comes out with it: pull the thread downwards along with the thread you composed in it until the thread comes out through the upper opening, and you can see it with your eye. Then pull both the thread and the hair and draw them both out and close the eye. Leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then either attach a longer hair from the natural hairs and raise it with that, or leave it alone until it grows long after some time, and then raise it.
Chapter 13
When this happens to the eye, it is called "Leporina".
And this injury is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, an accidental one occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or from a cut, cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for it is that you should find that consolidation and separate its lips, and put between them a linen wick, and tie it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict; for if you do so, Alxatrati will return worse than before. Rather, use things that soften, such as foentgraecum: and mix with water in which marshmallow has been cooked linseed: and anoint with diacylon ointment, melted with some oil: and wrap a linen cloth with it, and treat with it.
And your treasury of treatment is to strive by every means to prevent it from becoming consolidated again in its original shape.
And indeed this operation we have spoken of is only a kind of correction of Alxatrati so that the original form of the place does not return entirely.
Chapter on treating Alxatrati that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV
This Alxatrati which happens below is truly called Alxatrati. And it is either natural or accidental.
And an accidental one occurs from a wound, or slit, cautery, and similar things.
And the way of operating on it is that you should take a needle with a double thread and dip it in flesh, and make it pierce from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. If then the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a probe and place it in the slit, and turn the eyelid with it; then make two slits on the inner side of the eyelid, so that the ends of the two slits meet at the two angles of the incision, until they come together to form an angle: until when they are brought together, this figure is formed, which is like the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount of its width, with its acute edge below, from what follows the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: sewing them with a wool thread.
Then treat them with the ointments we have mentioned and linens until they are healed.
And if an ulcer occurs from the slit and suture or cautery, then you must make a flat slit under the hairs of the eyelid, even as it was before. Then separate between the two lips with linen, as we have said.
And the summary of treatment for an ulcer when it is above or below is that the operation should run according to how it is prepared from the form of the ulcer.
For indeed it has many different forms and the skilled craftsman prepares his ingenuity with whatever means are possible for him until he makes the form return to its natural shape or near it, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
Chapter 15.
ยถ On the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or cornea
Sometimes this condition occurs in many people, so that the eyelid sticks to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you should insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it upwards: or extend it with a hook; then cut through the adhesion with a dull scalpel that is not too sharp: so as not to distress the patient during the operation, and remove the scalpel, lest it wound the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be like scraping away the adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour saltwater into the eye and wash it with water: or distill onto it from a sieve made from dissolved glass mixed with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen thread: and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white: and on the third day use the sieve again, along with poultices, until it is healed.
ยถ On incising the nail and removing the flesh of tears
Chapter 16
Know that the nail is in two ways. Either it is nervous and hard like a string; Or it is not nervous and resembles frozen white moisture; which when touched by iron or tried to be grasped with a hook, breaks off without the hook sticking in it.
And both kinds do not begin until the large tear duct, gradually advancing until it covers the sight and prevents light and motion of the eye.
And the manner of operation for incising it is: have the patient place their head in your lap. Then open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Next, grasp the nail with a small hook and pull it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a thread made from horse, ox or cow hair - make sure the thread is strong and double the end of the needle slightly. Then pierce the nail with the needle and suture it with the thread, pulling it upwards. Next, scrape off the side of the nail that follows the pupil using the thread as if you were closing it until you reach its end.
Then make an incision in the remaining part of the lachrymal duct using a fine spatula or small forceps, taking care not to damage its natural tissue so that the flow of tears is not impaired.
And sometimes the nail can be extended with just a hook, or with a thread as mentioned earlier. Then scrape gently using a fine spatula, which has this shape:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the corneal tunic and cause it to rupture or perforate the pupil.
Then after the incision, sprinkle some crushed salt or powder made from saffron into the eye and leave it until the following day. Then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
But if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it nor can a hook be fixed on it, then this type of nail should be treated many times with medications until it heals as described in its division.
If you wish to make an incision into it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine, gentle, blunt spatula with this shape: And shave the nail from above with great care. If you see that it becomes thin and brittle and the razor impresses upon it, then instill into the eye from the time of shaving some saffron or red ochre powder or ground salt, and cover the eye until the following day.
Then repeat this procedure until all of it is removed. Unless there is a warm abscess in the eye itself: then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure on it with caution until it heals.
The prominence of the lacrimal gland, if it causes great harm to the eye, should be suspended with a hook and cut off from its part without making the last incision, lest the flow of tears be obstructed.
Then instill into the lacrimal passage saffron or powder made from safflower until it heals.
On incising an algourdane and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
A red fleshy growth sometimes occurs in the eyes of some people, covering or approaching the pupil, or drawing tight over the eyelids and even turning them outward; it resembles a sea-pink.
And the operation for this is that the patient should place their head in your lap. Then open the patient's eyes and grasp all of that flesh with appropriate hooks, holding it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut into the flesh first until it is completely severed with a knife. And be careful not to injure the eye during this operation. The cut should be made either with a sharp-pointed knife, as mentioned in the cutting of a nail, or with small forceps used for an eyelid, depending on how much flesh is present after the next chapter.
When the incision is complete and all of the algourdane has been removed, then fill the eye with ground salt or instill red ochre powder and similar corrosive medicines into it. Then place a white-hot copper disk on the outside of the eye to prevent inflammation.
But if some algourdane remains and there is hot blood and fear of a hot inflammation, then leave the eye alone and treat it with remedies that cool inflammation.
Then repeat the procedure until it heals.
And do the same for any added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that one should not undertake any treatment of a weak eye through the natural path or accidentally using an iron instrument unless you see that that member can tolerate such an operation.
On the collection of sebaceous material from the eye.
Chapter 18
Sebaceous veins are red vessels that grow over the eye and obstruct its sight, weakening it with prolonged time.
Therefore, first you must consider whether the eye with sebaceous material is strong and not affected by any other condition besides sebaceous material. Then collect its sebaceous material.
It is necessary that you order the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks according to your discretion. Let the hook be of fine double-pointed shape like this, or let there be two hooks graded on a single body like this.
Then carefully pluck those veins with fine forceps and wipe away blood hourly until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and dissolved. And be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the tweezers.
And perform the operation at midday facing the sun and be very firm in your operation so that you only cut those veins.
And when you have finished, then apply in the eye either green or red collyrium so that its sharpness may corrode what remains of the scale.
But if it is not possible for you to complete this in one session, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that soothes its pain; leave it alone for several days until the pain subsides and the heat has abated. Then repeat the process according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Chapter on Reduction of Dislocation of the Nose
Chapter 19
The physicians call Arissati a fistula which you treat with either the cautery or burning medicine according to its description.
And if it does not heal, then there is no cure for it except to make an incision over the abscess at its origin and extract all the moisture and pus that is within it until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness on it, then scrape it clean with this instrument whose shape is as follows.
And it is called the "asper's head".
It should be made of bright iron and its head should be round like a pea, punctured with the point of a file or a very fine awl; place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then roll it between your fingers and press your hand briefly until you know that the corruption has been scraped away. Repeat this several times.
Then restore the area with drying astringent medicines.
If the area solidifies and flesh grows there, and the flow of pus stops and remains so for forty days without returning or becoming inflamed, then know that it is now healed.
But if not, there is no cure except to reduce the fistula back into the nostril according to this method.
Then, you should bare the bone with an iron tool or caustic medicine; and once the bone is laid bare, take a trepan of this shape, its tip being iron and triangular, its wood being a slender pyramid tapering to the end as shown.
Then place it on the bone itself near the tear duct; and hold your hand somewhat away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the trepan until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it; at this point you will know that air has begun to pass through from the nose when they place their hand over it.
Therefore then dress the site with drying astringent medicines as I have taught you.
When flesh begins to grow and the site hardens, then the matter that was flowing outwards will return to the nose; thus it becomes easier for the patient.
On the reduction of a prolapsed eye.
Chapter 20
When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no injury to vision or diminution of it, then you should loosen the patient; next perform phlebotomy on them; afterward apply cupping glasses to their neck without incision but with suction.
Then apply over the eye a liniment made of acacia, aloe, olibanum, and tragacanth gum. Then bind the eye tightly from above over the plaster with many bandages.
And the method of bandages is this: take soft cloths, many in number, and fold each one four times; make many of them; then place them one over another according to the amount needed for the eye; finally bind them tightly with a hard cloth using strong pressure.
And repeat cupping glasses with suction without incision.
Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night.
If however the ligature becomes slack again, then it is necessary to tie it tightly; afterwards remove the ligature after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see that the eye has returned to its own tunic, it is good; but if not, then repeat the poultice, lint, binding, and cupping glasses until it heals.
On the Incision of the Vein Tunic.
Chapter XXI.
When a disruption occurs in the vein tunic, and then it becomes prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of barley, causing disfigurement to the appearance of the face, and you wish to incise it: then this is the operation for that condition, according to what I shall describe. First insert a needle into the root of the vein from below upwards.
Then insert another needle with a doubled thread attached on the side of the lachrymal gland, and make it penetrate; and let the first needle remain in its place.
Then cut the location of the doubled thread and tie the vein around the needle with it tightly.
Then withdraw the needle and place over the eye lint soaked in egg white; leave him until the thread falls off with the vein.
Then treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the vein is tied all around with a bandage of cloth until the eye becomes greatly prominent.
Then pierce it with a fine trocar that reaches to the depth of the eye, and let the aqueous humor flow out, and the eye subside, and immediately enter: then bind it until it heals.
On the Treatment of Trachoma
Chapter XXII.
This disease which is called trachoma is nothing but mucus that collects in the eye like descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating for this condition is to make the patient sit on a prepared or straight chair.
Then, take hold of his head with your hands from both sides and move it until you see the blood flow towards the lower parts beneath your eyes. Then bind it and let it not descend; and let light be restored; and the patient shall see things as they were before. But if it does not descend below, know that there is water present.
But if there is no preparation of the descent of blood along with what we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a sharp needle and pierce it slightly through the corneal conjunctiva at its junction with the tunic for a short distance until blood comes out.
When blood begins to flow, then instill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or boiled water from fenugreek seeds and honey. Then treat as before until it heals.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23
We have already spoken of the kinds of water and which is suitable for making an incision, now take that same water according to its healing properties.
Then have the patient sit squarely between your hands facing the light near the sun. Tie his healthy eye and press it firmly. Then hold the eyelid of his affected eye with your right hand if it is his left eye, or your left hand if it is his right eye.
Then take an magnet with your right hand if it's the patient's left eye, or your left hand if it's their right eye.
Then place the end of the magnet close to the cornea's edge near the smaller tear duct opening. Push the magnet with force while rotating your hand until you feel it reach the empty space inside the eye.
The length of the magnet's journey into the depth should be measured as the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness of the eye. This is the circumference of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil itself due to the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the magnet until it reaches the location where there is water. Then press it down once, then again.
If the water descends immediately, then the patient will see at once what they opened their vision upon, and the magnet will be in their eye.
Then pause briefly. If water descends, then lower it for a second time, except that the magnet should not come out.
When it is fixed and does not ascend, then remove the magnet gently while slowly turning your hand.
Then dissolve some clear salt of a gemstone in water and wash out the eye with it. Then place outside the entire eye a wick dipped in rose oil or wool infused in rose oil and close with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those of our time, place over it powdered cinnamon mixed with egg white.
If the magnet does not obey you and enter the eye due to its hardness, since it is made of human bone whose eye is very hard, then you should take a spatula called "Alberid," which has this shape:
Therefore, pierce the conjunctiva only with it and do not put your hand all the way into the hole. And it is only necessary to create a path for the magnet's subtle place.
Then insert the magnet as we have described.
And towards the completion of your operation, prepare for the patient a decent sleeping place where they can lie on their back in a dark room; forbid them from all movements and coughing, and provide them with food that soothes their nature; let them not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain in its place until the third day.
Then remove it in that dark room and test his vision; make him look at things. Then replace the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after the incision; rather, it should be done by someone else because water rises quickly through a strong gaze.
But if a hot swelling occurs, then you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that reduces the swelling until it subsides; then without revealing his vision, place over his face an eye patch to guide his sight for several days while he remains in the dark room.
Then let him gradually leave the house and return to his usual habits.
And know that in surgery, the student is not excused from seeing things occasionally; then he should dare to perform operations.
And indeed it has reached us that among those from Alayrah, there is one who said that in Alayrah a cistern was pierced through which water was drawn.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this, nor have I read it in any of the old books; and it is possible that it is a new thing.
And these are the forms of species from the magnet, so that one who does not know them may stand upon them.
They should be made of air and their ends should be sharpened like this with the same fineness, and the tip should be acute.
Chapter 24
On the treatment of a flesh growth in the nose.
Sometimes various kinds of flesh are born in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a many-legged scorpion: and from it comes fleshy, stone-like, dark-colored flesh; and also that which is soft flesh, not dark-colored.
Therefore, if it is that soft flesh which is not deceitful nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, and open their nostrils, and insert hooks into those fleshy growths: then pull them towards the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a sharp, fine spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
But if something remains which cannot be cut away, then shave it with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing remains of it. But if blood dominates you or a hot abscess occurs: then apply to it what is appropriate. Or if it is from evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize him until the blood is cut off and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar or water or wine should be poured into the nose after the incision. But if the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then know that he is already healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh born on the upper bones of the nose inside it to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Therefore, you should then insert a thread of linen which has some thickness and many knots in it: and place between each knot the amount of a finger or less. And let the patient insert one end of the thread into his nose with a reed or whatever is possible for him afterwards having made it like an awl: and let him draw in his breath until it reaches the upper part of the nostril, and comes out over his throat.
Indeed, children often do something like this in schools: and it is easy for one who wishes to do so.
Then place two ends of the thread, one end which emerges over the nose, and the other which remains in the nostril. Then bring a scalpel with knots tied to the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now attached to the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread and insert into the nose, after wiping away the blood, a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more until the ointment has consumed all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter a leaden tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if there is a need for treatment that dries up, use it.
For making a head purge to draw out oils and other medicines into the nose, make it of silver or bronze, like a small lamp with an opening like a shell, and its passage likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed cane.
And the shell of the instrument for making a head purge should be full and open, with a handle at its end with which to hold it when heating oil or other liquids and flowable substances within it.
Chapter 25
The nose often becomes enlarged at its tip and grows bigger with time until it becomes unsightly to look upon.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cut off the growth at its beginning when it first appears, and root out all of it. Then place upon the site either a caustic or a burning medicine to destroy it.
But if the incision is delayed until it becomes large, then consider whether it is hard, rough, dark in color, and has few sensory perceptions; do not touch it with iron for it is a cancerous abscess.
For I have seen many times that those who had this boil cut have subsequently suffered great harm from it.
But if the boil is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be cut completely, then drain the patient and cut it without fear or hesitation. Then treat the site with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26
On stitching of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages (nose, lip, ear), little can be achieved by surgery except in some cases.
Therefore, when such an injury occurs to someone, you should first consider if it is a fresh wound with blood. If so, then join the edges of the wound together with stitches and then treat it until it heals.
But if the lips of the wound are already separated and each part has healed on its own, then you should cut away all the skin that appears to be dead until it bleeds. Then sew the two edges together with stitches and tighten them. Dust powdered dragon's blood and incense over it. Place a piece of plaster of diachylon on top and another of cohesive plaster. Leave it bound for two or three days. Then remove the dressing after two or three days, change the medicine, and leave it alone until the stitches fall out by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is as follows: either join the edges of the wound together continuously with needles, as we have described for abdominal wounds; or join them with a thread, as I have instructed you.
Chapter 27
On the Extraction of Swellings on the Lips
Many people often get hard swellings similar to grains of barley inside their lips. Some are smaller, others larger.
Therefore, turn the lip and pierce it on all sides of every swelling, then hook it with a crochet needle and cut it completely around.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered zinc until bleeding stops.
Then let it be bandaged with vinegar and treated with it, where there is astringency, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28
On the Incision of Congenital Flesh on the Gums
Often there is born above the gums an excess of flesh, which the ancients called "abuluss".
Therefore, hook it with a crochet needle or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing blood or pus to flow.
Then apply powdered zinc or other drying astringents to the wound.
If that flesh grows back after treatment, for it often does so, then cut it again and cauterize it; for it will not grow back after being cauterized.
Chapter 29
On the Extraction of Teeth with Iron
Sometimes the surfaces of teeth become rough and discolored from within and without, between the gums. They may turn black, yellow, or green, until decay reaches the gum and the teeth smell bad because of it.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place their head in your lap. Then scrape the tooth and gum where you see rough surfaces like sand until nothing remains of them. Do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolorations until they are cleaned.
If what you remove first does not suffice, it is good. But if not, then repeat the scraping on another day, a second and third time, until you achieve your desired result.
Know that teeth require scrapers of various shapes and forms depending on the preparation for your operation. The scraper used to scrape the lower part of a tooth is different from the one used between teeth due to their differing shapes.
And these scrapers should be prepared and kept with you for use as needed.
Chapter 30
Chapter: On the Extraction of Toothache
You should endeavor to relieve tooth pain with all diligence and be slow in extracting it. For once it is extracted, there is no substitute for it. It is a delicate substance until there is no other option but to extract it when the patient is compelled to do so. Then you should ensure that the painful tooth is firmly extracted and the patient feels certain relief from you.
Pain often deceives the patient into believing that a nearby tooth is the source of pain and they extract it. However, the pain does not cease until the troubled tooth is extracted.
We have seen this happen many times among those who practice bloodletting.
Once the painful tooth is positively identified by you, then you should cauterize around it with a spatula containing something medicinal until the gum becomes loose on all sides. Then move the tooth gently with your fingers or fine forceps little by little until it begins to wobble.
Then place large forceps properly on the tooth and put your patient's head between your knees. Once you have a good grip so that it does not move, pull out the tooth straightly, making sure not to break it.
But if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath the tooth on all sides with ease. Then try to move it as you did initially.
But if the tooth is pierced or rotted, then you should fill its hole with a piece of cloth. Then tie it tightly with a thin silk thread so that it does not break when you squeeze it with forceps during tightening.
It is necessary to perform careful cauterization around the gum on all sides extensively.
Be mindful of your strength so as not to break it off and leave a part in the patient's mouth, which would cause greater pain upon removal.
Beware of doing what ignorant bloodletters do out of haste and boldness when extracting it. Instead, follow the method that I have described.
For often they cause serious illnesses in people which are difficult to heal because they break the tooth and leave its roots or some of them behind, or they pull it out along with some jawbones. We have witnessed this happening many times.
After extraction, let [the wound] be washed with wine or vinegar and salt.
If bleeding occurs from the site (which happens often), then mash some gum Arabic and apply it there. If that is not available, cauterize the spot if necessary.
The fine forceps used for moving the tooth initially should have long points and a short handle. They should be thick enough so that they do not bend when pressed on the tooth. The handles should be like those of coarse forceps but not too thick to prevent them from slipping or bending when squeezed together. Their tips should be straight, made of good iron or well-made steel, with teeth arranged in such a way that some interlock with others and hold firmly when closed.
Sometimes the tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called the stork (ciconia), having strong gripping power.
Chapter 31
Chapter on the Extraction of Teeth and Broken Mandible Bones
When a tooth that is about to be extracted remains firm, then you should apply a poultice of butter on the spot for one or two days until it becomes softened. Then insert a wedge made of wood or use forceps with tips resembling the beak of a bird called the stork (ciconia). This is the shape of the forceps.
Their tips should be made like a file on the inside, or like an awl (aliskilfeghi).
If the tooth does not come out with these forceps, then you should make an incision over the root and remove all surrounding flesh, and insert a small instrument called a "Palanca," which has this shape.
It should have a short point, slightly thickened at its end to prevent breaking.
If the root comes out through it, that is good. But if not, you should help it with other instruments whose shapes are like these.
The first has a triangular shape with some thickness at its tip.
The second has a thin, triangular shape.
And with other instruments and tools mentioned earlier concerning teeth.
Also use this instrument resembling a large hook, having this shape with a twisted tip of some thickness to prevent breaking and not being blunt.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth; likewise the rest of the instruments are not counted, and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds an instrument himself according to what the operation signifies and the diseases themselves.
Because there are diseases for which previous authors did not mention an instrument due to the diversity of their types.
If however the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or becomes gangrenous: then examine it over its location with whatever is suitable to it among the instruments and forceps which I mentioned for tooth extraction, and treat it with such gestures whose form is as follows.
It should have some thickness gradually so that it can be tightened or held with the bone and not slip away until the bone comes out: and restore the place with suitable medicines.
If however there is a small amount of gangrene in the bone, then shave it off from its gangrene and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32
On the extraction of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it results in an unsightly appearance; and this is particularly true when it occurs in women and girls, that is, those who are visible.
Therefore you should consider For if a tooth is born after another and does not fit in place or it is possible to extract it but not grind it down: then remove it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows.
It resembles a small beak and is made from sharp-pointed hard iron.
And make your incision over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that it is not disturbed by any other tooth.
But if it is prominent and exposed to grinding: then grind it with a file made of hard iron whose shape is as follows.
Let it be entirely of iron and its handle covered with small puncture-like holes like the file used for making needles. Grind the tooth gradually over many days with ease so that it does not move nor fall out. Then polish it gently, finally shave it with some razors.
But if it is a tooth from which a part has broken off and harms the tongue, then you should file it down until the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out so that it does not harm the tongue nor interfere with speech.
Chapter 33.
On the extraction of teeth using gold wires.
When a concussion and injury occurs to the front teeth due to blow or accident, and the patient cannot chew without dropping food, and you have treated them with styptic medicines without success, then it is appropriate to bind them with a gold wire because silver turns green and rots after some days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium fineness and thickness according to the quantity that fits between the teeth.
And the method of extraction is as follows: Take a wire and insert its doubled end between two healthy teeth. Then wind both ends of the wire around the moving tooth or teeth until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the winding until you reach the point where you started. Hold your hand with gentleness and wisdom so that it does not move at all, and let your grasp of the wire be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps and join both together. Bend them towards each other and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so that they do not harm the tongue. Then let it remain bound in this way.
If it becomes loose or is cut, bind them together with another thread and it will remain stable thus for the entire period of time.
This is the form of teeth: and the figure of retention of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see it.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after having been displaced and are retained as we have described, and they remain there. And this is done only by an experienced and skilled craftsman.
And sometimes a piece from cow bones is prepared and shaped like a tooth and placed in the gap where it supports and holds the tooth, as we have said. And it remains there for a long period of time.
Chapter 34
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which one is born, or accidental, resulting from an already healed wound.
The operation for this is as follows: open the mouth of the patient and elevate their tongue. Then cut through that ligament with a scalpel until the tongue is freed from its constraint.
But if there is some hardness and knotting present, resulting from the healing of a wound, then use a hook to find it and cut through it widthwise until you have severed the ligament and released the knot.
And beware lest there be a deep incision in the flesh and you cut into an artery there, causing bleeding to occur.
Then rinse the wound with rose water, vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a linen bandage which the patient should hold in place throughout the night so that it does not heal again.
If bleeding occurs, then apply powdered myrrh to the wound site. But if blood overcomes you, then cauterize the spot with a lentigo cautery that is suitable for it; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35
It sometimes happens that a swelling resembling a small toad appears under the tongue, preventing it from its natural movement, and may even become so large as to fill the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and observe the swelling.
But if you see it as dark-colored or black, hard, without sensation for the patient, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
But if it is inclined towards whiteness and has moisture, then introduce a hook into it, cut it with a fine bistoury, and free it from all sides. But if bleeding overcomes you during the procedure, then apply powdered myrrh to it until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation until you have removed it completely along with its base.
Then cauterize it with vinegar and salt and treat it with the appropriate care until it heals.
On the Treatment of a Swelling of the Two Glands.
Chapter 36
Sometimes swellings occur between the throat and the gullet (i.e., the glands) which resemble almonds that appear externally and are called the two tonsils. When you treat them with what we have mentioned earlier, but they do not heal, then observe them.
But if the swelling is hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with an iron instrument.
Moreover, if the swelling is red in color and its root is large, do not touch it even with an iron instrument for fear of bleeding; indeed, leave it alone until it ripens. And then you should pierce it: or else it will burst on its own.
If it is white in color, round, and has a fine root, then it should be incised.
And the procedure is as follows: before performing it, consider whether the abscess has completed its development with quiet heat, or has decreased somewhat in size. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and hold their head on your lap; open their mouth, and let an assistant take a tongue press between both hands and press down on the tongue below with an instrument of this shape:
It should be made of silver or bronze, thin like a knife.
When you press the tongue with it and the abscess becomes visible, then take a hook and fix it into the tonsil; draw it out towards the outside as much as possible, except for what you pull out along with its coats.
Then cut it open with an instrument of this shape: It resembles forceps, but its ends should be curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite the point of the other. Therefore take care that it is made of pure iron or steel.
If such an instrument is not available, then cut it open with a spatula of this shape: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut open one tonsil, cut open the other in the same way.
Then let the patient gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if bleeding occurs, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled, or with leaves of myrtle and other astringent herbs, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes other swellings are born in the throat besides the two tonsils. So cut them as I said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I had already treated a woman for an abscess that was born between her throat which pulled towards the swelling, few sensations, which had almost closed her throat. And the woman breathed through a narrow passage, and eating and drinking water had been prohibited to her, and death would have reached her within one or two days if it had remained untreated.
And the abscess had risen so much that it emitted two branches until they exited through both nostrils.
So I hurried and fixed one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it out and a large portion came out with it.
Then I cut off the part that protruded from the nostril.
Then I did to her what had emerged from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue. And afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess itself; then I cut off a part of it and only a small amount of blood came out from it. Therefore the woman's throat was healed and she immediately began to drink water, then she took some food.
So I did not cease cutting into that abscess many times over a long period of time. And the abscess kept recurring in its place where I had cut it until it became excessively prolonged along with it.
I sewed up and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
So it stopped increasing. Then I left her side and did not know what God did with her afterwards.
On the Incision of an Abscess on the Throat.
Chapter 37.
When mucus descends to the throat and becomes inflamed, forming an abscess that is elongated, it is called a "perpendicular"; but if it is thick and round at its lower part, it is called a "grape.
When treated with the method we described in division and improvement does not occur, and you observe that the abscess has become warm and thin, then it is necessary to make an incision.
And if the mass gathered around it is round and not elongated, and is bloody in color, or dark, and has no sensation, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision. For there is fear of harming the patient.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I described, with its whiteness and length, make the patient sit facing the sun. Press down on their tongue with an instrument, which will be mentioned later. Then insert a hook into the throat and pull it downward. Finally, incise the abscess with one of the two instruments mentioned for the incision of the tonsils.
And you should not make an incision beyond its natural boundary without adding anything to it.
For if you cut into it too deeply, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then, after the incision, use the method we described for the incision of the tonsils, and treat it until it heals.
But if the patient is afraid of an incision, then you must use your skill to cauterize it without causing fear or fright.
And the method of cauterizing it is only with acid water, and you should place your hand on the patient's head during the procedure. Then press down on their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then take some of the water I mentioned earlier for cauterization, and soak a not extinguished lime in it. Then place it on top of this instrument, which has this shape:
The depression at its end where the medication is placed should be shaped like the cavity of a snail's shell.
Place the instrument with the medication on top of the throat itself; and let the patient lie on their side so that the medicinal saliva flows out of their mouth from the inside medicine, so that nothing descends into their throat and harms it.
Then hold your hand over the medication. And you should keep it on the throat for half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the bite of the medication has subsided.
And if you wish to take cotton and wrap it around the end of the probe, and pour the medication onto the cotton, and insert the probe with the cotton into the cannula from above until the cotton adheres to the throat.
Repeat this procedure many times until you achieve your desired result in cauterizing the wound. Then leave it; for it dries up and falls off on its own after three or four days.
But if you need to repeat the medication, do so. And after cauterizing, wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter, and clean it with what remains of the medication around it; then rinse it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices and internally with gargles until it heals.
Thus this method of treatment is healthier than incising and farther from causing fear.
And sometimes the throat is also treated with something gentler than cautery or incision; for it is treated by inhalation in this manner. Take mullein, hyssop, oregano, rue, asafoetida, chamomile, and similar herbs such as abrotanum. Combine them all in a pot with vinegar, and let them boil. The pot should be well-covered with clay and have a hole in its center over which you place the concave instrument thus shaped.
Let it be made of silver or bronze; and insert the end with the pomegranate shape into the patient's mouth until steam rises to the throat through the tube, so that the throat becomes greatly obscured.
Then repeat this process many times until it dries up.
And beware that you do not perform this treatment at the onset of an inflammation. For often pus is added (to the wound), and it is not proper to do this unless the inflammation is on the decline and hot.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to its end so that the patient's bone does not burn. For the eggshell prevents the heat from burning the bone. This is good treatment with safety.
ยถ On the removal of thorns and bones from the throat
Chapter 38
Fragments of bone or fish spines often adhere in the throat.
Therefore, you must remove what is visible among them upon which the sight falls after pressing the tongue with an instrument towards the sun, and it becomes clear to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before digestion begins in the stomach. For perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the patient may swallow a piece of radish root or lettuce root, or dry breadcrumbs, or take a piece of dry soft sea sponge tied on a thread and then swallow it. And when it reaches the place where the spines or bone are located, and is pulled out, then they will come out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape
Make it somewhat thicker than the radius bone for a brief moment and at its end make it curved so that you can insert it into their throat easily while keeping your head raised upwards.
And take care not to touch the patient's epiglottis so that they do not cough, and push it with the bone or spine, or insert it into the throat using one's hand.
But it is better for the patient themselves to insert it, due to their knowledge of the location of the attached object: and they should push downwards or pull their hand upwards with the instrument, entirely according to the length that has been prepared for them until it comes out.
Chapter on Removing a Leech.
Chapter 39
When you treat the leech with the medicine I mentioned in the division on treatment using medicines and it does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in front of the sun or facing the sun after pressing their tongue with the instrument I told you about.
If therefore your gaze falls upon the leech, remove it using a small hook or with gentle tweezers appropriately.
But if it is not possible with these [tools], then take a hollow cannula and insert it into the patient's throat up to near the throat, then insert into the hollow of the cannula a red-hot iron with fire. Do this repeatedly until it is removed, and the patient should refrain from water all day long.
Then have them take a cup full of cold water and open their mouth in it, and hold their mouth with it without swallowing any of it, and move the water once an hour with their hand. For the leech will immediately fall when it senses the water.
But if it still does not come out with what we have said, then fumigate the patient with dried beetles or frankincense using the instrument I mentioned for fumigating the throat.
Do this many times until it falls out.
The manner of performing fumigation is as follows: Take a pot containing live coals and place it on top of the cover, with the narrow end of the instrument placed over the hole.
Then throw the fumigation into the pot, and have the patient place their ear at the end of the tube. They should close their ear so that no smoke escapes until you know that the smoke has reached the bloodsucker. For the leech will immediately fall out.
But if it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the patient should endure thirst, eat salty food and garlic, but drink no water.
Therefore it is necessary that he should discharge with this regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on top of it upon sighting.
It resembles forceps, except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its tip is like the beak of a bird called a pelican, which has the roughness of a file; when it grabs something, it does not let go at all.
On Opening Abscesses, Their Incision, and Treatment in General
Chapter 40
There are many kinds of abscesses, with various forms, according to the recollection of them, that is, one, and one in this book. And they differ in their perforation and incision from two ways.
One way is based on the type of abscess itself and its inclusion of moistures.
And the second way is due to the locations where they occur within the body.
For an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in fleshy tissue is different from one occurring at joints. And each of them has its own judgment based on its operation.
Among abscesses, there are those that should not be incised except after the matter within them has ripened and gathered; and among them are those which should be incised while they are still raw and do not ripen fully.
Like abscesses which are near joints
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and extends its length until the surrounding tissue becomes gangrenous, it may cause damage to the ligaments or nerves of that joint. Therefore, it is a closer cause of contraction in that limb.
Or there may be an abscess on the main member: for if you delay its incision until it ripens, it will harm either that [member] or through it the main member.
Or if it is near the anus, incise it even while still immature; but do not incise a raw abscess that has not fully digested, except for one near the anus, lest it should decay deeply and extend to the interior of the anus and cause a fistula or result in an unhealing ulcer.
You should know the proper time to incise an abscess that has ripened fully according to its gathering. It is indicated by the cessation of pain, reduction of fever, decrease in redness and throbbing, sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should make the incision in the lower part of the abscess, at its most prominent point. The incision should be long enough to reach down to the body of the abscess if it is located on the hands, feet, arms, or other parts where there are muscles, nerves, arteries, and especially in any flat area where there is no reflection.
But in those that have a convex surface, make the incision along the length of that member.
However, when an abscess is in fatty areas, it's better to leave the incision open until its digestion is completed, as we've previously stated.
For if you open it beforehand, the flow of pus will be prolonged from it, and there will be much foulness and filthiness, and perhaps its lips will harden and deepen.
Some abscesses should be opened according to the width of the body where necessary, or along the length of the affected limb.
And it is necessary to make a small incision for small abscesses and a large one for big ones; or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
There are also abscesses where the skin should be undermined and incised when it has become like a rag and is ready to burst, such as those that occur with boils and buboes.
And among these are some that should be opened with an incision having three angles. Among them is one that should be incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Such as a groin abscess.
And among them are some where a round and crescent-shaped incision is made, along with similar incisions.
But those without a head, such as superficial soft abscesses, should be opened with a superficial or flat incision.
When an abscess is large and has collected much pus, it's necessary that when you open it, you don't hurry to squeeze out all the pus at once; rather, take out only a portion of it. Then pack the abscess until the following day. Then squeeze out some more pus again.
Do this repeatedly in increments until all the pus has been expressed, especially if the patient is weak in vitality, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the vital spirit is exhausted along with the discharge of the pus, and perhaps the patient may die without you realizing it.
Therefore, beware this chapter with great caution
After making your incision to drain the abscess, you must cleanse the wound and observe carefully. If the wound from an abscess is small or if the incision was smooth, then apply a bandage made of linen or old cotton. But if the abscess is large and there are many incisions, then you must insert a bandage into every incision until they meet.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin around an abscess or hollowed it out, then fill this area with old cotton, like when sewing cloth together, or shave linen wool without moisture and bind it tightly for three days.
Then remove the bandage and treat the wound with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
But if there is bleeding during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after soaking a cloth in them, to the site of bleeding repeatedly.
However, if the bleeding persists, then you must apply treatment and powders as mentioned in many places throughout this book, including those under the heading of "division.
But if it is wintertime and the abscess is located near many nerves, then you must apply a poultice made of fine powders mixed with warm wine and oil to the area.
And if it is summertime and the area is fleshy, then apply poultices soaked in cold water, oil, or wine mixed with oil. Until the third day has passed, as we have said, then you must open the abscess, cleanse it, and apply appropriate treatment until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary concerning the general knowledge of treating abscesses.
But in accordance with the path of division, I have already spoken about every abscess, how each one is treated individually.
Chapter XLII.
On the Incision of Abscesses that Occur on the Scalp
Small abscesses occur on the scalp, and they are of the kind called nodes, which are contained within sacs that resemble pouches: as if they were swallowed by a hen.
And their kinds are many.
Among them are fatty ones; and among them are those that contain moisture like mud; and among them are those that contain moisture like fried foods and pulses; and similar to these, there are also stone-like hard ones.
And in the incision of all of them, and their removal, there is no fear, provided that an artery does not oppose such incision.
And the operation for incising them is that you should try it with an instrument, of which the form comes later, called "the introducer," until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then incise it lengthwise with a superficial cut according to this shape.
And begin the incision from point B to point G. When the moisture has been evacuated, then scrape out the skin that contains it, leaving nothing behind.
For indeed it returns many times if anything remains of it.
Then immerse the skin in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not, in water and salt. Fill the wound with this mixture and leave it until the next day. For it will dissolve what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment to the skin a second and third time. If it dissolves, continue treating the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the boil contains a fatty node, then cut it in this shape, with an incision shaped like a cross. Insert hooks between the lips of the incision and remove it from all sides. Then strive to extract its containing membrane.
But if the artery resists you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
Similarly, act with respect to a boil that is stony, by performing an incision and treatment as mentioned before.
And the incision over a stony boil is easier, because it contains little blood or moisture. Sometimes there are boils of this kind that occur on the head of certain individuals which have no moisture at all.
That is to say, I once made an incision on a boil on the head of an old woman and found the boil to be like a solid and hard stone, rough and white, which could not be broken even if someone threw something at it. It would wound whoever struck against it.
But in the case of other boils that occur on the head, except for those which occur on children's heads and at the roots of ears, all such boils should be made with a surface incision only.
Or make their perforations always from below them, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated downward.
Then treat these with whatever is suitable for them in treatment.
Chapter on the Incision of Swellings in the Neck
Chapter 42
Swellings of this kind often occur in the neck, shoulders, and groin, but they can also happen elsewhere on the body.
And those swellings that occur in the neck are either single or multiple, and they arise from one another. Each swelling is enclosed within its own membrane, like knots and boils on the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these swellings. Among them are the stony ones; and among them are those that contain fluids; and there are also malignant ones that do not yield to treatment.
Therefore, if you see among them one that appears well-formed to the touch, has a visible color similar to the skin's, moves easily in all directions, is not attached to any of the neck's nerves, glands, arteries or veins, and is superficial: then you should cut it open from top to bottom along its length using a scalpel, extend its two lips of skin with a hook or hooks if necessary, as we have mentioned for boils on the head, and remove it gradually.
And it is important to be cautious so that no vein or nerve is cut.
And the scalpel should not be too sharp, lest your hand slip during the incision or disturb the patient unnecessarily.
But if you cut a vein or artery and this hinders the operation, then place on the wound powdered myrrh or some powder that stops bleeding, and bind the wound. Leave it alone until the swelling subsides and the wound softens or begins to suppurate.
For blood will be cut off from its sheath, so return to your operation until you complete it.
Then examine with your index finger if any small swellings remain; if they do, cut them and cleanse them.
But if there is a large vein at the root of the swelling, then you should not cut the swelling from its root; rather, you should tie it with doubled, strong thread and leave it alone until it falls off on its own without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have previously immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the swelling is completely cut, then you should approximate the two lips of the wound and sew it immediately, once you see that there is no excess remaining.
But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the swelling, then you should intend to cut its root and remove it, and perform the suture which we have mentioned.
And when a swelling contains fluids, pierce it with a superficial perforation so that you may see the place of its ripeness, and make the perforation below what follows on the body, as we have said.
Then apply after the perforation a lint with ointment and similar things so that it may corrupt what remains from the decay until when you see that the wound is already cleaned; then take care of it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter 43
On the section of the epiglottis caused by an obstruction within the throat.
The ancients said that this procedure should be performed on the epiglottis, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it. This is what they wrote:
But in cases of synanche (choking), the section of the epiglottis should be avoided since no relief can be obtained through it because all veins and lungs are weak.
But in those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or both tonsils, when there is no inflammation in the canal, it is necessary to perform the section of the epiglottis to escape from the danger that would result from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to make three or four small cuts around its circumference, in the intervening space between two circles, so that the cut may be made in flesh and not in cartilage: this place is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are far away.
But if the surgeon is afraid, then he should stretch out the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should carefully open the skin until it reaches the canal; he should avoid blood vessels, if any are visible.
Then cut the flesh that we have mentioned; and it is indicated that there will be an emission of phlegm from the canal at the time of the cutting, along with what bursts forth and the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the time during which suffocation is feared has passed, join together the two lips of the wound of the skin and heal it alone without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
This is what Albucasis says. The summary of this discussion which we have narrated is that it is not necessary unless they see that one of these swellings has already closed up the throat of the patient and the patient has been raised up towards death and wants to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and thus be saved from death. And for this reason they have ordered that the wound should be left open until the malady is consumed, and its malady lasts for three days and two nights. Then they have ordered that the wound should be sewn up and treated until it heals.
And I have seen with my own eyes that a certain maidservant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and thereby cut part of the windpipe.
I was called to treat her and found her groaning like one who is dying.
So I dissected from the wound, and I found that the blood which had flowed out of it was small. I became assured then that she herself had not cut the vein nor the artery, and wind (air) was escaping from the wound.
So I washed her wound and treated it until it healed. And nothing happened to the maidservant except hoarseness of voice, and she returned after several days to a better state of health.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
Chapter on the Incision of a Hernia of the Throat.
Chapter 42.
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling, similar in color to the body itself, and it occurs very frequently in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no defect in the natural one.
But the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty tumors. And the other way is similar to swellings that occur from the bursting of an artery. And in this [case] there is fear, and it is not proper to make a presumption about it with iron, unless it is small. You should probe it and investigate it with an introductor. If you find it like a fatty tumor and not suspended with any veins, then cut it like cutting knots; and draw out the tumor along with what contains it from the quistera (cyst), if it is in the quistera. And if not, then examine all of its parts. Then treat the place with what is necessary for healing until it heals.
Chapter 45.
On the Incision over Tumors.
There are many kinds of tumors, and I have already spoken about all their kinds in the division. And it is necessary for me to mention here the difference between a tumor and an outlet, as there is doubt between them.
I say therefore that when the outlet is hotness and fever with severe pains until the boiling over of excess fluid is seated and the putrefaction is completed, then fever and heat become quiet.
But with a tumor there is no hotness nor fever nor pains, and it contains them in its own sac called kistis sifachin, which is proper to them. And they begin like chickpeas, and they become like bubbles, both large and small.
And there are two kinds of them: either fatty or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
It is therefore necessary, when you come to the treatment of a tumor, that you examine it and inquire about it first with an instrument called an introductor, according to what will come in the form of it in the chapter which follows this.
And the method of examining swellings and tumors is to take this instrument and introduce it into the wetter place which you find in the swelling. And you should slowly turn your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin. Then, measure the size of the swelling with your hand.
Next, remove what has been inserted and observe what emerges from its trail.
If a running dampness of any color comes out, then cut it with a superficial incision, as I said in the case of other swellings.
But if no dampness comes out along the path of what has been inserted, then know that it is a fleshy swelling. Therefore, cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross, following the form which I have shown you: and suspend it with hooks, and peel off the skin from all sides easily: and if you can, guard the stitches over it so that you may extract it whole with the tumor.
But if the cyst bursts during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, which often happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if some part of it, whether a little or much, remains, the tumor will return for the most part.
But if it defeats you and leaves some part behind, then fill the wound at its completion with certain sharp corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and apply something warm to sit upon the swelling, and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If the tumor is large, then stitch up its two lips and treat it as if it were flesh.
But if there is a contrary pulsating or non-pulsating vein, then hurry and fill the place of the cut with bruised material, and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound rots and the blood ceases to boil. Then return to cutting what remains of the tumor.
Chapter 46
On instruments used for cutting and piercing.
The probes are of three kinds in form.
There is a large one among them, and there is a medium one among them, and there is a small one among them.
They should be made of iron with square ends well-cut, so that they may easily enter into an aperture.
And these are the forms of instruments used for piercing or boring holes; one of them is called a 'beris', that is to say, a borer, and they come in three sizes.
For there is a large one among them, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are suitable for investigating through them fistulas, passages, and boils which are between the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and polished like large needles with which the joints are treated, made of bronze or iron or silver.
And those that are made of bronze are better among them.
And instruments made of black lead are also used for probing those fistulas which have reflections within them, so that they may gently touch these reflections.
And once again there are three sizes among them. For there are long ones among them, medium ones, and short ones according to the width and constriction of the fistula.
The forms of hooks are many in kind.
For there are simple ones among them, that is to say those with one curve; and they come in three sizes as you see: large, medium, and small.
And among them there are also blind hooks which come in three sizes.
And among them there are hooks with two curves and three curves each coming in three sizes; all of these are necessary in their proper places.
The forms of the scalpels used for cutting and scraping nodes and boils are three in number, namely large, medium, and small.
Their cutting edges are sharp, the others blunt. They are not used like this unless when scraping nodes there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve, so that the patient may be healed and find temporary tranquility from cauterization instead of what is found in scraping.
These are made of iron, resembling brass with which alcohol is made. At the wide end there is a hidden point like a needle's eye through which it can be directed inwardly or outwardly as desired.
Three sizes of needles hidden between the fingers for perforating boils so that patients are unaware: large, medium and small.
The forms of the bloodletting cupping glasses used to stop bleeding. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Made of copper or glass, round and short in length as shown here, they should be made with precision.
And you should have among your instruments large and small bloodletting cups so that you may quickly let blood when necessary, especially in the absence of medication.
However, do not use them for bloodletting everywhere on the body but only in fleshy places such as the arms of the legs and thighs, arms, breasts, belly, groin, and similar moist flesh.
Sometimes small instruments similar to the rinds of figs are made from these, according to their shape, for letting blood when it flows from the site of phlebotomy or after incision of a vein or artery. Sometimes they are made round like this.
Chapter XLVI
Concerning the treatment of male breasts, which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become enlarged at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to grow turbid during sleep), resembling those of women; and they remain foully festered.
He therefore who dislikes this (enlargement), it is necessary that he make a crescent-shaped incision above the breasts according to this line, below to the line, and then scrape away all the fat. Then fill the wound with an embrocation for flesh wounds. Then approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it heals.
If however the breast hangs downwards and becomes flaccid due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary that it be cut in two on its upper sides with two incisions similar in shape to a crescent moon, each contained with the other at their ends so that there is one larger line containing a smaller one according to this form from line, b. to line, g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips and excise the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, which is necessary for healing until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision that you ought to make because of the patient's discomfort or because of bleeding: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
Concerning the incision of an abscess that occurs in the armpit.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur in the armpit are from hard species of roughages (strophulae) which contain cysts and those which contain humors.
It is necessary that those which contain humors be opened with a crescent-shaped incision along this line from b to g. Then, when all the pus has been evacuated, fill it with old wax and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the wax, and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess is of the species of nodes (strophulae), then cut upon it as we have said in the case of an equal division for strophulae.
But if the wound extends so as to emit pus, then apply a causterization to it according to what has been said before.
Chapter 49.
Concerning the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an artery and vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it solidifies, often an abscess occurs from it. Similarly, this also happens with a vein, so that an abscess and swelling occur.
And the signs by which it can be recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are these: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and collected deep in the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round and manifest on the body.
An incision upon this abscess is an error, especially when it occurs under the armpits, groins, neck, and many other parts of the body. And it is very large indeed. Therefore, its treatment should be avoided with an iron (scalpel), and that which is also on the extremities or head should be avoided.
Therefore, concerning that which is caused by them from swelling of the arterial opening, you should find it out in the skin by making a lengthwise cut. Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the artery; and free it from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle underneath it and make it penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a fine probe until all the blood contained within it emerges and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply treatment that generates pus until the ligatures fall off; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until it heals.
But if it is an abscess due to a vein incision, then you should hold back with your hand as much of the abscess as possible along with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place you held back with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be doubled thread on it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligature; as I have told you regarding the ligature of a vein, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread might be drawn out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the needle; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of it until when what is inside it emerges; then incise the excess skin and let go of what is tied to it.
Then place upon it a little piece of bread which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply treatment with lint and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L
Concerning the condition that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in an artery or vein, so too can an abscess occur in nerves: this happens due to impact or from excessive labor and similar causes; it often occurs at joints, such as the elbow or heel, and wherever there are articulations. And such an abscess is severe.
Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it appears in most cases without pain; but when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a sensation similar to stupor.
And it is not an abscess formed deep within the body, but rather under the skin; indeed, it can move in any direction and does not proceed to the front or back.
Therefore, those that occur at joints should not be incised with a knife. For otherwise, contraction might result.
But for one that occurs on the head or forehead, find the skin with a probe. If it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off at its root.
But if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and excoriate it; then remove it and close the wound with sutures. And dress it until it heals.
Chapter LI
Concerning the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Some people often have, in their bellies and other parts of their bodies, swellings called "funguses" due to their similarity to mushrooms.
Their roots are fine, but their heads are thick; and their lips are inverted. And among them there are some that are small, and others that become greatly enlarged.
And indeed I have seen a man whose belly had two such swellings that were more like mushrooms than anything else: there was no difference between them, they were white with small roots and inverted lips; they could be felt and moisture flowed continuously from them.
I cut into them and found that one weighed about ten and eight ounces, and the other about six ounces. The operation for cutting them is as follows: first consider whether the patient is moist and the color of the swellings is white and humid with thin roots. Then cut it with a wide spatula, having cauteries ready in the fire.
For often much blood flows out at its cutting: therefore be prepared if it overcomes you with blood, then cauterize it.
But if you see the patient fearful and hesitant about being cut with a knife, then take a fine thread made of lead and tie it around the swelling. The manner of doing this is as we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then add more lead to the binding. So do not cease tightening the lead whenever it presses on the swelling until it is severed and falls off by itself without effort.
But if the swelling has a thick root, then there is some fear and anxiety in cutting it, especially those in the belly.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat it until the wound heals.
But beware of cutting into a swelling that is of dark color, has little sensation, and is foul-smelling; for it is a cancerous abscess. And I shall speak more about cancer afterwards.
Chapter 52
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia can have many causes. Either it occurs due to splits in the navel, from which either bile or intestine protrudes, as happens with other ruptures. Or from blood flowing out of a vein or artery, according to what was previously stated. Or due to constriction of the windpipe therein.
But if it is due to a split in the navel with protrusion of intestines, then its color resembles the color of the body and is soft without pain; and it appears in different positions. And if it is due to protrusion of intestine, then its position differs more violently than what we have described. But when you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns again, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it becomes very large at the entrance of the bathhouse, causing great pain.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft and does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract or increase.
If it is due to blood, then along with these signs an abscess appears towards the blackness of blue.
But if it is due to born flesh, then the abscess is heavy, thick, hard, and measures about one unit.
But if it is due to wind, its touch is soft.
And the treatment of it is that you should then examine whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind. If so, then you must forbear from treating it. For there is fear and trembling in it, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses due to an artery or vein are feared.
If the prominence of the navel is due to intestine or hernia, then you should order the patient to hold their breath and stand still with arms extended. Then make signs around the entire circumference of the navel with a cautery. Next, tell him to lie face down on your hands placed on his back. Then, encircle the navel with a wide bandage around the marked spot using hot wax. Next, stretch out the center of the swelling towards its upper part with a large hook. Then bind it firmly around with thread or silk cord tie: let the knot be tied tightly.
Then open the center of the swelling stretched over the bandage. If you find it captured by the bandage: then extract the tightened (ligature), and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find a boil, then take it with a hook, and cut its excess.
But if an artery or vein opposes you, then bind it tightly around it. Then return to your operation. Take two needles and insert two strong threads into them; then insert the needles into the circumference you made around the swelling in the shape of a cross, which you should penetrate.
Then tighten the swelling at four points over the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the extended flesh rots and falls off on its own; or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then treat it with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
But if there is a prominence of the navel due to flesh growing on it or moisture: then you should make the swelling concave as we have said. And remove blood or moisture that you find within it.
Then treat it with what will heal the spot.
Chapter 53
ยถ On the treatment of CANCER
We have already discussed the division of the types of Cancer, and how it is treated with medications; and we have warned about avoiding its treatment with iron so that it does not become ulcerated. We have also mentioned cancer generated in the uterus and the caution against treating it.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a location where its removal is possible; such as cancer that is in the breasts or thigh, and similar ones located in limbs which can be completely removed. Especially when it is just beginning small.
But when it has grown old and become large, do not approach it.
For indeed I was unable to cure anyone from this condition; nor have I seen any before me who succeeded in treating it.
And the operation for one thus located, as we have described, is to cut into him and release him from black bile sometimes. Then perform bloodletting if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient for preparation in which he will undergo the operation.
Then cast hooks that fit into the cancer upon it. Then excise it on all sides with skin according to your inspection until there remains nothing of its roots. Then let blood flow freely and do not cut it off hastily but press the edges and wipe away thick blood completely with your hand or whatever instruments are possible there.
But if you encounter difficulty with the flow of thick blood from the incision due to an artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
ยง On the Treatment of Dropsy
Chapter 54. We have already spoken in the division of the kinds of dropsy and how water collects, and the signs of each kind and their treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only the species of ascites alone; it does not approach with iron the species of tympany, nor the species of hydrops completely, for that is deadly.
When you have already treated this species of dropsy called tympany with medicines and it has not improved, then consider For if the patient has already become weakened or there is another illness besides dropsy present, such as coughing or diarrhea, etc., then beware of treating him with iron for fear of harm.
If you find the patient to be of robust constitution and without any other illness besides dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then proceed with this method: raise the patient upright between your hands, and have an assistant press their abdomen from below upwards towards the lower chest.
Then take a spina bifida probe of this shape. It is forked at two parts and has a sharp tip like a spatula. However, it should taper gradually towards the end so that you do not pierce through to the intestines and injure them during the procedure.
Then observe. For if the dropsy is due to a condition of the intestines, then you should lengthen your cut from the navel by three fingerbreadths downwards towards the lower abdomen.
But if the dropsy is due to a condition of the liver, then your incision should be made three fingerbreadths to the left of the navel.
And if the dropsy is due to a condition of the spleen, then make your incision on the right side. Do not let it be on the side where the patient desires to lie down, so that no fluids run towards that weakened area.
Then pierce through the skin completely with your instrument Then insert the spatula into that opening and raise your hand as if you are scraping out something between the skin. The amount scraped should be roughly equivalent to the size of a nail or thereabouts.
Then continue scraping until the spatula reaches an empty space; this is where the water collects Then remove it and insert into the opening an instrument of this shape It resembles a cannula; it is made of silver, brass or bronze, polished and smooth. Its lower part has a small opening, with three openings on its sides - two on one side and one on the other. Its tip is cut like a pen nib, as you can see. Above it there is a ring
When the instrument reaches the water, it sinks immediately and thus expels half of its quantity from the water within an hour.
For if you expel too much from it, the patient may perhaps die within an hour due to depletion of their vital spirit; or else a syncope may occur that approaches death.
But expel from it according to its quantity of strength and according to what the conditions of the patient indicate to you through the virtue of their pulse and their constitution.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it will be retained immediately due to the skin that retains the opening which I mentioned earlier, and which you should pierce according to that method.
Then repeat the procedure on the second day if you see that the patient can tolerate it; and also remove a small quantity of water from it.
Do this for several days without fear, taking care to avoid error until only a little water remains.
But if you fear for the patient and allow much water to remain, then treat them with hot sand burial and profuse sweating in a bath and sun exposure, and make them wait until they are thirsty. Then treat them with drying medications until they recover; and cauterize their stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water according to what I have already described.
On the treatment of infants born with unperforated urinary passages
Chapter 54
When an infant is born from its mother's womb and the opening of its urinary meatus is not perforated or is too narrow or not in its proper place
Therefore, one should immediately come to its aid with a fine Probe made of silver wire, shaped thus
Then place a thin lead clamp at the opening and bind it. Keep it on for three or four days
When ready to pass urine, remove it and let it void Then replace it.
But if you do not use lead, then urine that passes over the spot may prevent it from closing
But one whose opening is too narrow should be treated with lead as we have described for many days until it widens
Those who have the opening not in its proper place are harmed. That is to say, in those infants born with the opening at the tip of the penis, they cannot void urine properly until they lift the penis by hand upwards Nor can he father children because semen cannot reach the womb properly; and it causes great distress.
The procedure for this is as follows: lay the infant on its back. Then with your left hand stretch out the head of the penis forcefully and cut off its tip at the frenulum using a sharp knife or probe, just like cutting the end off a reed so that it resembles the head of the penis, and so that the opening falls in the middle as it should.
Be careful during this procedure to avoid bleeding. For many times has this happened. Therefore apply pressure with what has cut it to stop the bleeding and take care of the wound until it heals.
On Circumcision which occurs on the foreskin and head of the penis, and its corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 60
These circumcisions often occur on the penis, with a prominent, foul growth of flesh.
There is also one that is malignant and another that is benign.
Therefore, you should hang the benign one with a fine hook and cut it off until it is completely removed. Then place over it cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment. Next, treat it afterward with dyaphekon ointment until it heals.
But if the circumcision is malignant and of foul color, then you should apply a cautery to it after its incision and excision.
But if the circumcision is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive and there is part of it under the foreskin and another part outside, then you should first remove the part that is inside until it solidifies, then treat the outer part: for when you treat them together, the foreskin will certainly not heal without being perforated.
And now such blackness and corruption also occur in the testes and the foreskin. Therefore, you should carve out all that which has already become blackened and that which desires to decay or has already decayed.
Then apply over it afterward a poultice made from honey that has been crushed with the powder of pomegranate rinds and sifted bran.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar-shaped cautery with this shape:
For the cautery has two uses at once, namely for stopping the flow of blood and for healing when a wound becomes corrupt.
But if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed entirely within an hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the urethra so that the patient can urinate over it.
But in the case of adhesions of the foreskin to the head of the penis - and indeed such adhesions do not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and has not been circumcised, and sometimes they occur because of a wound or an abscess - you should cut them away with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
But if it is difficult to distinguish them when examined closely, then you should cut away some from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. That is, because when the foreskin is thin, it may be punctured quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with an astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter 57
On the cleansing of infants and treatment for errors that occur to them.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as other wounds are: nevertheless, since it is our operation by our will and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary that we indicate a better method of performing it and an easier path leading to healing.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws and it is only something that we have acquired through experience.
That is to say that I have found the majority of barbers and bloodletters using cleansing with a knife or forceps for circumcision, and they use cauterization and ligation with thread and incision with a nail.
And indeed I have already tested all these methods and found none better than cleansing with forceps and ligation with thread.
For when using a knife for cleansing, the skin often escapes. Because the foreskin has two layers of skin, sometimes only the outer layer is cut and the inner one remains. This forces another incision to be made, causing pain. But with the cleansing done through catgut, that is, by finger, which surgeons use, the incision at the end of the male member is not secured, because perhaps it might enter its opening.
But in cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron might slip out and ruin your procedure; moreover, the skin of a child is naturally short, and many are born in such a way that they do not need cleansing; indeed I have seen this myself.
But I have found by experience that cleansing with forceps and ligature with thread is good, because the forceps are proportionate to the incision; therefore, what is sharp above is like what is sharp below. Therefore, when you press your hand, the two sharp points become proportional and make one incision at once, creating a compression with a similar shape that holds the skin of the rod from every side without any error.
And the proper way of operating is that you should make the child especially understand, particularly if he is one of those who comprehend quickly, that you are only tying a thread on his member and leaving him until another day.
Then make him happy and rejoice as much as possible, to the extent that he understands what is happening to him. Then make him stand between your prepared hands and not sitting; hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot so that the child does not see them at all, nor any other instruments.
Then insert your hand towards his member, blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the foreskin comes out. Then cleanse it from the dirt that has accumulated on it.
Then tie the marked spot with a double thread. Next, bind it below briefly with another ligature. Then hold the site of the lower ligature with your index finger and thumb and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly elevate the skin upwards and remove the head of the splinter. Then allow the blood to flow gradually (for it is better), and then apply powder on top. Place over the powder a cloth containing the beaten yolk of an egg cooked in rose water mixed with rose oil. Then apply it well and leave him on it overnight until the next day, treating him with the remaining treatment until he is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows.
Let the two ends be blunt and inclined so that the branch of the nail does not come out. Let the length of the two points be equal to the length of the two handles equally.
The error occurring during cleaning is that perhaps the entire inner skin or part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore, you should stretch it out with your nail before cauterizing the site and cut it evenly.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days pass and there is still swelling under the splinter, then let it be until the swelling becomes hot and hard, and remove it gently and cut it according to what you prepare for yourself, being careful about the head of the splinter. For it will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with that which solidifies wounds from powders, those of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders. And if it is cut more than necessary and reaches higher areas, it will not harm him either.
Therefore treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 58
On the Extraction of a Retained Foreign Body in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh growths, or similar things from those mentioned earlier in our discussion on treatment methods.
But if urine does not dissolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be positioned on their knees with their buttocks elevated. Then have his feet placed on his back and extend his belly from the upper part of his back. The patient should hold their breath as much as possible. Therefore, pressure is applied to the neck of the bladder towards the rear for the expulsion of the stone, and thus urine is released.
If it does not dissolve with what we have said and the situation is urgent for the patient, then you should administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe," which has this form: It should be made of silver, thin, smooth, hollow like a quill's cannula in its fineness, long resembling the length of one and a half palms, with a fine cannula at its tip.
The method of extracting urine through it is as follows: Take a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton securely at its end. Insert the thread's tip into the lower part of the syringe, then cut any excess wool with scissors, but insert it forcefully into the cannula like squeezing water from a sponge.
Then grease the syringe with oil, butter, and egg white. Have the patient sit on a chair, then catheterize the bladder and its tube with warm olive oil and water.
Then insert the syringe into the tube gently until it reaches the root of the tube.
Then press it twice on the upper side near the navel.
Then push the syringe further until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached an empty space. This should be done gently, especially if the passage is tortuous.
Next, slowly extend the thread with wool attached. For indeed the stone will follow the wool.
Then pull it out and cause the stone to pass through the urine pathway. Repeat the syringing process until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
On the Nature of Catheterizing the Bladder with a Waterclock
Chapter 59
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder or blood congeals in it, or pus collects and distills water and medicines cannot reach it, use the instrument called a Clepsydra, which is shaped as follows:
It is indeed deaf, that is to say, closed. And it has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
And the concave space where the piston is located should be exactly suited to its size without any addition. When it is pulled out along with something inside it, liquid is drawn from the humidity; when pushed, it expels the liquid far away, just like a waterclock that throws naphta (Greek fire) in naval battles.
When you wish to introduce liquids into the bladder, insert the end of the Clepsydra into the liquid and pull up the piston. The liquid will be drawn into the concave space of the Clepshydra.
Then insert its tip into the urinary meatus as described for a syringe. Then push the liquid with the piston; this liquid will immediately reach the bladder so that the patient feels it.
The shape of the thin catheter used for catheterizing the bladder
Make it from silver or gold. Its tip should be shaped like a small trumpet with a cavity underneath where the ligature is attached.
Then take a ram's bladder and apply moisture to it for use as an enema. Next, tie the bladder between two cavities with a strong thread doubled over, and gently warm the moisture on a fire.
Then insert the tip of the enema into the rectum, and afterwards apply your hand over the bladder with appropriate pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the rectum.
If a bladder is not available, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle. Poke holes around the entire circumference of the circle. Then insert a strong thread through these holes as they revolve. Next, gather the circle together like a drawstring purse; after which you may place within it whatever moist substance, oils, or waters you desire.
Then tie the instrument shut and proceed with it as you would have with a bladder by expressing its contents with your hand until the moisture reaches the rectum.
Chapter 60
Chapter on Removing Stones
We have already spoken about the classification of stones and their treatment with medications. We also discussed the difference between stones originating in the kidneys and bladder, as well as their symptoms. We mentioned how to operate on stones and perform lithotomy, specifically for stones generated within the bladder and those lodged in the urethra. I will now explain the procedure clearly and concisely.
I say therefore that stones generated in the bladder most commonly occur in children.
The symptoms of such a stone include urine exiting the bladder like water in its fineness, along with white sand appearing in it. The patient also experiences discomfort and irritation in the urethra while urinating, and often struggles or hesitates to finish. Then, erection occurs and a piece of stone exits through the anus in many cases.
The healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is intermediate; in that which is between the two extremes, cure is easier if the stone is larger; but if small, its treatment is conversely more difficult.
Therefore, when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster that removes all waste from their bowels; for this sometimes prevents the detection of the stone during examination.
Then take the patient with their feet and shake them and move them towards their lower parts so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder or sometimes jumps from a high place.
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his hips so that the bladder is completely inclined towards its lower parts.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If you feel the stone in space, then immediately proceed with an incision above it.
But if it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must cleanse your left index finger with oil (if the patient is a child) or middle finger (if an adult), and insert it into their anus to search for the stone until it is located beneath your finger; then gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the location of the incision that you wish to make; and order an assistant to press on the bladder with their hand, and another assistant to extend the testicles upwards with their right hand while removing the skin that is below them in the area where the incision will be made.
Then insert the spatula incising, which has this shape: And find it between the anus and testicles, not in the middle but to the left side of the navel; make the incision directly over the stone while your finger is still in the anus. Make the incision transverse so that it is wide externally and narrow internally, according to what is possible for the emergence of the stone from it without being too large.
Perhaps your finger, which is inserted into the anus at the time of the incision, compresses the stone and causes it to emerge without difficulty.
Know that a stone with corners or edges makes its exit difficult on account of this.
And one that is smooth and round like a gland exits easily.
Therefore, for one with corners and edges, make an incision in the furrow.
But if it does not come out that way, then you must try this: either place a loop over it with the hand properly positioned, its end shaped like a crescent moon to grasp the stone and not slip away from it; or else insert beneath it a thin instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot do this, then enlarge the opening somewhat. If anything troublesome occurs concerning blood, cut it off with a cautery.
But if the stone is larger than one, then first insert a large bougie into the urethra. Then make an incision over it. Next, insert a small one behind it; do likewise if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, then it is ignorance to attempt an incision over it that is too large. For the patient will suffer one of two things: either he will die, or else continuous dripping of urine will occur, because the place will not heal at all.
But continue to dilate it until it emerges; or else attempt to fracture it with forceps and remove it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it up and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water, so that the swelling may subside.
Then lay the patient on their back with their head hanging over the edge of a bed or similar support, without loosening the bandage until the third day. When you have loosened it, wash the area with water and plenty of oil.
Then treat it with salve of diaphoretic and salve of basilicon until healed.
But if a hot abscess forms in the wound and causes corrosion or similar symptoms, such as when blood coagulates in the bladder and obstructs the flow of urine, this can be recognized by the emission of bloody urine. Then insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood. For if it remains, it will cause corrosion and gangrene of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply whatever suitable remedy applies until healed.
And during the entire period of treatment, it is necessary to bind both thighs together and press them closely together, so that medicinal substances placed on the area are retained in place.
But if the stone is small and located in the urethra at the bladder neck, and blocks the passage of urine, then treat it with the remedy I have mentioned before resorting to surgical intervention. For often you will be spared surgical intervention by this treatment, as I have proven its effectiveness many times.
And you should take a perforator made of iron steel, which has the shape of a triangular point and is sharp, fixed into wood.
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it does not slip back up into the bladder.
Then carefully insert the perforator into the penis until it reaches the stone. Then gradually rotate the perforator with your hand on the stone and attempt to pierce it until you break through to the other side.
The urine is immediately relieved.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the external part of the penis. For it will break apart and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not possible due to some obstacle preventing it, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above it. Then cut over the stone on the penis between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Afterwards, untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood that forms at the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread beneath the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder. And another thread above it is only necessary so that when the thread is untied after the stone has come out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound. And for this reason, when you tie the thread above, you must raise the skin upwards so that it returns to its original position and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61
Chapter on the Extraction of a Woman's Stone
A stone is rarely produced in women.
But if it happens to any of them that she has a stone, then treatment is difficult and prevented by many obstacles.
One of these obstacles is: perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second obstacle is: because you cannot find a woman who reveals herself to a physician when she is chaste or has had no marital relations.
The third obstacle is: because you cannot find a woman who knows this art well, especially the manual operation.
And the fourth obstacle is the remoteness of the stone's location, which requires a deep incision and causes fear.
But if necessity demands it, then you should take a woman physician who is well-versed in the art, although they are few to be found.
But if you lack such a woman physician, then seek out a chaste and skilled male physician and present a female midwife who is well-versed in the art of women's health or another knowledgeable woman. Make sure she is present and instruct her to perform all that you order regarding the examination for the stone.
Firstly, she should examine whether the woman is a virgin. If so, she should insert her finger into the woman's anus and search for the stone.
If she finds the stone, she should grasp it with her finger. Then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vulva and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and applying gentle pressure.
If she finds the stone, then she should gradually move it from the opening of the urethra downwards with all her strength until she reaches the root of the thigh.
Then she should make an incision opposite the middle of the vulva at the root of the thigh, on whichever side the stone is felt. Her finger should not be removed from the stone while holding it in place, and the initial incision should be small. Then she should insert a probe through that incision.
Then she should insert a probe through that incision. If she feels the stone, then she should enlarge the incision according to the size of the stone as it emerges from it.
And know that stones have many forms. They are small or large, smooth or rough, long or round with branches.
Therefore, know the forms of stones so that you may be informed about their nature and your intentions.
If bleeding defeats you, then apply powdered mallow in the place of the incision and hold it there for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your procedure until the stone emerges. And ensure that you have with you the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from the bladder, so as to assist you in your procedure.
But if you are defeated by bleeding and know that the loss of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the location and compress it with a suitable bandage; do not remove this [compression]; and leave the stone alone and do not attempt to extract it. For perhaps the sick woman will die. Then dress the wound.
After several days when the bleeding has subsided and the location becomes infected, then return to your procedure until the stone emerges.
Chapter 62
Chapter on the Incision of a Hydrocele.
A watery tumor is not anything other than an accumulation of fluid in the tunica albuginea, which is beneath the skin that contains the testis; and it is called a tunica.
And sometimes it is enclosed within its own membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the testis until it becomes hard; this is another testis, and it is the skin of the testis between the tunica albuginea that we have mentioned; and this occurs rarely.
The formation of such a tumor arises from weakness that befalls the testes, whence this material accumulates towards them. And sometimes it occurs as a result of injury to the testes.
This fluid has many different colors. It may be yellowish, or red like blood, or black and foul-smelling, or it may be a clear white watery fluid, but the latter is more common.
The signs by which one knows where there is an accumulation of water are these. For if it is in the tunica albuginea that we have mentioned, then the tumor will be round, scarcely more than a finger's length, like the shape of an egg; and the testis itself will not be apparent because the fluid surrounds it on all sides.
But if there is fluid in the tunic of its own, then the tumor will be round with an egg-like portion, and because of this the man may think that it is another testicle.
But if the fluid is between the skin of the testes and the tunica albuginea, then it falls under sensation.
Therefore, when you wish to determine the color of the fluid, then examine the color of the fluid in the tumor by inserting a square probe, whose form has preceded. Therefore, according to what emerges at the point of insertion, judge about that which is between them.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you order the patient, if possible for him, to undergo bloodletting, and see that his body is full.
Then he should lie on his back upon something high and place many cloths beneath him.
Then you should sit on the left side of him and order an assistant to sit on his right side, who will stretch out the penis towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testes, and towards the part called the "mirah" of the belly.
Then take a broad scalpel and cut the skin of the testes from the middle lengthwise until near the pubic hair: and let the incision be made straight according to the line that divides the skin of the testes equally, until it reaches the tunica albuginea enclosing it: and strip off this skin and observe carefully, or else avoid cutting it, for fear of damaging it; and let your stripping away of the skin be on the side which hangs down more with the testis: and search carefully with the stripping according to what is possible for you.
Then bore through the full tunica albuginea with a wide borehole and draw out all of the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the tunica albuginea upwards without touching the skin that surrounds the testicles; and cut the tunica as much as possible either entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side. For if you do not carefully examine it in the incision, there is no safety that water will not return.
But if an egg protrudes externally from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the tunica albuginea, push it back. Then join together the two lips of the skin around the testicles with a stitch.
Then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
But if you find that the egg is corrupted by blackness: then you should tie off the vessels which are the suspensiony ligaments, fearing blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension ligament and remove the egg; afterwards treat it as we have said.
But if water is collected in two parts, know that there are two branches; therefore cut the other part equally as you did the first one.
And if it seems equal to you that it should be one operation, then do so; afterwards wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the abdomen; then put on top of it doubled cloths which are bandages, and bind them together with a ligature that is six fingers wide according to this form.
Then take two cloths and soak them, fill them with red wool like this; and make their ends to press on with cotton or wet wool; and tie them together with a bandage at the level of the hips: one end should go over the anus up to the back, and the second to the chest part, and two other ends should go under both thighs and two more ends on both groins, and all bands should be tied together at the level of the hips.
And sometimes this instrument is artificially treated with a cautery instead of the knife at the place of section; and take a sharp knife cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it, and heat it as we have described until when white smoke containing water appears: then take the cautery in this form.
The letters are Greek.
Then pierce that opening with it and heat it until all moisture has come out.
Then stretch the opening with hooks and scrape it clean with a hot sharp cautery, and cut into it as much as you can until you have removed all of it.
And take care that the egg does not touch the fire.
Know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if during the time of section or cautery, a hot abscess or bleeding or anything else happens that opposes you, then it is necessary to treat what opposes you with the treatment that suits it, according to what has been stated.
But if the patient is fearful and does not await this operation because of its horrible nature, then perform the perforation as I describe it now: And thus.
When you have confirmed through what we said about the meanings that the instrument is watery, then make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a broad spatula and make the opening along the length of the body so that all water may flow out.
Next, place a cloth on the area and tie it, allowing the remaining water to run off; then treat it until the wound heals.
But if there is obstruction to the outflow of water at the time when it is pierced and this happens only because a piece of cloth causes an obstacle at the wound's opening, preventing the exit of water, then you must insert a feather into the wound or use an instrument with which water is drawn out from dropsy, the shape of which has been previously described. Otherwise, wait briefly during the operation on the wound.
Know that the water returns and accumulates again after six months or roughly that period. Therefore, when it collects again, pierce it in the same manner, and the patient shall spend their days accordingly.
Chapter 63
Chapter on the treatment of flesh-colored growths (warts).
Know that cutting this wen [wart] often leads to further harm due to the fear-induced movements of many people. Therefore, it seems to me that letting it alone would be the safer course.
And I remember an operation performed on one such wen and its appearance as an abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses occur in the body, from which testicles are formed; this happens due to many causes.
Or from an acute or sharp excess that flows towards the testicles. Or from injury by blows.
And the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body itself and it does not cause pain; nonetheless, it is a serious abscess.
And perhaps there is a stony-like abscess, which has a dark color but no sensation or feeling attached to it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the blockage of arteries and their swelling, as has already been mentioned, or from the swelling of veins.
Therefore, when you press on it with your fingers, you can recognize whether the abscess is due to arterial swelling by its pulsating sensation. Do not touch it at all.
But that which is caused by swelling of the veins does not disappear upon pressing with fingers.
And now it is possible for an incision to be made over this type of swelling and over other flesh: the skin of the testicles should be slit open. Then draw the testicle upwards and remove it together with its white tunic. Free the suspensory ligament from the blood vessels and tie them off. Finally, cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it completely from all parts of the testicle.
If however the testicle has grown together with the surrounding tissues, then draw the testicle back and make an incision into it.
And if there is adherence between any part of the scrotum or between the blood vessels, then you should free all that adhering tissue and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is growth of flesh in the place where the adhesion was behind, then you should cut through all of it and remove the testicle as we have said.
After you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine. Then care for it with the usual treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids
If an abscess has formed around the scrotum, resembling a bubble and accompanied by swelling of the testicles, it becomes difficult for the patient to move about and exercise, as well as to walk.
And in treating this condition, there is a concern due to what preceded it, as mentioned earlier.
However, we must mention the operation performed on such cases by those who came before us.
I say therefore that you should make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then push the testicles downwards with their suspensory ligaments. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers near to the penis. Another assistant should do this and stretch it forcefully.
Then cut transversely with a broad, sharp blade across the direct path of the vessels until they are exposed.
Then strip it from every side, as we have told you regarding the extraction of arteries found in the temples.
Next, insert a needle into it on which there is a double thread, and tie it at the first point where veins are encountered; then tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it midway along a straight line according to the length of the body and remove what is accumulated from corrupt fetid humors.
Then dress the wound with the dressing of other wounds, in which pus is generated so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles may fall. For there is no harm from this.
But if all the veins are affected, then it is necessary to remove both testicles with their vessels so that the egg may not be deprived of its nourishment due to the cutting and thus shrivel or dry up without being beneficial.
Chapter 65.
Chapter on the treatment of rupture of the intestines.
The event of this rupture occurs from a cut that happens during stretching the sigmoid colon on the lower abdomen near the groin due to sudden distention of the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend through that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture occurs either from the sigmoid colon itself or from its stretching.
These two types occur from many causes. Or from a blow. Or by falling. Or by shouting loudly. Or lifting of heavy objects and similar activities.
And the sign is when it occurs from stretching of the sigmoid colon. It occurs gradually over time and not suddenly; there is an abscess directed towards the depths due to the sigmoid colon pressing on the intestine.
When it occurs after an incision of the sigmoid colon, there is initially a sudden intense pain; moreover, a different abscess appears under the skin nearby due to the exit of the intestine and its course towards the outside of the sigmoid colon.
Sometimes it emerges along with the intestine's hernia; this is called "Ramex intestinalis" and "hernia." Sometimes it occurs with wind.
Sometimes feces run into the intestine and get trapped there, causing harm to the patient; this is especially so when it causes severe pain upon pressure.
In treating such diseases with an iron instrument, there is fear of injury; therefore, caution should be exercised to avoid mishaps in this regard.
The method of operation is as follows: order the patient to gently push their intestine back into place with their hand if it can be returned. Then have the patient lie on their back between your hands, elevating their legs.
Next, extend the skin that follows the scrotum upwards and cut the entire skin of the scrotum along its length. Then insert forceps into the two lips of the incision according to your need to open it; make the incision as wide as possible so that an egg can pass through it.
Then strip off the sigmoid colon and the structures underneath the skin of the scrotum until you expose the white, hard part of the sigmoid colon on all sides. Then insert your index finger into the space between the testicle and the exposed sigmoid colon, pushing it gently without adhering to what is behind the egg-like structure.
Then gently move the sigmoid colon with your right hand towards the inside of the skin of the scrotum. With your left hand, push the exposed white sigmoid colon upwards while lifting the egg along with it towards the incision site. Instruct an assistant to hold the egg upwards, and then carefully separate the adhesions behind it once completely freed.
And search with your fingers to ensure there is nothing of the intestine wrapped around the rigid white sigmoid colon. If you find anything wrapped around it, then push it down towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten strands twisted together, and insert it into the last sigmoid colon. Then cut the ends that stick out from the thread until there are four threads remaining. Then arrange some of the threads over others in the shape of a cross, and tie them together with the alisfach (ligament) we mentioned earlier, which is located underneath the skin of the scrotum. Tie it tightly so that no fluid can flow into the testicles from any of the vessels, lest an inflamed abscess develop as a result. And place another ligament next to the first one, keeping it about two fingers' width away from it. After tying the two ligaments, allow about one finger's width of sigmoid colon to remain beneath the skin of the scrotum. Then cut along the circumference and remove the egg (testicle).
Then cut across the lower part of the skin of the scrotum where blood and pus are flowing out, as previously described.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and secure it with the ligament mentioned earlier. And sometimes cauterize the white sigmoid colon that we have mentioned after its incision to prevent bleeding. For this happens very often. Leave the ligature in place until it falls off on its own.
But if its falling off is delayed, then apply warm water and put on top of it what we have mentioned until it falls off.
Then dress the wound with the usual dressing for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on Hemorrhoids.
In this case, I have not seen anyone who dared to attempt treatment with a knife.
And the first authors said that it happens as we have described for hemorrhoids accompanied by Veins. namely, to tie the veins after cutting them below with ease; then cut through in the middle, and finally treat it with what opens it until the veins fall off; and dress the wound according to what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Chapter on Dislocations that occur in the Groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have described, and a swelling appears but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles, or if something does descend but it is small and returns at all times: however, if this continues for some time, a tear will occur in the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens due to stretching of the scrotum, which is located in the groin, as we have said. namely, because the scrotum stretches, then it becomes soft and swell up, and a boil appears.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as its description has preceded.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron tool, in this manner: namely, that the patient should lie on their back between your hands. Then cut the boil and swelling of the rupture with a transverse incision according to its size, which is about three finger-widths.
Next, tie the scrotum and what is beneath the skin until you can see the white scrotal sac underneath the skin that follows it.
Then take a probe and place it on the swelling of the scrotum and press it into the depth of the abdomen.
Then, take two points that are prominent on the end of the probe from the swelling and connect them with a suture. Then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut into the swelling at all, neither stretch nor do anything else as I have taught you in treating a prolapse of the intestines.
Then treat it with wound treatment. After cutting the threads, cleanse them and dress the wound until it heals.
For the swelling will contract and there will be no prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better for this location since it is closer to health.
Chapter 68
Chapter on the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, causing the flesh between them to also become soft and making their appearance unsightly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one performing the treatment to have the patient lie on their back and incise all of the softened skin down to the natural skin.
Then bring together both lips with a suture: and if you wish, remove the excess softened skin by three or four sutures, then secure it firmly with a suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it like other wounds until it heals and the stitches fall out.
Chapter 69
Chapter on Castration.
Know that castration is condemned by our law, and therefore I would not have mentioned it in this book of mine if it were not for two methods.
One reason is so that the knowledge of castration may be possessed by a physician when asked about it, and so that he may know how to treat it if it occurs.
And another reason is because we often need the castration of certain animals for our own uses, such as rams, roosters, and cats, among others.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by friction. Or by incision and separation.
In that which is done by friction, the method of operation is as follows: let the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become softened and relaxed, and hang down; then press them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer visible to touch.
In castration by incision and division, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and make a single cut over all the testicles until two emerge; then cut them after you have stripped each one, leaving nothing but the thin sifak covering on top of the blood vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by friction, because friction may sometimes leave some of the testicles behind, causing the animal to desire copulation.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70
On the Care of Hermaphrodites in Two Methods.
A hermaphrodite is of two kinds according to males. One of them is when there appears a space after the scrotum, or on the skin of the testicles between the two testicles, shaped like a woman's vulva with hairs, from which urine may sometimes flow.
In women, however, there is one form, which is a woman's vulva above the pubis like small, protruding male testicles. One of these resembles the penis of a man, and two resemble the two testicles.
And the treatment of these three forms - two from males and one from females - is as follows: it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh until the impression is removed. Then, treat them with the care used for other wounds.
In the second species of males, from which urine flows, which is on the skin of the testes, there is no operation, nor any treatment at all.
Chapter 71
On the Incision of a Hemorrhoid and Excess Flesh Protruding from the Vagina of Women
A hemorrhoid may sometimes be added to the natural condition until it disfigures and becomes unsightly; and in some women it may become so enlarged that it resembles that of men, even extending to sexual intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold the excess hemorrhoid with your hand or hook and make an incision; but do not cut too deeply, especially at the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the care used for wounds until it heals.
But the flesh that arises is the flesh that grows at the mouth of the womb until it fills it, and perhaps it may protrude externally in the manner of a tail. And on account of this some call this condition "tailed". Therefore we should cut it like a hemorrhoid and treat it until it heals.
On the Treatment of the Hymen, Which is the Unperforated Vagina of Women
Chapter 72
The hymen is when the vagina of a woman is unperforated or has only a small opening. And it may be either natural or acquired.
An acquired hymen is one that results from some preceding illness, and it may be composed of flesh that has grown there, or of thin or thick membrane. It may occur deep within the uterus, on its sides, above or below it. And it may prevent sexual intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation as well.
Its diagnosis is made through obstetrical inspection if there appears to be an approaching dilation.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or using a speculum.
But if the dilation is due to thin membrane and is close to the two lips, then hurry up and tear it apart.
And you should place wool pads on the two lips.
Then place your index fingers of both hands together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread out. Then stretch open the two lips with force until the thin membrane tears apart and dilation occurs.
Then take wool, dampen it with oil, and apply it to the area. Have the woman have intercourse every day so that the area does not heal over again.
But if the membrane is thick and dense, then you must cut it with a wide-bladed knife similar to a mulberry leaf.
But if the dilation is due to flesh that has grown there, then suspend it with hooks and cut into it. Have with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and powdered saffron mixed with egg white.
Then apply a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from healing quickly. Keep it in place for several days, then apply a dry linen bandage, and finally treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And sometimes other flesh may grow within the uterus. In such cases, they must be cut according to this method: but do not cauterize with a burning iron any cancerous growth that is within the uterus, for it would be contrary to nature to do so.
Chapter 73
On the treatment of piles (hemorrhoids), the swollen vein (Bothor) and red spots (Athehelil) in women's vulvae.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of vein orifices from which much blood flows continuously.
When hemorrhoids are inflamed, they become hard (thelil), as I have mentioned earlier regarding their classification and symptoms. Now I will discuss which ones can be treated and which ones cannot.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are situated at the mouth of the uterus and are not visible to sensation should not be treated with a hot iron.
But those which are situated at the opening of the uterus and are perceptible to sensation are the ones that can be treated.
Therefore, you should take the woman into a cold house Then, using forceps or coarse cloth, extend the swollen veins (athehelil) and cut them off at their roots.
Next, sprinkle the following powders over them during the flow of blood without causing further injury: acacia powder, dragon's blood resin powder, and frankincense powder, along with similar substances.
Then have her place her feet against the wall for about an hour Afterwards, place her in cold water.
But if the bleeding persists, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, henbane, and similar substances.
Then take some barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice to apply on her back.
If the bleeding stops with this treatment, that's good. But if not, apply blisters made from leeches on her back and breasts without making incisions.
Then take some wool and dip it into the juice of tartar, or jujube root (arnogloss), or the juice of wild fig tree branches ("aglanter"), mixed with strong wine from Pontus. Apply this to the affected area
When the boil has quieted down, then treat the location with ointments until it heals.
Albarth is red in color and resembles the heads of larks, and has a rough appearance
Therefore, you should cut open what appears from it, as I said earlier about the thelil: treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74
Chapter on Perforation of an Uterine Rupture
Many kinds of swellings occur in the uterus such as cancer, calculus, ulcer, hardened growths, and warts; also herpes, skin tags, fistulas, piles, cracks and fissures, and hot boils.
I have already spoken about all these diseases and their kinds, signs, and treatments in my earlier works. However, it is necessary that I speak here in this treatise about the hot boil that occurs in the uterus when it is due to swellings that collect blood, so that you may know how its opening can be performed with an iron instrument.
Therefore, you should consider Then if the pain of the boil at its onset is sharp with throbbing, inflammation, fever, and redness, and you observe that sensation has been lost over it, then do not rush to perform its opening; rather treat it with what promotes maturation until it subsides.
Then you should have the woman sit on a chair that has two seats, and recline or lie down on her back, and bring her feet up to the lower part of her abdomen; let her hips be spread wide apart, and let her arms be placed under her knees. Then bind both legs with suitable ligatures to them.
Then have the midwife sit on the right side of the woman and assist in holding the instrument used to open the vaginal opening
And when you wish to use this instrument, insert it gently into the depth of the woman's womb; so that nothing more than its tip may enter and injure the patient.
But if the instrument is longer than necessary, then place pillows on top of the woman's buttocks to prevent the entire instrument from entering her womb. The assistant should hold the instrument while another servant turns the handle until the depth of the uterus has been reached.
When the birth presents itself and is touched by hand and found to be soft and yielding, then you should cut it at its base with a wide-mouthed scissors.
After the discharge has been evacuated, then place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent properties on the wound and remove the piece of flesh from inside the uterus.
Then place externally over the uterus and vulva clean wool immersed in water in which mallow has been boiled.
Afterwards, treat it with an appropriate ointment two days later until it heals.
And whenever the uterus and wound are washed, they should be cleaned with a combination of water and honey, then rinsed with water in which either lily root or long-borne has been boiled. After that, apply the ointment again.
But if the wound is hidden inside the uterus, then do not attempt to treat it with iron. Instead, cure it with what we have mentioned earlier about division [of the birth].
Chapter 70
Chapter on Midwifery: How living fetuses that emerge unnaturally shaped are treated.
First and foremost, the midwife must know the normal shape of a birth.
One of its signs is that when you see a woman being pressed downward and she desires to smell the air, and feels relieved from what is above her regarding childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to its natural shape, and it exits with its head foremost, and the afterbirth is with it, either suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press down on her belly so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it [the child] descends with its head first, the afterbirth comes down with it, and is cleansed of those superfluities through a good cleansing.
Any birth other than this is unnatural and reprehensible.
For sometimes the fetus comes out with its feet first, and its body emerges before its head, and one of its hands or feet, or both hands come out first: or its head and hands emerge together: or it comes out belly-first: and perhaps it turns on its neck, and such other unseemly shapes.
Therefore, the midwife must be prudent and careful in all these matters, and avoid error and deceit. I am showing every shape among them, what its character is, how it is signified, and what should be done about it.
When the fetus emerges headfirst in its natural way, and becomes violent upon the woman, and her labor becomes difficult, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then have her sit on a chair or women hold her up. And vaporize rue with fenugreek decoction and moist oils onto her vulva.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and use it to hook out the afterbirth, cutting it with her nail until it runs clear of fluid. Then press down on the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be given an enema of ground fenugreek seed mixed with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to lie on her back after the enema, and make her sneeze with snuff made of ground condimentum, while holding her mouth and nose closed at once. For the fetus will emerge immediately.
But if two hands of the fetus are born first, then it is necessary to gently push them back little by little until they are fully inside. But if it does not obey and enter, then place the woman on a chair and raise her feet up. Then shake the chair on the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the shaking.
But if the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them open and remove the remaining fetus. Then tie up the woman's hand with cloth and gently pull out the fetus.
Regarding the emergence of the embryo feet-first. When the fetus emerges feet-first, then push its feet upwards and gently turn it around. Then bring it down slowly.
Then take one of its feet and gradually straighten it out.
When they emerge up to the hips, then instruct her to lie back down and make her sneeze with snuff made of ground condimentum. For it will come out if God wills it.
And if it does not emerge even with the method mentioned above, then gradually push the fetus back in until it is in its natural position. For it will then come out easily.
But if it is still not delivered even with everything that has been mentioned, then take some ground fenugreek seed and sesame oil, along with dissolved gum tragacanth. Grind them together in a mortar, then wrap the mixture in a cloth and insert it into the woman's vagina and below her belly button. Then have her sit in warm water until she sweats abundantly.
Once you see that the lower parts of her body are sufficiently warmed, then make her a suppository with myrrh and insert it. After one hour has passed, have her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed while gently pressing the lower part of her abdomen. For the fetus will be expelled immediately.
Exit of the fetus between thighs and hands When it comes out in this manner, then gradually insert your hands inside. Then the woman should lie on her back and hang her feet over the edge of the bed, while she rests her hands folded on her chest. Then gradually press on her abdomen above. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillowcases until she is prepared below. But if the fetus does not come out, then take hold of her feet and move them vigorously. Then gently press on what is above the hypogastrium until the fetus rises upwards. Then insert her hands and gradually bring out the fetus; and instruct the woman to press down until the fetus is expelled.
Exit of the fetus hanging out widely from the hands Insert your hand inside her for examination. But if she cannot reduce it, then lift up the woman and have her walk around.
If walking is not possible for her, then make her lie down on the bed and shake her legs vigorously.
Then apply the liniment you have prepared from fenugreek seeds.
But if she is delivered of her child, then make her sit on a chair. Then apply yourself to reducing the hand, and position the infant according to its natural shape. Make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press on herself until it emerges.
Exit of the child over its own neck, with hands extended, and its face is towards mother's back. The midwife should hold the infant's hand, then gradually turn it around, and align it gently.
When it is aligned, then place upon its vulva the thing we mentioned earlier made from oil and mucilage.
Then instruct her to move gradually. After doing this, then make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to lean towards her right side. Then instruct her to press upon herself; and make her sneeze with the application.
Exit of the prepared child over its side. When it descends to the mouth of the womb according to this manner with the caul, then cut the caul with your nail until it empties out from the moisture.
If therefore it hangs over the face and neck of the child, then cut it at the navel so that it may not be retained and cause death.
Then push the infant into the womb until you place it properly. Instruct the woman to press upon herself several times; for indeed it will emerge easily.
Exit of twins or multiple infants. Know that twins are born very often, and sometimes three, even four are born. However, this is rare and does not happen often.
But five is a thing against nature and do not live at all. Even though they multiply, there is only one caul containing them. They are separated by the sieve, distinguishing between each one's bond at the navel.
And sometimes they emerge just like a single infant emerging naturally and easily. They also emerge in that praiseworthy manner which we have described.
If some of them prove difficult at birth and reach the state we mentioned with unnatural shapes, then treat them as we have described. Use a fine needle, and perform the procedure with ease and gentleness, allowing the infant to emerge according to its natural shape under the guidance of skilled hands leading towards recovery.
Memorandum: That which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed in the womb. I have personally witnessed a woman miscarry seven and on another occasion fifteen, all of them fully formed.
This has been measured by the glorious sage.
Therefore, all of this should be included in the science of obstetrics. Perhaps a similar case may come his way; therefore, he should approach it with whatever is appropriate
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus:
When treating a dead fetus according to what I have said about division under medicinal treatment, and it does not emerge, you must resort to manual intervention. Then it is necessary for you to consider.
If the woman is of sound health and free from any accidents that might cause harm to her, then she should be laid on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised. A helper should hold her at both sides or secure her to the bed so that her body does not shift during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the uterus with oily liquids containing mucilage of mallow, fenugreek seeds, and flaxseed.
Next, the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, then gently insert it into the uterus. Then she should search with her hand for a place on the fetus where hooks can be applied, and places suitable for this purpose.
Therefore, if the fetus is ready to descend onto its head: then fix hooks into its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, beard, collarbone, or nearby areas of the ribs, and beneath the armpits.
But if the descent is on its feet, then attach them to its pubic bone or middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand and place its loop between the fingers of her left hand. Then gently insert her hand and fix the hook into one of those places we have mentioned until she reaches a vacant space.
Then fix another hook opposite it, or even a third one if necessary, so that the traction is equal and not inclined towards any particular side.
Then apply equal traction and do not pull only in a straight line, but move it in all directions to ease its delivery, just like when extracting a tooth.
And it is necessary that the traction is softened between them. But if some part remains retained, then the midwife should anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from one side to roll back what is retained.
If a part of the fetus emerges, then move the hooks to another higher place. Do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If the hand emerges before other parts and cannot be reduced due to its constriction, then wrap a cloth around it. Then pull it out until it is entirely out, then cut it either at the ankle joint or elbow. Do the same for the other hand and both feet.
If the fetus's head is large or its exit is obstructed by constriction, or if there is water collected in its head, then one should insert a sharp hooked probe between the digits and use it to pierce the head and remove the water. Otherwise, one should rupture it using an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape can be found among the illustrations of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature, then it is necessary to separate the membrane (amnion), or remove it with Almisdac as mentioned earlier. Then grasp the bones with forceps and pull them out.
But if the head emerges but is obstructed at the neck, then it should be punctured until the fluid in the chest is drained.
If it does not turn nor conform to emerge, then cut the head into pieces as much as you are able to.
If there is an abscess lower down in the belly or hydrops (ascites), then you must pierce it until the fluid runs out.
But if the fetus is presenting by the feet first, its extraction will be easy and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be straightforward.
But if it is obstructed at the belly or chest, then you should remove it using a cloth wrapped around your hand and pierce the belly or chest until what is inside runs out.
But if the remaining parts are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, then she should insert her hand deeply into the womb and search for the head with it. Then she should grasp the head with her fingers up to the mouth of the womb. Next, she should insert one hook or two hooks into it and pull it out with them.
But if the mouth of the womb is constricted due to a hot inflammation that occurs therein, then she should not exert herself over it. Rather, at such time one should administer applications of moist and fatty substances; and apply poultices; and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is lying crosswise, then it may be possible to turn it right-side up; at that point one should administer what we have said regarding a live fetus.
But if this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and remove it [the fetus].
And one must ensure that nothing of the afterbirth remains inside at all.
After completing your procedure, then administer what we have said regarding hot inflammations that occur in the wombs [of women].
If bleeding occurs, then let her sit in astringent waters and administer the remainder of the treatment.
And indeed, I have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; afterwards she became pregnant again with another [fetus], but then that one also died. Therefore, after a long time had passed, an inflammation occurred at her navel and it became swollen until it opened; then it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore summoned for her treatment and treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
So I placed upon it certain poultices with strong attractive powers, and a bone came out from that place. Then after some days had passed, another bone came out. I was astonished at this because there are no bones in the womb.
Therefore I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound and removed many bones while she was in a better condition; now she lives quite well after a long time and discharges only a little pus from that place.
And I did not include this foreign matter here except insofar as it contains knowledge and assistance for that which the skilled medical practitioner administers with his hand in treating.
Chapter 77
On the shapes of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
Form of the wheel used to open the womb.
Here below is the form of the press used for equalizing books, which has two revolving wheels at both ends of two wooden beams. However, this wheel must be more delicate on the press; and it should be made either from ivory or boxwood.
And the width of each beam should be like two fingers; and the edge of both beams is like one finger, and their length is a palm and half; and in the middle of the two beams there are two additions made from the same wood, which are already attached to both, whose length is half a palm plus a little more: and the width of each is like two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it opens along with them when you turn both wheels.
Another form similar to this one but more delicate and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or boxwood, resembling forceps in appearance. However, at its end there should be two additions like you see depicted above; and the length of each addition is about a palm, while their width is two fingers.
When you wish to open the womb with this instrument, then make the woman sit on a bed with her feet dangling, with what is between her legs exposed. Then insert these two connected additions into the womb; and you, holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with tongs, evenly according to the amount you wish from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo, which the ancients called 'pushing', by which the fetus is pushed.
Form of Almisdac, with which a large head is crushed; it resembles tongs having teeth at the extremity as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong like tongs according to this form, as you see, having teeth like sawteeth, with which it cuts and crushes.
Form of Uncinate having one spine.
Form of Uncinate having two spines
Form of spatula having two extremities for cutting off the head
Form of two broader spatulas.
All these instruments are exercised and the more their kinds are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they become for use, and the greater their reputation among people due to their quantity.
Therefore do not neglect having any of these instruments ready at hand. For the need of them is inexcusable.
Chapter 78
Chapter on the Extraction of the Afterbirth
When the afterbirth is retained at birth, then you should order the woman to hold her breath. Then have her sneeze with condis powder and press your hand on her lower abdomen and nose. If it comes out by this method, that is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its cover; put in it herbs that open the mouth of the womb such as calamentum, rue, anetum, camomile, sesamum, lignum aloes, and centaurium. Take all these herbs or some of them, immerse them with water, and place them on a fire.
Then put an embolus of reed over the hole in the cover of the pot and the other end into the mouth of the womb; hold it until steam reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For the second one will come out more easily.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or slippery elm gum. Then insert it into the vulva and search with it for the second one. When she finds it, then grasp it and gradually pull it out.
But if it is attached deep within the womb, then insert your hand as we have described until you find the second one and pull it out gradually along its length so that the womb does not fall back due to strong suction. Rather, it should be gently pulled towards the right and left sides; then increase the suction gradually. For it will then obey and be saved, and come out from its adherence.
But if the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already mentioned: treat it with sneezing and the medication of the pot with herbs.
But if it does not come out despite all that has been said, then be careful not to tire yourself out by repeatedly trying to extract it.
However, whatever comes out at the mouth of the womb should be tied to the woman's thigh. Then give her an enema with tetrapharmacon ointment. For it will rot her afterwards and dissolve and come out.
But when it rots, a foul smell rises to the stomach and head, harming the sick person. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered to it.
Some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with radishes and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigation in women suffering from menstrual retention.
Make an alembic-like vessel out of glass or copper. Place the wide end over a fire and put the fumigation on burning coals. Hold it until the fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Chapter 79
Chapter On The Treatment Of An Imperforate Anus
Many boys are born with an imperforate anus, which has been closed by nature. Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger and if she cannot, she should pierce it with a pointed spatula and be careful not to touch the rectum.
Then place on it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if you fear that it may close again, then place a leaden cannula in the opening for many days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it has also happened that the anus becomes closed due to the healing of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, the consolidation must be cut away and then treated with what we have said for treatment using lead.
Chapter 80
Chapter On The Treatment Of Fistulae That Occur In The Lower Part
Fistulae that occur in the lower part are those that are close to the anus externally or in one of its parts; they may be single or multiple.
When this nodule becomes old, it opens and a watery white fluid or thin pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate [into the bone]. Therefore, when they penetrate, they are recognized by that which comes out in the discharge and its windiness, when the patient uses it for evacuation; and perhaps a worm will come out of them.
And there are fistulas among these that penetrate through space up to the bladder, and up to the urethra. And some of them penetrate as far as the hip joint, and as far as the coccyx bone.
But to determine whether a fistula reaches the anus, you should insert your index finger into it and insert a fine probe made of either bronze or iron into the fistula from the outside, provided there is no curvature.
If it has a curve, then insert into it a fine lead probe or a horsehair probe until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
If you do not feel it at all and there is no discharge coming from the opening, nor windiness nor any worm as I have said, then know that it is not penetrating; therefore proceed to treat it.
And when a fistula reaches the bladder or the urethra, its indication is that urine comes out of it, and its treatment is to inhibit this using medications so as to consolidate the affected area.
But if it penetrates as far as the hip joint or the hip bone, its sign is that a probe reaches there without curvature; and there will be pain around the area, continuous discharge of pus, and no medication nor ointment can consolidate it.
There is no cure at all for these fistulas that penetrate; their treatment is pointless and futile, due to the foolishness of some doctors.
But in one that is not penetrating and not old, healing can be expected with treatment according to what I have told you and proven myself. Have the patient lie on their back between your hands, raise their legs up above their hips, and incline their hips towards their belly. Then insert a probe made of lead or bronze, if the fistula is tortuous, until you know where it has reached.
But if the patient feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe has pierced through on its own and you can sense something between your finger and the flesh or skin, then know for certain that it is penetrating. Do not waste effort on healing it, as we have said.
Some say that flesh can be healed and that a hot cautery, thin according to the width of the fistula as described earlier, should be inserted into the fistula while heated until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the excess flesh resembling a feather quill has been burnt away.
Then dress it with bandages wrapped in butter until the burnt flesh comes out. Then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it heals, then that is good.
And if not, it will never be healed by any other treatment.
And if the probe comes out and does not reach your finger inside the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh or skin between them, then cut into the skin at the beginning of the fistula. Follow the probe with your cutting until you reach where its tip has reached, then release the probe so that it falls out.
Then cleanse those filtred flesh which resemble quills of a feather, so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood overcomes you and loosens your grip during the operation so that you cannot cut those flesh, then it is better to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine for quicker relief.
For cautery with fire combines the benefits of sealing good habits, burning away excess flesh, cutting off blood vessels, and drying out moistures.
Then dress it with linens wrapped in butter or crushed cabbage leaves until the wound discharges pus and the burned flesh comes out into the pus.
Then dress the wound with cohesive ointments that promote the growth of hard flesh; they are medicines that have astringent and drying properties.
For when it is restored, then it will be healed; do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has reached deep into the anus and is distant from the external skin opening, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with care.
If you feel the probe and there is a thick layer of skin or flesh between it and your finger, and it is close to the external opening, then do not attempt an operation on it unless done with trust and hope.
Which means that it can be treated in one of three ways: either cauterize it as mentioned earlier, or cut it until you reach its depth so that you can insert a linen and apply treatment nearby. And do not cut too deeply lest you injure the muscle that supports the anus and cause involuntary fecal incontinence. Then suture it as we have said.
Perhaps the wound will heal on its own; otherwise, you may extend the incision further or clean it afterwards once you have cut it close to the anus, as we have mentioned, either with a probe or some other sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse the flesh torn by the incision as thoroughly as you can examine it.
Then attempt to restore the entire wound with the incision and the upper opening where it solidifies; a fistula will remain open inside the anus, which will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is closed like this: when you insert a probe into the fistula and it exits on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus, then take a probe with a pierced tip resembling a tailor's needle, that is, prepared for piercing skins, in this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped around five threads, and wind it around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth.
If it penetrates into the inner margin of the anus near by, then extract the thread from that opening so that you can insert your finger into the anus and bring out the end of the thread, bringing both ends together, and tie both ends tightly, leaving it for one or two days. The more the thread is embedded in the flesh, the tighter it should be tied until the tissues between the two ends of the thread are cut off and fall away. Then dress the wound until it heals and solidifies.
But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then cause it to penetrate however it may be prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not your intention to do this on account of the muscle, so as not to injure it.
Then proceed with it as we have described until it heals.
The shape of the spatula for splitting a fistula is such that its point is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
Chapter on the Suturing of Hemorrhoids, from which blood flows due to their incision; and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds. Either they resemble charcoal or plum stones within the anus, or they appear like grapes themselves. And among them are small and large ones; blood flows from them continually, either there is one or many. And they are also found outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are usually of little moisture, from which flows yellow water or a small amount of blood intermittently; and they are of the same color as the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to bind and express until they emerge from the anus, so that you may see them clearly. Therefore, also suspend them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they do not hold with the forceps due to their moisture and softness, then grasp them with a rough cloth or with a wick made of doubled wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision so that they may serve as a cautery in their place. Or cauterize them according to what was previously described in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not allow them to emerge, then administer a cleansing enema containing a small amount of acid to wash out what is inside the anus and cause it to emerge quickly when the patient expresses.
If there are external warts around the anus, then their removal is easy: take them with your nail or use a hook and cut them off. Then treat them with what we have mentioned until they heal.
And for those who shrink from cutting with a knife, it is necessary to apply stitches according to this method: Take a thread wound round and insert it into the needle. Then draw out the hemorrhoid upwards and make the needle pierce it at its base from the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, keeping them horizontal. Then tie the hemorrhoid tightly with a strong knot. Then tie the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids, leaving one alone to allow for the discharge of excess blood.
Then place over the anus a pad soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it there. Instruct the patient to rest. Then let him go until it falls off.
When the hemorrhoids fall off, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they heal.
On the treatment of fissures For often they occur due to dryness of the feces and tightening of the anus by nature.
When they become chronic and medicine fails to help, then you should scrape them with a curette or your nail until they become moist and remove the hard skin that prevents their healing. Then treat them until they heal properly.
But if they do not heal, then repeat the scraping with more vigor until they bleed profusely and are completely opened. Then treat them until they heal.
Concerning the treatment of inverted ulcers (and not inverted ones): of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Chapter 82.
Know that hemorrhoids are nothing but a round node, similar in color to the body, like the head of a nail. They occur throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes. Pain occurs during walking due to them.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut around the nail-like node and hold it with tweezers or a hook, and remove it from its root.
Then treat the wound, and if you wish, cauterize it according to what is mentioned in its chapter.
From dry fistulas, there appears a small, rough, porous, round elevation above the surface of the body. And they occur very often in the hands of children.
Its treatment is to stretch the fistula and cut it open; or tie it with silk thread or hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with a caustic medicine, as mentioned earlier. And now inverted and non-inverted fistulas can be eradicated using the instrument that I will describe.
A fistula is also a small porous elevation on the surface of the body, thick and going deep inside. When it encounters coldness, it feels like an ant bite. It can occur anywhere on the body but most often appears on the hands.
Its treatment is to take a cannula made from goose or strong vulture feather and place it on the fistula until its circle covers both sides of the elevation. Then roll your hand with the cannula until it cuts through what is around the fistula. Then place it deep into the flesh and remove the fistula from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a bronze or iron cannula, following this method.
Place the upper part of the cannula towards the top, wrapped around the finger so that its grip and turning may be eased.
And if you wish to cauterize the fistula according to what has been mentioned concerning cauterization with a hot iron, as stated in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter 83
On forms of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and for loosening the bowels and colic pains.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or of brass, or of cast iron, or of hammered iron.
And sometimes it is made small or large from these instruments according to those used for administration.
Therefore, what is administered for the treatment of young children should be small, and likewise for those whose anus are weak or painful.
A large enema.
The cannula of the enema, that is, its upper part where the bag is tied, should be wide like this. It should have a distinction such that the bag can be tied as you see fit, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be blind, that is, not open, very smooth, tapering to a fine point; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the holes should be according to the thickness of the threads, a little wider is better. The bag in which medicines are placed should be made from an animal's bladder or from sheep's gut, shaped like a small onion. Its root should be one span long.
And it should be pierced with many holes as it is rolled, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Next, insert into those holes a strong thread made from raw cotton thread, which should consist of about ten threads, and gather it with the bladder like the technique used in ligatures. When the bladder is placed there, it should be tied at the top with a tight knot using two strings. Then apply the enema.
This is the shape of the circle and the holes depicted here
The appropriate amount of the enema to administer is as follows: fill the bladder or bag with warm medicine according to the patient's tolerance, ensuring that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and raise their legs upwards. Place under them a piece of leather or cloth upon which people lie.
Then grease the tip of the enema with oil, egg white, tragacanth gum, or similar substances Then gently insert it into the anus Then let an assistant take the bladder with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until all of its contents have been emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the enema and let the patient raise their legs up against the wall
If the medication causes the need to expel, then have them hold it in as much as they can And if he sleeps with it all night long, that is most beneficial.
But if you are administering an enema for abdominal pain and bowel obstruction, continue to administer enemas until the condition improves.
If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses wounding the anus, then use a very fine, gentle enema, such as those used for children.
This is the shape of the fine enema that should have a narrowed tip to fit snugly against the skin
Chapter 84.
Now that I have spoken about the division of wound treatments appropriate for this book, I will now discuss their treatment by hand and with medicines according to what is lacking.
I say therefore that wounds are differentiated according to the cause of the wound, and according to the place where the wound occurs.
The causes of wounds are manifold, such as a blow from a stone; or a cut from a sword or knife; or a wound made by a spear, stake, arrow, or similar objects.
Wounds which occur according to the parts of the body are, for example, those that fall upon the head, neck, chest, belly, or limbs.
And I am relating the treatments of certain wounds so that I may set forth a reasoning and rule for the remainder of wounds.
And I shall begin with simple head wounds, since the memory aid on compound fractures will come at the beginning of Chapter Three.
I say therefore I say therefore that when a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, you should consider whether it was caused by a stone throw or similar object. If so, then only the skin has been broken and the wound is large, causing fear of a hot swelling (abscess). In this case, act quickly and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately; do not delay. Remove blood according to the patient's strength, provided there are no contraindications for phlebotomy, especially if little blood is flowing from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part. And the patient should avoid overeating, drinking wine, and consuming heavy foods.
But if some contraindication forbids bloodletting, then reduce by diet alone; avoid meats and wines.
And if a hot swelling (abscess) occurs, apply to the wound a poultice made from wormwood steeped in rose oil alone or with wine that has been thickened.
But if you are free from the hot swelling (abscess), then apply to the fresh wound with its blood and not yet exposed to air, a powder which I will describe later. And if it has already been exposed to air, then apply some ointment until it heals.
But if the wound is large or made by a cut with a knife and similar ones, and its lips do not join together through poultices, then close it up with stitches according to what I will describe regarding the suture of abdominal wounds.
But if the wound has been exposed by bone and hangs open with no tension except for a small suspension, then cut into it. Then treat the wound with medicines and replace the lost skin with tough flesh. Order the patient to be fed on foods that increase thickness, such as broths and cooked wheat, until they recover their strength; and similar foods.
But if you find putrefaction in the skin which does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the putrid part and throw it out; then treat the wound.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and cannot be tied off with medicines, then press upon the artery. If you find it not cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or tie it with a ligature. But if the necessity arises when what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
But if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy and light. Thus, sprinkle this powder upon them because it solidifies them before they become exposed to air.
Here follows the method of the powder for flesh-colored wounds Take one part of olibanum (frankincense), two parts of dragon's blood resin, and three parts of slaked lime. Grind all together thoroughly and sift it. Fill the wound with this powder and apply a good dressing until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it from above with linen strips, and leave it alone without removing it until it dries completely so that it does not become loosened. For the medicine should not be removed from him until he is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does the job, when you do not have frankincense and dragon's blood at hand. It also works in many great wounds when it is applied and bound, especially with fresh wounds that have not been exposed to air.
But if the wound has already been exposed to air for some time, especially during summer, then this powder should not be used. Instead, treat it with what was mentioned earlier, applying ointments made from digested ingredients or pastes made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it discharges pus. Then continue treating it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
But if a fracture of the bone occurs together with the wound, and it is small, then extract it using forceps. I will discuss the treatment of head fractures later on.
Chapter on Neck Wounds
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
But if the neck wound has severed a nerve or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to treat it with something that causes strong coagulation, like cinnabar (cinnabar), lead, and other similar substances. For they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not apply anything cold to the wound at all, because the substance of nerves is cold and their continuity goes up to the brain which is the most noble organ. Therefore, what you use to treat it should be gentle medicines such as lime washed with sweet water and repeatedly infused with oil or rose oil, and also tutia (a perfume), when used for washing even with sweet water, along with other mineral stones and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply stitches (sutura): otherwise, press its lips together with lint. Then care for it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or there is a cavity in its lower part where pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a more depressed spot.
If an artery has been cut in the wound and its blood flow is copious, then separate or cut it and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
But if the spine of the throat or all of it has been injured, and the Adam's apple is saved, then join the edges of the skin with stitches over the bone of the throat and do not touch the throat itself, but leave it alone and let it return to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage and leave it for a few days. Then treat it with ointments that have an astringent and drying effect until it heals.
But if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then examine it. If there are bone fragments in it, remove all of them that you can; but what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound putsrefies, separates and its discharge is relieved.
But if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle upon it the powder I have mentioned. But if bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it according to the method described in its chapter.
Chapter on wounds of the hands.
If there is a wound from a lance or knife and you see its depth, then consider (the severity). If breathiness emerges from the wound when the patient gasps, know that the wound is mortal.
If the wound does not have depth and is fresh with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it at first, nor bind it tightly, so that blood does not become trapped within its depths and return to the heart, causing the death of the patient. Instead, apply an absorbent ointment to it and change it twice a day.
But if an absorbent ointment is not available to you, then place a piece of old linen over the mouth of the wound so that it may absorb any moisture exiting from it. And make sure the patient sleeps on their wound so that what collects within it may flow out.
If three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasm has occurred for the patient, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see that all other symptoms are favorable, then know that the wound is safe. Therefore treat it with linen bandages and other remedies until it heals.
But if its healing is delayed and it keeps opening up again, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat the fistula according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what preceded regarding stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if the wound has already reached the bone and there are bone fragments from it, then examine the wound and promptly remove those fragments if they have separated. However, if [the bone fragments] have not separated, then leave them alone until the wound has putrefied and softened, for their removal will thus be easier.
The treatment of other wounds occurring in other parts of the body is as we have described.
Chapter on Abdominal Wounds, and on the Protrusion of Intestines and Their Exit
Disruption that occurs to the abdomen is either great, medium, or small.
Therefore, in a large disruption sometimes one intestine or several intestines protrude.
Hence, their replacement and suture is urgent and difficult.
And a small disruption also presents difficulties in another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly replace them to their original position immediately, because they swell up, open, and become thicker, making replacement more difficult.
Therefore, a medium disruption is better because with it there is no difficulty in reducing the intestine, unlike in those two types [great and small].
Know that there are four ways to suture an abdomen.
Two types of sutures are common for both abdominal wounds and other wounds on the body, while two others are specific to other wounds. However, these latter two types of sutures are particularly suitable for abdominal wounds, and I will now explain each one to you with its proper description.
I say therefore that when the wound is small and some intestine protrudes from it, making reduction difficult, then one of two methods should be used. Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or because there is swelling in the intestine due to exposure to cold air.
Therefore, when such is the case, then you should warm the protruding intestine by immersing a sponge or moist cloth into warm water alone. Or boil it in water with squill, cyperus, and spikenard, along with embrocation until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes wine with astringent properties is used; this is better than water alone for resolving inflammation.
When you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the protruding intestine with water in which has been boiled either celery or mallows. For this will alleviate its entrance when it is slightly inserted.
But if the return of the protruding intestine persists after this treatment, then make a small incision with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
The first treatment is better when it is prepared; the incision should not be forced unless necessary and due to a lack of proper instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp; let its tip be somewhat blunt, not too fine like a needle; rather, it should resemble a chisel in appearance.
When the wound is widened and the protruding intestine enters it, then it is necessary that its reduction should be according to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible; for this is better.
But when the incision is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
Similarly, if the incision is on one of two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your intention and attention on ensuring that the part with the wound is higher than the other.
And so it should be done in both large wounds and medium-sized ones.
In small wounds, however, place the patient according to how you prepare them.
Then ensure that a pious assistant is present, who holds the wound open with one hand; then approximate the edges with your fingers. Next, wipe it clean and pass the needle to the one who follows for continuous suturing. This is the common method of single-layer closure.
And take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound. Then insert the needle at a distance of about one fingerbreadth from the end of the wound (i.e., about an inch), and sew back and forth under the skin with two strands of thread until you have approximated both edges of the cut and have made four stitches.
Then tie the needle with doubled thread several times on both sides simultaneously until the two edges of the wound are approximated nicely.
Then insert the needle again at the same depth and sew with a straight stitch as you did with the first suture. Do not cease doing this until you have completed the closure of the entire wound.
And use needles of medium size, neither too fine nor too coarse. Very fine needles cut the flesh quickly, while thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, it is best to use needles of medium thickness and fineness.
Do not insert the needle too close to the edges of the skin on both sides at once, so that you do not cut the flesh quickly and open the wound before it has healed properly. Also, do not make the stitches too long, as this may hinder the healing of the wound.
Then cut off the ends of the threads to prevent them from bothering the patient during sleep. Put gauze pads made from clean cloth around the wound to hold the thread ends in place. Leave them there until you know that the wound has healed properly.
This method of suturing with needles is particularly suitable for small wounds. For stitching them, one needle will suffice, or two, or approximately that number.
The second method of stitching is common, where you join together the four ends: two of skin and two of the thread. Take one needle with an evenly wound thread that is neither too fine nor too coarse.
Then when you have pierced the four ends with your needle, bring it back on the same side from which you started, so that the thread falls evenly across the top of the wound. The stitch should be like a seam in cloth. Place between every stitch an amount of thread equal to the thickness of a finger joint.
This method of stitching is known by men.
And with this stitching method I myself sutured a wound that had occurred on the abdomen of a man who was wounded with a knife. The disruption of the wound was about one palm's length and about two palms' worth of intestine had protruded from the middle intestine, with a tear in the center of the abdomen.
Therefore I reduced it back into place after his intestines had been outside the wound for 24 hours.
Thus, the wound healed in about fifteen days. I took care of it and he recovered well, living many years thereafter with no further issues.
And the physicians had judged that it would not heal.
It was by a miracle that I did not treat this wound with an ointment. Because there were no salves or medicines available in the place where I was located. Therefore, I applied an old piece of linen twice a day to the wound and washed it regularly with honey water until it healed.
I will now describe two types of stitching according to the spoken tradition.
Begin with a sharp suture by inserting the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle has pierced the skin and is traveling through the flesh according to the length and width of the entire body, release the thread on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
After you have made it pierce, then make it pierce back from the outer part to the inner part at the same end. Release the thread on this side and make the needle pierce into the other end from the inner part to the outer part, and continue piercing until it has pierced through everything.
Then begin again from this same side, and with the end that is on the other side, pull out the needle from the skin it has pierced.
Then bring it back into that skin with the end on the other side and make it pierce again from its part, pulling it out from the skin. Do this repeatedly until all is stitched together according to this example.
The final result of this stitching is similar to the way tanners sew hides together, so that one end of the thread goes in on one side of the skin and comes out on the other side, completing the stitch.
Here is the second type of proper stitching, which Galen spoke about.
This type of stitching is described as being done in a similar manner to how some physicians join parts together by bringing them close together and matching them naturally. The end of the thread is applied to one end of the part, while the other end is applied to its opposite end. And this is what I have told you.
You must insert the needle into the end of mirah that is nearest to you from the outer part and make it pass through to the inner side alone. Then release both ends of sifac. Then turn the needle around and insert it from the outer part to the inner side on both ends of sifac, that is, on either side.
Then turn both over and make them penetrate from the inner to the outer side on both other ends of mirah that are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is a better stitch than the common easy one, and it is a stitch which leaves a memory.
This is also the speech of Galen.
And some said, Sutures of the belly should be corrected using two needles. This is so that you insert one thread into both of them and begin with the insertion of the needle from what is nearest to you, making it pass through to the other side according to the stitching of those who join skins evenly.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, its stitching is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of treating wounds is the same as for other wounds.
That is to say, when you encounter a fresh wound with its own blood before the air alters it and you reduce the intestines and tie it up properly, then apply powder of cinnabar.
But if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ointments that you have with you until they cause it to suppurate and release the threads, and sifac and mirah are consolidated. Then treat it as other wounds are treated, until it heals.
If you do not have the medicines present, then immediately apply a bandage at the point where it begins to discharge pus, and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medications in many cases when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate with the principal members in injury, then it is necessary to immerse soft wool in oil of moderate heat or rose oil and apply it around the areas between the thighs and under the armpits.
If the patient feels pain, pricking, or putrefaction in their intestines (for this often happens), then administer a clyster with black, tepid, astringent wine, especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and caused a deep evacuation.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal, but what comes from the small intestine is harder to heal.
However, the intestine called the ileum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude of veins, their size, the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
But if what comes out from the wound is blood clots and you find them fresh, then reduce them according to your method of reducing intestines evenly.
But if some time has passed and it has become green or black, then you must tie it with a thread above the place that has been darkened by it to prevent bleeding. For in bruises there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament and place two ends of the thread hanging down from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its tension may be relieved upon you, and its extraction at the time of the bruise, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Remembering a wound that occurs in the intestines.
When there is a rupture in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some people; therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was old: and a fistula formed, and there was emission from it, and windiness.
I therefore applied treatment until I had no confidence in the healing of it; nor did I cease to treat it finely until it was healed and the place consolidated.
After I saw that the place was already consolidated, I feared for the patient that some bad event might occur to him in his belly; and no such thing happened to him. And he remained in better conditions than before, eating and drinking, and having intercourse, and entered the baths, and exercised himself in his usual activities.
And now some experts say that when a wound occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner. It is necessary to take large-headed ants. Then gather together the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants which have an open mouth upon the two lips of the wound. When it seizes them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not let go.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this with ants in succession according to the total quantity of the wound.
Then dress it and heal its wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestines until the intestines are eaten and healed, so that no harm befalls the patient.
And now it is possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: what has been removed from the animal's intestine should be attached to it when it is inserted into the wound.
And you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and burn it well. Then tie a fine linen thread onto its end. Then insert that thread into the wound and bring the intestine with it. Then reduce it into the incision.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestines is only a matter of trust and hope.
Know that if the wound is large or wide, especially if it affects one of the delicate intestines, then there is no hope and no cure for it.
On the treatment of fistulas.
You should know that every wound or abscess which becomes old and hardened, turns into an ulcer, does not heal, constantly emits pus but is not cut off: then it is universally called a fistula in whichever limb it may be found, and we call it zuchemen.
And a fistula is indeed in truth a hard, white knot like a sieve, without pain and concave like the feather of a bird. And because of this some call it 'risati', that is, 'feather'.
And at certain times it may be moist and emit pus. And perhaps the moisture splits open at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is abundant and sometimes scarce; it may be thick or thin.
And I have already stated in the division where wounds are concerned, that every wound which does not heal and upon which flesh does not grow, is so only because of one of nine causes.
These are nine causes: either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of the quality of the blood; or because there is hard flesh between the wound and its lips preventing flesh from growing; or because it contains much dirtiness and foulness; or because the wound itself is putrid, and the material sent to it is of bad quality; or because the treatment is unsuitable for its healing; or because a falling corruption in the region is a kind of pestilence, such as occurs in Caesaraugusta where digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of apostemes is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone too many or not enough bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and treatments with medicines for each one in the division; and here it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas and ulcers which occur through an operation by hand.
Know therefore that fistulas occur in all members of the body. For there are fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, nerves, or bones; or the intestines, bladder, or some of the ribs; or some of the vertebrae in the back, or some of the joints composed by articulation, such as hands and feet. And there are those which approach the main member and similar ones.
Therefore, among these fistulas, those that follow this pattern are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment. They are troublesome and accompanied by ignorance.
But if there is one among these fistulas whose depth does not reach those places I mentioned and you hope for its healing and trust in its treatment, then take a probe made of brass or iron, if the fistula extends straight ahead, and explore it with that.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe made of fine lead. Because lead, due to the gentleness of its substance, alleviates and curves around the twist.
But if a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate it with a probe. Therefore, seal off one of its openings from the others.
For the water with which you perform the enema will flow towards the other openings and run out through them.
Then examine carefully to find out whether it is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or nerve there, and if the fistula is deeply concave, either nearby or far away; or if it is one fistula with many openings. And stand on all of this with your utmost strength, through questioning the patient and finding pain at compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs and causes that occur in an apostema.
When you have stood firm on all of these with true steadfastness, then proceed to treat it with confidence. And consider at that time whether the fistula is close by and apparent, or in a safe place far from the junction, or from nerve, artery, vein, or one of those places I mentioned to you. Then cut open the fistula according to what has been previously stated in my description, and remove whatever is inside it through filtration, including rotting flesh that grows at its opening from flesh, gland, or similar things. And treat it until it heals.
But if the fistula is deeply buried and extends straight ahead, then it is necessary for you to cut into it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then insert medicated linen wrapped around sharp needles into the cavity of the fistula you have grasped with forceps; do this repeatedly until the acrid medicine has eaten away all that remains inside the cavity.
Then dress it with salves which promote healing, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then expose it and cut into it as I have told you; but if anything prevents you from doing so, such as a vein, nerve, or main limb, as we have said.
If you expose bone and find that there is decay or blackness in it, then scrape it away until all the decay is removed. Then dress it with what promotes healing until it heals.
But if it does not heal and continues to discharge pus as before, then know that you have not completely removed all the decay.
Therefore expose it again and investigate its cause thoroughly, and cleanse it with all your strength.
Then dress it. But if it does not heal, then know that the decay is deeply buried within the body and you have not reached it. Therefore there is no remedy for it but to leave it to nature.
But if a small bone is affected and you are able, grasp it with fine forceps that fit its size.
If there are many bones, then carefully grasp them all with your strength and leave none behind.
But if anything resists you due to moisture and there is no fear of cutting or error involved, then cut through the moistures and flesh (if any are present) and free the bones.
But if you lack the preparation to remove bones from your own body, then place something that will rot on the wound and leave it until what is surrounding those bones in flesh and moisture rots.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And bind the incision that you made during your operation. Rather, if you wish, place on it [the wound] cotton soaked in ground sulfur with oil; or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the gold-colored ointments.
For when those moistures putrefy and separate from them [the bones], the removal of these becomes easier, as does their attraction.
But if there is one large bone, such as the leg bone or the hip bone and similar ones, and a large part of it has decayed, then shave it down to the last layer until that blackness and decay are removed. Then close the wound.
But if what is decayed in it is a large part and the decay has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close it [the wound] and cut all the way to the point where the decay has reached; then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this example of a man who had an injury to his leg so that you may use it as a model and aid for your own operations.
There was once a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause that moved upon it until matter reached the leg and formed a large abscess; there was no external cause for this.
So much time passed with the error of doctors until the abscess burst open and much matter gathered around it. And its treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulous and many openings appeared in it which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore many doctors treated it for about two years but there was no skilled hand in the art until I was called and saw his leg, and the materials that flowed from those openings with great abundance: indeed the whole man's body was already emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
I inserted a probe into one of those holes, and it reached to the bone.
Then I examined all the openings, and found that they communicated with each other from every part of the leg.
So I prepared and opened above one of those holes until I reached the bone itself, which I found corrupted; it was already rotted, blackened, putrefied, and perforated, having penetrated to the marrow.
I therefore cut away what I had discovered of the corrupted bone.
And ordered that nothing be left on the bone except that corruption which I cut off and sawed away. I had already removed it.
Then I applied dressings with strengthening medicines for a long period of time. And it did not heal.
Then I probed and searched again above the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone; I sawed away what appeared to me of that corruption also.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
Therefore I searched again upon it and did not cease cutting the bone bit by bit and attempting its restoration until I cut about a palm's breadth of it out and extracted it along with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; nor would this repetition of operation and section have been necessary if not for the disposition of the patient's weakness, his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him regarding death, since he suffered continuous syncope from the profuse evacuation.
Therefore he was healed with a complete recovery: and hard flesh grew in place of the bone, and his bodily condition improved, and his strength returned; and he resumed his usual activities without any harm from walking.
But if the bone protruding from the body is already broken: then you should take hold of it in this manner: and there is to take a bandage, and wrap it tightly around the end of the projecting bone: and order someone to stretch it upward: and place another bandage made of coarse wool over the first bandage. Then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone; and stretch its end so as to draw the flesh downwards; and you uncover the flesh at the place where you wish to compress it, so that the compress does not injure the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the bone below appropriately: for when you do this, it will prevent cutting into the rotted flesh.
And it is necessary that the compression be maintained for a short time over the rotted place so that there may not be a hollow in the bone; nor should it appear evident in its appearance and compel another compression.
But if the bone is rotted and not protruding, rather being continuous with itself; and the corruption is in its midst or on one of its parts: then uncover all the flesh from all sides. Then place wood below.
Next cut it from the first side where there is corruption until the compression continues to the other side; and let the compression be along the length of the corruption for a short distance as we have said.
If there is corruption at a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues on the other side.
But if corruption is between two joints, there is no remedy for it except scraping.
However, if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or foot, then this case is very difficult. But it is necessary to investigate how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it and cleanse it according to any possible arrangement that you can make with whatever tool suits you: as long as the vein or nerve does not cause you opposition.
Know that saws and chisels for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, thickness, thinness, size, fineness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an appropriate tool for each type of operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the kind of tool that you need when you are engaged in study for a long time. And the knowledge of methods in this art is witness to the methods of illnesses. Then you will find by yourself what is suitable for each disease from the tools available.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should have as examples on which to practice and by which to test others.
Shape of another saw.
Shape of Rasp for Joints. The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a star-nail head, and its points should resemble those of an awl.
And it is not fitting unless the heads of joints are rubbed with it when they become corrupted or if the bone is wide and large.
Shape of the Larger Rasp.
Shape of the Broad Rasp.
Shape of the Rasp with Concavity.
Shape of Another Fine Rasp.
Form of Another Rasp with a Curved Tip.
Form of the Small, Fine, and Flexible Rasp.
This resembles a Rod and its end is like a Saw; it is used in many places due to the reason of bones.
Shape of the Rasp fitting for use on that which has been pierced by bone.
Its tip is triangular, with sharp points.
It is made from India. And similarly, it is necessary that all which we have spoken of be made from Raspers, Cutters, and Saws.
ยง On the Incision of Extremities and Sawing of Bones.
Extremities putrefy due to external or internal causes.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicines, and the treatment does not help, and you see the corruption spreading to the limb without any sign of improvement, then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or from a greater loss of the limb.
And the sign that this has occurred is when the limb becomes blackened until it seems burned; if fire has not burned it, then it rots after becoming blackened; and the corruption should be cut out until it reaches that which follows the limb, and if it spreads throughout the body.
Therefore, make the incision promptly, and likewise if the cause of the corruption is from the bite of some venomous creature such as a marine scorpion, viper, adder, or similar ones.
If corruption or a bite is on the tip of a finger, then cut into the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to spread up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs on the hand, then cut into it from its root towards the wrist, and do not allow space for corruption until it reaches the elbow.
If it invades further, then cut into the arm at the elbow joint.
But if corruption passes through and you see that it is encircling the elbow, then death of the patient is imminent. And apart from that, everything else for treatment amounts to nothing but powerlessness.
And similarly do the same for the foot when corruption invades a toe; cut into it at one of its joints. But if it reaches the heel, then amputate the entire foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut into the thigh at the knee joint.
However, if corruption has already reached above the knee, there is no remedy for it except to abandon (the limb) and leave the patient to their fate.
The method of cutting into a limb or binding it is to tie off the ligament below where you wish to cut and tie off another ligament above the location. And let one assistant hold one ligament downward, while another assistant holds another ligament upward. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments using a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then cut or bind it.
It is necessary to place linen cloth on all sides and not let the bandage touch the healthy area, so that additional injury or a hot abscess does not occur.
But if bleeding occurs internally while you are working, then cauterize the location quickly or apply some powders that stop bleeding on it. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you that what happened to this man's foot is exactly as I have described to you.
This is because blackness occurred on his foot with burning akin to fireburn: and that corruption initially happened in his toe, until it began to spread throughout the entire foot.
So the man amputated himself after seeing the severity of the corruption occurring in his limb, which he discovered through pain and burning sensation. He cut it at the joint and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred on his right index finger.
So he came to me, and I tried to recover that swelling with the medications I applied on his hand after cleansing his body. But the swelling did not recede and began to spread to another finger until corruption reached his entire hand.
So he called for me to cut off his hand. But I refused that because I hoped the swelling would recede from my treatments. And I also feared death might occur during the amputation of his hand. Because the man's strength was greater than his illness.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his own land. And I heard that he had hastened and cut off his entire hand himself, and was healed.
And I relate this story not for any other reason than to provide help regarding cases of this kind of illness and to indicate a method according to which one should act.
On the treatment of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medications.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of pus, then if it bursts or is opened and the pus comes out from it, leaving behind an empty space like a vessel, and the skin over it becomes thin like worn-out cloth, but does not reach its final corruption nor affect bone, nerve, or ligament, then it deserves to be called a 'sinus', and should not be called a 'fistula'. But if the space extends until corruption affects one of these members, then it is called a 'fistula' or 'zuken'.
Moreover, the treatment is to make an incision in that skin entirely as it has become rolled back, especially when it has become thin and worn like cloth, since you can be confident that it will not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and corruption does not proceed to its ultimate conclusion; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with a clyster, especially considering the sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus emitted from it has a foul odor, then apply a clyster with Egyptian medicine made of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and cinnamon mixed together in a vessel and heated over a fire until the medicine thickens like honey.
Then take some of that which you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and apply it as a clyster to the sinus, and close its opening, allowing the medicine to remain within for two hours.
Then remove it with pressure, doing this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes a clyster is applied with ash water when this medicine is not available. Take the ashes of grapewood or oak wood and throw them on that water. Then mix it, and apply a clyster with it until you are confident that the anus has been cleansed.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then apply a clyster with water and honey mixed with some ground cinnabar. Or apply a clyster with honey and wine mixed together, since honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the anus adhere more closely, especially when there is excess dryness and firmness in the wine.
After doing this repeatedly and being confident that the corruption of the anus has been removed, then apply a clyster with something that promotes flesh growth.
Take some ointment from the plaster called 'Dyafinicon', dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine. Or apply a clyster with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in my treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the anus is too narrow to admit the clyster tube, then dilate it briefly with an iron instrument. Or insert a small linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it widens.
And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then approximate its lips with a suture and allow only as much of the clyster to enter as it can hold without leakage.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then cut it in a lower place so that the pus may flow downwards, because when pus is trapped deep in the anus, it prevents flesh growth.
If it is not possible for you to cut the anus around its lower part as desired, then strive to prepare the member so that the pus may flow out easily according to your preparation. Strive so that nothing of the pus remains within it at all. And take medicines for consolidation which are placed upon the wound, suitable for what you desire. And spread them out on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire wound. Then cut with forceps directly at the opening of the wound, a little larger than the opening of the wound. Then spread one of the soft ointments on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over it at a distance from the wound opening so that the exit of the pus may be relieved: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days once.
But the one over the wound opening is the one you remove at every hour, so that what collects in it from pus may flow out. And know this: whether the discharge flowing from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
And with this, also consider the location of the wound itself: whether its lord feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
When your dressing is thus extended and you see the matter that flows out over the wound opening, then know that the wound has already adhered or approached adhesion. Then loosen it in the morning or on the third day: and when you loose the wound, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if a thin discharge flows out of the wound after a long time, then do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing approaches. For among men there are those who delay the growth of flesh in their wounds, and among them there are those who act contrary to that.
But if undigested pus comes out from the wound after many days, then know that the wound is not adhering.
If the adhesion of the wound is delayed and prolonged, then increase the application of medications. But let them be moist in substance and dry in power, like the ointment diaphoreticum, when an excess of addition from zephyrion is added to it.
And from among the last [steps] in which it is treated, there is that you take the ointment diaphoreticum and dissolve it with rose oil, and then pour over it old wine equal in substance.
Then mix it with this (i.e. the wound) and apply it.
And similarly, when you do not have the ointment diaphoreticum present, honey, when it is cooked until it thickens and then used. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of them together and powder it over the honey while it is on the fire. Then take a linen cloth and wrap it around the wound. Then take the honey that you have cooked until it has thickened, and powder spices over it, and place it on the linen cloth, and wrap him.
And sometimes aristolochia longa, and the roots of blue lily, and it is called lily: and flour of millet, and centaury are administered in this (i.e. the wound). Use them alone or mixed together, grind them and sift them, and powder them over the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
But if the condition of the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that there is corruption in its depths. Or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on other hard members, or ligaments. Then treat it with the cure for fistulas, according to what has been previously mentioned.
Regarding the treatment of panaritium, and the trimming of nails, and the addition of a digit, and its sectioning.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot; and perhaps it arises in the other digits.
When this condition is prolonged and the treatment of it is neglected, and a hot abscess is formed, or it becomes corrupted and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps corruption reaches the bone so that there is a foul odor; and the extremity of the digit becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it with what we have said regarding division and it is not successful, then it is necessary to cut away with an iron tool all the superfluous matter that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very beneficial indeed.
But if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the nail are pressing down on the flesh towards the interior and beginning to pierce it, and wounding it, then you should place a fine radium under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh and push it upwards; and cut into the flesh easily, and put upon what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if corruption has already impressed itself on the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it; for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing in a finger, then cut it at one of its joints, as previously mentioned. Then treat it until it heals.
But if an injury occurs such as attrition or percussion and intense pain results, then you must first perform phlebotomy on the patient. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse incision from above to below as seen.
But take care that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for if it does, you will cause great pain to the patient and promote the growth of new skin tissue at that location.
Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
However, the extra digit that sometimes grows on human hands may be entirely fleshy; it may also have bones and a nail, and its growth may occur at the root of the joint or at one of the joints of the finger. Therefore, the one that grows at a joint of the finger does not move; but the one that grows at the root of the finger may possibly move.
So the one that is fleshy among them is easy to cut off. That is, you should cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
But treating one that has grown at the root of a joint is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
But in the case of one that grows at the tip of a finger, you should first make a circular incision through the flesh down to the bone. Then saw through the bone using an appropriate saw. Then treat it until it heals.
Furthermore, the fusion of fingers with each other occurs frequently either from birth, that is, it appears at birth, or from the healing of wounds, burning by fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, one must separate that fusion until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen threads or cloths soaked in rose oil between them so that they do not fuse together quickly and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the site is healed as it should be.
And similarly, if fusion occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that fusion according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
Chapter on Incision.
Veins are found to be twisted, thick, full of melancholic excesses which occur in many parts of the body, but especially in the legs, particularly in those who travel and work hard, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore you should administer a strong rubbing of the body with black bile medicine.
Then perform a bloodletting on the patient at the elbow vein.
The cure for these is done in two ways using iron. One of them is that they should be cut open and black blood removed. And another way is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The manner of cutting it is as follows. First immerse the leg in warm water for a long time until the thick dirty blood is liquefied. Then tie the patient's leg from above the hip down to below the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one or two or three places with a wide incision.
Then elevate the leg, that is, remove blood from its lower part upwards with your hand until it reaches up to where you have made your first bloodletting incision. Then cut the vein downwards with a scalpel until as much blood comes out as you see is sufficient and as much as the patient can tolerate.
Next, tie off the vein and instruct them to abstain from foods that generate black bile. Repeat evacuation (of blood) and phlebotomy when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
This is how it is raised up. Shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it. Then place the patient in a bath or rub their leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins are filled, or have them exercise vigorously if there is no bath available until the limb is heated.
Then cut the skin along the direct line of the vein's course, either at its end near the knee or at its lower part near the heel.
Then use hooks to open the skin and strip away the vein from all sides until it is visible. When it appears, you will see that it has turned red with a tendency towards blackness. When it comes out of the skin, you will see that it is white like a string.
Then insert a spatula under it until it lifts up and comes out of the skin; then suspend it gently with a hook.
Then cut another incision three fingerbreadths away from the first one. Then strip off the skin from above the vein until it becomes visible. Then lift it up with spatulas as you did before and suspend it with another hook as you did at first.
Then cut another incision or several incisions if necessary. Then lift up the vein and cut it at its last point near the heel.
Then pull out the vein towards the incision above it.
Do this until you have pulled the vein out through the highest incision or all higher incisions, so that it comes out entirely; then cut it.
But if it does not yield to being pulled out and lifted up, then insert a needle with strong thread doubled, tie the vein, and pull it out; or insert a spatula under it and roll your hand around every part until it comes out. And take care that it is not cut. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult to lift up, and harm enters the patient from it.
After you have pulled out the entire vein, then place on the wound a piece of wool dipped in wine and rose oil or oil, and care for it until it heals.
But if the vein is contracted and has twists with coils towards its parts, and is not straight as described before, then you must make incisions along all of its twists and places where it is coiled.
Then suspend it with hooks until you lift it out completely; and be careful not to cut the vein or wound at your incision, for it will be difficult to lift up or pull out. Therefore, be cautious.
The Shape of an Incision that Heals the Vein
Shape of a Blind Hook
It is not curved like other hooks, nor does it have a sharp point that wounds the vein. It is of thick and gentle curvature; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its fineness; indeed, let it be excessively thick as mentioned before.
On the Extraction of the Leg Vein
This vein is produced in legs in hot lands, such as those of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands that have little humidity, i.e., where neither grass nor trees grow.
And perhaps it may also be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation arises from corruption that occurs under the skin, like that which happens within the bodies of serpents and worms called ascarides, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the onset of this event is that severe inflammation occurs in the leg. Then cauterize the location. Then the vein begins to emerge from that cauterized location, like the root of a plant or an animal.
When its extremity appears, then you should wrap a piece of lead weighing between one and two drachmas kilay around it and tie it; then let the lead hang from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it towards the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it. If it extends too far, then cut off its protruding part and wrap the remaining portion with a bandage And do not cut it off at the root before all of it has emerged. For if you cut it off prematurely, it will constrict and burrow into the flesh, causing an abscess, decay at the site, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be handled gently and pulled out gradually until the very end of it emerges, so that none remains inside the body. And from this vein, in some people, five palms or ten spans emerge. And I have heard that in one man twenty palms emerged from it.
If it happens to be cut during your treatment of the patient, then insert a probe into its opening and make a long incision with the probe throughout its body until all its contents are emptied out. Then apply medications to the affected area for several days to prevent decay. Then treat it as you would an abscess.
This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle or on the foot itself; it may have many openings, with a branch emerging from each opening.
Therefore treat it as we described in its division, along with what was previously stated.
On the cutting of worms generated under the skin, which is called 'ox-like illness.'
This illness is called "ox-like illness" in a certain land among us, because it often occurs in oxen; and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it can be perceived during its movement from member to member until it bursts through the skin at some point and emerges.
Its generation comes from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes occur, that is, tapeworms and roundworms in the intestines.
And it is feared because of its harmfulness. Because when it moves through the body and rises up to the head, and reaches that place: then perhaps it opens there and emerges, and destroys the eye; and this happens very often.
Therefore, when you wish to treat him and extract it, then that can only be done during its movement and appearance to the senses.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong binding strap. Then cut above it and extract it.
But if it is buried deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery with fire on that spot until it dies.
And more feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then tie below it with a good bandage on the eyebrow. Then cut above it and extract it.
The sick person should use cleansing of their body with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And they should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter on the Incision for the Condition Called Nakir
This condition is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs and then moves from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen this myself, as I am telling you now. I was summoned to a woman who was ill in some villages. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after remaining there for one hour, I saw a swelling move with a rustling sound like a worm, ascending to her shoulder quickly, just as quicksilver moves from place to place.
Then the pain departed from that spot and became fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat there for another hour, and it ran through the rest of her body until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it revolved throughout her entire body, just as I had seen.
Therefore, I was astonished at the speed with which it moved from limb to limb. And indeed, before that time I had never seen this condition with my own eyes in such a manner. But I have seen many people who experience pain moving from limb to limb, although I had not seen it myself as clearly as I saw it in this woman.
And I do not believe that this condition exists except among those who are from dry-bodied villagers with bare veins. Therefore, it seems clear to me that the wind-like mobility is transferred due to this reason.
And it is necessary that such cases do not appear among those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
When you wish to treat it and the patient feels the pain, then if it is clearly visible to your eye as we have described, then bind above and below it quickly, and cut above it until that wind-like swelling comes out. Then cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it by bodily pressure and with something that expels windiness, and dress it with foul-smelling poultices, made of mummy and the like.
On the Extraction of Arrows
Arrows are differentiated according to their shapes and according to the places on the body where they fall.
And among them there are those which have large points, small points, hollow points, and blunt points. And among them there are also those that have three angles. And among them there are those with tongues. And among them there are those with stars.
Those which fall according to the members of the body are divided into two types. Either they fall into main concave organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. When an arrow falls into any of these organs and the signs of death become apparent to you, which I will tell you about later, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting such an arrow. For death often follows those who attempt it. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply buried within the organ, then extract it and treat the wound.
The signs that an arrow has fallen into the brain are: when it penetrates the bone and emerges through the fontanelle above the brain. Then there occur sudden tremors, blindness in part or all of the eyes, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, reddening of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of the senses, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood may issue from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And a white moisture resembling pus issues from the wound. And a watery discharge like that of flesh comes out from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and withdraw the arrow if it does not exit by itself.
The signs that an arrow has fallen into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and when touched it feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not in something empty. And perhaps there is a movement of the arrow similar to the heartbeat; and black blood flows from the wound. And afterwards there follows coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, and syncope (fainting). Know therefore that death is certainly approaching.
The sign that an arrow has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels in the neck become swollen and discolored. And he expires a great, deep breath; and seeks to draw in cold air.
But if the arrow falls into the pleura, which is within the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there is a great sighing with intense pain, accompanied by groaning; and all the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food will issue from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and becomes fixed there, then some feces or part of an intestine that has already been ruptured will issue from the wound. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor for the removal of the arrow.
But if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out of it, and something stronger also emerges from it, and there is severe pain for the patient, then know that it is mortal.
As for the other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, forearm, back, hip, thigh, and similar parts of the body, they are treated according to various methods when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, nor is the arrow poisoned.
And I tell you what I have seen concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them in your practice.
That is to say, an arrow struck a man in the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. So I removed it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid. The arrow was already hidden, and I only succeeded in extracting a small portion of it with which it adhered to its wooden shaft; it was one of the large arrows used by Turkish archers, with a soft iron point and no feathers.
So the Jew was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab arrow, which has feathers on it. So I tied a bandage over it between two blood vessels, and the arrow had already sunk into his throat. Thus, with careful extraction, I removed it until it came out, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the belly with it; we thought that he would surely die from this wound.
After thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow. I probed for it and extracted it; he was healed and suffered no further harm.
And I saw a man on whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound around it had become inflamed. After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman into whose belly an arrow had struck, and the wound around it became inflamed, but the arrow remained inside her; nothing changed in her condition, and she suffered no harm from it regarding her natural functions.
And I saw another man on whom an arrow struck his face; the wound became inflamed but remained there, causing him little pain. Similar cases to this were many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man among the king's nobles which had struck him on the middle of his nose and slightly deviated to the right side; the entire arrow was hidden.
Therefore, I was called for his treatment three days after he was struck by the arrow. I found that the wound of the arrow had entered deeply.
So I probed for it with a fine probe and did not find it, but he felt the prick and pain under his right ear. I then believed that that point was from the tip of the arrow.
Therefore I applied a plaster with attractive and digestive properties to the place where I believed the arrow had gone astray, expecting that the spot would fester and reveal the sign of the arrow so that I could make an incision over it. But nothing happened in that spot to indicate that the arrow had followed its course.
I applied the plaster assiduously to him for many days, but nothing happened. Meanwhile, the wound became inflamed and the patient remained for some time without the arrow being extracted until one day he felt it within his nose. He told me this.
He told me this. I applied an acute, corrosive medication to that wound for many days until it opened. Then I probed it and felt the tip of the arrowhead sticking out from the wood.
Then I continued to widen the wound with that medication until we could see the tip of the arrow plainly. And it took about four months for this process.
Then after the wound had been widened and I was able to insert forceps into it and move it around without success in making the arrowhead come out, I did not give up but kept refining my methods until one day with well-made forceps (as described later in this chapter), I finally managed to extract it. Then I treated the wound.
Indeed, physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose does not regenerate. So I treated it and the wound healed soundly, and the patient recovered fully without any harm at all.
And I tell you about the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may use it as a guideline for what I have not mentioned.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended in this narrative, nor does this book contain them all. But a prudent craftsman compares little with much, and what is present with what is absent, and finds new operations and instruments among foreign things when they occur in this art.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out from the limbs where they are fixed except by two methods. Either by being drawn out of the place where it entered. Or by moving to the opposite side of the limb.
And that which emerges is either an arrowhead advancing in flesh, or it sticks out: and it is drawn back, and it comes out.
But if it does not obey to come out at the time it falls: then you should leave it alone for a few days, until the flesh around it putsrefies: and its attraction will decrease, and its exit will be made easier.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you to come out then leave it alone also for a few days: and repeat it with traction and movement every day until it comes out.
But if it does not obey you to come out after several days: then you must bore around the arrow in the bone itself from all sides with a fine trepan until the arrowheads are widened. Then draw it and pull it out.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the body and concealed from sensation: then search for it with probes. If you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its traction.
If you cannot get at it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there: then open over it until the wound is widened enough to allow for the extraction of the arrow.
If the ears are injured and they stick to it: then free the attached flesh from all sides with every means you have, using tricks if necessary; so that even if the ears break or twist, they may be freed.
And when you perform the extraction of an arrow, wherever it may be, then use twisting motions with your hand and tweezers on all sides until you make it come out; and carefully, very carefully, so that the arrow does not break and becomes difficult for you to attract and extract.
But if you cannot get at it from one direction, then leave it alone for a few days until what is around it becomes inflamed. Then attempt it again: for the flesh will be softened if there is discharge. But if blood flow opposes you, then apply what was said regarding treatment in its chapter; and protect yourself from cutting into a vein, nerve, or tendon.
And apply every means possible to you for the extraction of the arrow; and do so with ease and calmness, or slowly and firmly, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you draw out the arrow, you should keep the patient in the same position as they were when the arrow entered them. For this is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then do what is feasible according to the figures.
An arrow that exits from the opposite side or has already begun to protrude: or if the tip of the arrow causes a bulge on the skin above it and you see it is prominent: then cut over it, and make the incision according to how much the tweezers can grasp.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easier to remove.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness until the arrow presses upon the bone and expands itself; then pull it out.
And if not: leave it alone for a few days, then try again until it comes out.
But if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then push it in with it.
But if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer a push: then insert a hollow instrument so that its cavity enters into the hollow of the arrow's buttocks; then push it with it.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it with an instrument inserted into it. For it alleviates the pressure of the arrow by doing so.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove all the flesh around it where the poison is, if possible. Then treat it with what is appropriate for that wound.
But if the arrow has fallen into the chest, belly, bladder or side and is close to what you are touching with your tent and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then dress the wound if there is one, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of tweezers used to remove arrows.
Let their ends be like a bird's beak, made of iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many shapes made from them: large and small, medium-sized ones, according to the size of the arrow, its thinness, the width of the wound, and its constriction.
Concave form of the pusher.
And the form of the pusher for a deaf ear.
This is the end of the deaf part like a radius bone so that its entrance into the concave arrowhead may be eased and pushed along with it.
On bloodletting from veins.
The thirty veins commonly used for bloodletting are as follows:
Of these, sixteen are found on the head: two pulsating veins behind the ears called "the two herbs," and two arteries appearing at the temples; two veins in the two lachrymal ducts of the eyes, called "those that look"; one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and one vein at the tip of the nose. And two "veins of the neck" located on the neck. And two veins found in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. These are the veins called "Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, five veins are used for bloodletting in each arm.
One of these is the cephalic vein, which is on the outer side of the arm; it is commonly called the "head vein. And the dark one. And there is the median vein, composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic veins; it is commonly called the "body vein. And the basilica vein, which is situated on the inner side [of the arm]; it is also known as the "tendril-like" vein. And it is commonly called the "vein of the belly. And the vein of the arm is located over the elbow; it is the one where bloodletting is performed, and it appears prominently above the thumb.
And Salvatella: it is a vein that lies between the annular and little fingers and has two branches.
In the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is that which curves under the little toe on the outer side. And the second is the Saphenous vein, and its location is at the heel on the inner side. And the Nessa vein: its location is at the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
Regarding bloodletting of two veins behind the ears
For bloodletting of two veins that are behind the ears: it is beneficial for chronic catarrhs, headaches, coughs, and old sores on the head.
And the manner of performing this bloodletting is as I have described. And it is necessary to shave the patient's head and rub their occupit at the location of the two veins with a rough cloth. Then the patient should bind his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears, at two depressed points on the head. So seek them out with your finger, and where you feel their pulse beneath your fingertip, mark that spot with a hot iron.
Then take the phlebotomist's scalpel, which is called the "Incising. Then insert it under the vein in the skin until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then lift up your hand with the vein and skin towards the top, and make an incision through the vein and skin using the incising cut. And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths, or approximately that amount; and allow as much blood to flow out as you desire.
Then tie it with catgut and leave it alone until it heals.
And at the beginning of this book, incisions and cauterizations are discussed.
Of the two arteries that are beneficial for bloodletting in two seasons: it is useful for an old headache and a bad cough, and frequent inflammation of the eyes, and the flow of abundant tears.
And I will tell you about the appropriate time for bloodletting them. Let the patient tighten their neck tightly until two veins appear visibly and their pulse can be felt under your finger. Then cauterize them with a hot iron.
Next, lift the skin above the vein using your index finger and insert the bloodletting needle underneath, then raise the vein upwards. And cut it like you did with the other two veins, and allow blood to flow out according to your needs.
Then release the pressure on the patient and place your finger over the vein for one hour. Afterwards, apply cotton and catgut over it, tie it tightly from above, and leave it alone until it heals.
And now I have discussed their description, incision, and extraction at the beginning of this book.
The benefit of bloodletting the frontal vein is after a cephalic bloodletting, for old facial ailments, headache, redness, and ugly sores.
And I will tell you about the appropriate time for its bloodletting. Let the patient bind their neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "Fossorium".
Place the protruding point at the top of the Fossorium on the vein and strike it with a flea comb or another tool in this manner: then let blood flow according to your desired quantity. Then tie off the incision of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it opens using a wide phlebotomy blade. However, the phlebotome should not have a pointed end like other phlebotomes, but rather a wide end. And perform the phlebotomy across the turn (of the vein), since the bone is nearby, and perhaps a fine phlebotome might break there.
The benefit of phlebotomy for the two veins that are in both lachrymals of the two eyes is for the relief of itching and redness of the eye, and for conditions of the eye and facial disorders.
And the method of phlebotomy for these veins is for the patient to bind their neck with a bandage. Then perform phlebotomy on them, and you should stand above the patient's head.
And perform phlebotomy across its length a little, using a small, somewhat wide phlebotome, for there is not much flesh in that location. For if the phlebotome has a fine point, it might break.
Then let as much blood flow out as you deem necessary. And apply cotton to them and bind them overnight, then release them.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, and facial disorders such as migraine and especially when there is redness of long duration.
And the method of phlebotomy for these veins is for the patient to bind their neck. Next, hold the patient's nose with your left hand and take a fine, long phlebotome. Insert it into the center of the nostril, between what separates the nose according to its length. For there the vein is not visible to the senses, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you keep your hand with the phlebotome gently pressed for a while, so that blood flows according to your need. Then bind it overnight. For it heals quickly.
But phlebotomy of the veins in the groin is beneficial for treating shortness of breath, leprosy, melancholic illnesses, impetigo and malignant ulcers, and corrosive diseases, that is, herpes and erysipelas.
And the method of phlebotomy for these veins is for the patient to bind under both arms with a bandage and for the practitioner to stand above the patient's head while the patient sits on a seat.
Then make an incision into the vein along its length, using a wide phlebotome briefly. Then draw out as much blood as is appropriate, or according to what you see is necessary for the condition. Then do the same with another vein.
Afterwards, loosen the bandage and bind both veins tightly in the middle to prevent the patient from fainting. And leave it until morning. For the wound will heal.
Chapter on the Phlebotomy of Veins in the Arm. But phlebotomy of the veins in the arm is beneficial for treating throat inflammation, gum disease, malignant ulcers, cracks in the lips, and malignant ulcers that are also found around the nose.
And the method of phlebotomy for these veins is to have the patient sit in front of you and bind their neck with a cloth. Then roll back the patient's lip and look for two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second is on the left; the demonstration of both is by their darkness. And it is true that around them are small, dark veins. Therefore, make an incision on both of them with one cut.
But if you are uncertain and do not know which is which, then turn your attention to the larger of them and make a more conspicuous incision.
And likewise do the same for the two veins that are on the upper lip, and mostly it is customary with this. And cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
## On Phlebotomy of the Sublingual Vein after Bleeding from the Cephalic Veins For the phlebotomy of the two veins that are under the tongue is helpful for those with difficulties in swallowing and throat ailments, and diseases of the mouth.
And the method of phlebotomizing these veins is for the patient to sit between your hands facing the sun, and stick out their tongue; look under the tongue from one side you will see one vein, and from the other side another vein, and the color of both inclines towards darkness.
Therefore, phlebotomize both veins, but be careful not to cut too deep when phlebotomizing them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
There are three veins that are commonly phlebotomized in the elbow.
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a wide myrtle-wood lancet or cutting with an oily blade that tapers to a point, or cutting with a scalpel, which is called Alnesil. This is its form.
And among them are wide and fine kinds according to the size of veins and their constriction. The form of the myrtle-wood lancet is wide, as you see. It is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, visible veins, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
This lancet is of lesser width and more pointed at the tip.
It is suitable for bloodletting fine veins that contain clear, yellowish blood
But among these three veins, the bloodletting of Basiliaca is helpful. Because it draws out blood from diseases that are under the throat and neck, chest, and abdomen. And it is suitable for a bloodletter to use this lancet cautiously, as there is an artery beneath it. If therefore he errs and adds too much pressure with the lancet, he will puncture that artery, and a bleeding will occur. Therefore, it is necessary not to prick it with a lancet but rather to cut it with an Alnesil.
But if Basiliaca does not appear prominently, then you should seek out another vein and exchange it, or find a branch of it. Or use the vein of the arm instead. For indeed Basiliaca is prominent, and cut it with an Alnesil as we have said.
If however you wish to perform bloodletting on the same arm, then it is necessary that before constricting the arm, you touch the place until you recognize the location of the pulse. Then mark the spot with a cautery, afterwards constrict the arm, and cut the vein with a concave-cutting lancet called Alnesil, as we have said. And ensure that no blow falls within the space near the artery.
When you see that as you compress the bandage there is swelling at the spot you marked with the cautery, then this swelling is the swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rising at the phlebotomy like urine from a child, and it is subtle, red blood, then know that it is from arterial blood. Then quickly place your finger on top of it at a distance, then remove your finger. If blood is cut off (for indeed it often happens that blood is cut off), then compress the arm and let it alone; and let the patient refrain from moving it, and beware of frightening him.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
But if blood does not cut off and overpowers you, and there is no medicine ready at hand for you to use at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears visible. For its ends contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of cork and cut it in half; take one half and bind it over the wound with a bandage and lint until the next day.
Then if blood is cut off, that is good. But if not, then treat it with the remedy that preceded this regarding checking blood flow and cutting off bleeding; and its blood is easily cut off in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of bandaging from the arm.
The Dark Vein is beneficial for phlebotomy because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body. This is because it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to avoid it due to fear of injury during its bloodletting, since a nerve lies beneath it. If, therefore, the bloodletter accidentally pierces and strikes a nerve, it will result in paralysis, difficult healing, and perhaps permanent disability.
And this nerve is often visible to sight. But if it is hidden in some people and thin, so as not to be visible, then you should place your bloodletting point with the help of the sinews, avoiding the nerve with caution.
But if the vein is between two nerves, then find it by lengthening the vein.
ยง On the Cephalic Vein. The Cephalic vein is beneficial for bloodletting because it draws blood from the head and relieves ailments of the eyes.
And in this vein specifically, if you wish to perform bloodletting on it with an olive-oil or myrrh oil lancet, because it is the safest of all veins since there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, during bloodletting, you should avoid the bend of the elbow and seek a gentler spot; it does no harm if it is not found with the first strike, but may be repeated upon it several times.
However, sometimes a boil may form in certain people when bloodletting is not performed on the first strike, but this boil does no harm.
ยง On the Benefits of Bloodletting and Precautions to Be Observed During Its Practice. The qualities and effects of bloodletting on which you should meditate for its proper practice.
Firstly, you should know that bloodletting is not performed except for the preservation of health, its maintenance, and careful avoidance of diseases.
And for bloodletting to be done in one of the three veins of the elbow, namely, the cephalic, the dark-colored, and the basilica. And bloodletting should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting, in summer and winter: autumn and winter after meals, when signs of repletion appear.
And bloodletting should be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed.
But bloodletting performed for illnesses does not have a fixed hour; rather it is done whenever it is appropriate and necessary, day or night, at any hour, and at all times.
And children should not be bled until they have reached fourteen years of age. A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should the elderly who have already exceeded sixty years of age be bled.
Therefore, when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces: so that the veins do not draw putrid and harmful impurities from the intestines during bloodletting, which could harm the main limbs.
And a patient should not be bled while they are nauseous or vomiting, drunk, or recovering from drunkenness until that condition has passed. Nor an ill person with dropsy.
And one should beware of bloodletting again after an attack of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, hard work, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, and anything else that weakens the body's strength.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, whether blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines. If it is possible for him.
Then he should enter a bath if nothing prevents him, or engage in some exercise to make the blood more subtle.
And perform bloodletting on him in the chest around the third day, as we have said. And strive so that his chest is emptied that day of all harmful animal accidents such as distress and anger and fear; and of all bodily accidents such as hard work and punishment and excessive sexual activity, and similar things.
And let his bed have present those things with whose use humans have accustomed themselves by reason of their fragrance and pleasant smell and rejoicing, and similar things, according to what is possible.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a stool higher than the stool of bloodletting. Afterwards, he should draw out his arm and rub it twice or three times with his hand. Then tie the bandage with a cord and wrap it around twice.
And let the tightening be moderate. For when tightening is unequal or due to excess in tightening, it hinders the flow of blood; and likewise when it is too slack.
Then after tightening, one should rub the hands of the patient together until the veins swell and become visible to the senses.
Then the phlebotomist should wipe off the bloodletting instrument with a little old olive oil.
Then he should place his left hand's index finger on the vein itself where he wants to perform bloodletting, lightly, so that the vein does not escape and the strike is precise. For there are veins that slip away like a string during bloodletting, and others that are full of windiness. When you place the bloodletter on them, they contract under the bloodletter, and the bloodletter is deceived, so that the bloodletter does not open the vein; if he does open it, it becomes constricted. Therefore, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then he should remove the bloodletter. If the vein opens from one attempt, then that is good. And if not, then repeat it once again in the same spot with caution, or above it hastily, without damaging the location.
But if [the vein] is damaged or the patient becomes frightened, then let him go for a day or two, and do not apply a bandage. For perhaps it would draw out the inflammation. He should not enter a bath.
Then he should repeat bloodletting if desired.
If the opening is small or the blood flows finely and you fear that not enough blood will be drawn, then repeat the bloodlettering in the same hole directly, and add a little to the procedure.
And do this hastily before the location is damaged, for a damaged location during a small operation happens often among many people.
If you see that it has already been damaged, then do not repeat on it at all, for it will not excuse you from anything. Then put some olive oil dregs on it, because they alleviate the flow of blood. And it is better for this location than oil itself and other oils.
And likewise use olive oil dregs in all your bloodletting procedures where veins are opened to control the flow of blood. And these are the practices of Tyrian doctors, Albarracin doctors, and Saguntine doctors when they apply one of them to the location.
For blood is purified and dissolved when it is thick.
But if a large abscess occurs at the site of bloodletting, which happens frequently, especially with someone who is bled only occasionally or has a small vein opening, then quickly apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly: bind it tightly for one hour, as it will dissolve.
And it is necessary that you perform this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
But if there remains in the location after some days a bit of darkness or greenness, it does no harm. And if you wish, apply over it some aloe, or myrrh dissolved, or some juice of mint leaves, that is, pennyroyal or something similar.
Indeed, swellings and elevations often occur at bloodletting sites on the Basilic vein.
So place your hand over it. Then if you find softness at the compression point, then that elevation is bad. Therefore beware of placing on it any of those things we mentioned. For perhaps arterial blood will flow from it.
But make a plaster for it with something that has astringent properties, so that the location may harden. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to remove blood from every person according to their strength's quantity. And what appears from the color that wins over blood.
For if blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red. And likewise if you see it thick: then let it flow out until it thins. And likewise if it is sharp: then let it flow out until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full-blooded, strong, and requires bloodletting to have a large vein opened widely, with the phlebotomist being broad. But for one who is weak, it should be done conversely.
And it is necessary to draw blood from him at intervals, and that the opening be made narrow. And it is better when performing phlebotomy on a vein that the cut be transverse, not punctured.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from blood flow and nerve cutting. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting along width and length.
And for one who usually experiences fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that they consume, before bloodletting, a moderate amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice or cooked spinach. And draw from him blood in three or four intervals.
And if he is of a cold temperament, then let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in mead syrup or honey-sweetened syrup with spices, or fragrant perfumed syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting due to excessive bleeding, then it is necessary for him to drink water of flesh and fragrant syrup. And let him use aromatics with aloe wood and anoint his chest with it. And let him use the remaining remedies mentioned in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
He who wishes to empty his arm and dissolve his blood a second time: for one whose bloodletting is due to excessive evacuation, and whose strength is weak, it is necessary for him to gradually dissolve blood according to the amount of strength in continuous days.
He who wishes to empty his arm and dissolve his blood a second time, if his body is robust, then let him do it after seven hours, or nine from his first bloodletting.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side from which it inclines should have a bloodletting performed on him on the second day, or the third.
In cases where there is an abundance of heated and thickened blood in the body that causes fever, it is necessary to let a considerable amount of blood out at once and continue until syncope occurs. After carefully observing all conditions for bloodletting and placing your hand on the patient's pulse near the course of the blood, ensure that syncope does not lead to death. For this often happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and carelessness occurs.
But when you wish to empty the arm and dissolve blood a second time, it is not necessary to press forcefully on the vein opening after it has already closed, as this will make the exit of blood difficult. Instead, quickly extend the curved hand. For that is very harmful, indeed leave it alone until the second bloodletting.
Or remove with care the clot that has formed from blood at the vein opening and apply a solution of salt in water. And place on it some of theriac of Alfarouch or Sagazena, then apply gentle pressure until the blood flows out.
But if the vein has already become inflamed, leave it alone and do not bind it until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity demands a second bloodletting and there is no excuse for it, then either perform the bloodletting on that same spot or on another vein in the other arm.
The ligature for bloodletting at the elbow is located at the site of the Flexor Carpi Ulnaris and Biceps Brachii tendons, which may not be palpable but are approximated together.
And the quality of bloodletting at this site is such that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the vein becomes prominent and reddened.
Then tie a ligature around it with moderate pressure using a bandage. Then perform the bloodletting slowly across the vein, not lengthwise or breadthwise; make a wide incision and perform the bloodletting slightly above the junction of the hand.
But if the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse your hand again in warm water and allow the blood to run into the water until you have achieved your purpose.
But if it is summer, you may excuse yourself from immersing your hand in warm water. And indeed, the course of blood in warm water is most beneficial during the wintertime.
And bloodletting at this vein is safer than at any other, as there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
But bloodletting at the 'Salvation' vein of the right hand is beneficial for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of bloodletting at this vein is that you should tie a bandage around the wrist with your hand or compress it with your fingers after immersing it in warm water until the vein distends and becomes prominently visible. Then perform the bloodletting across the vein. And if you cut through it entirely, it will do him no harm.
But keep your hand away from the incision while performing the bloodletting. For beneath it lie the naked tendons of the fingers, exposed without flesh.
Then repeat your hand into warm water, and allow blood to flow into it. For if you do not immerse it again in hot water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening and hinder its flow.
Therefore, after drawing out the necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt upon the vein: so that it may not clot quickly.
And similarly you should do with every branch cut.
But the method of bloodletting from his left arm is this: because it relates to diseases of the spleen. And likewise you should do with this one as you did with the second equally.
However, the method of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is suitable for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menses, renal weaknesses, and old ulcers on the hips and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and apply friction to it until the veins swell up, and then tie above the junction of the foot with a bandage. And indeed, the vein is located at the heel, appearing towards the thumb, and many branches spring from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, perform bloodletting upon its larger branch, or at the heel where it converges, for this is better and safer.
But if you perform bloodletting on its surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And perform your bloodletting upon its transverse branch, as if you wish to cut it open, and let the phlebotomist be skillful.
But if the flow of blood is hindered, then immerse his foot again in warm water and allow blood to flow into it until it is emptied.
If the vein for bloodletting is missed on the first attempt, then try again with another bloodletting higher up, as that location is safe and there is no fear of harm if you avoid nerves, as we have said.
And similarly, when bleeding from the saphenous vein of the other leg.
The location of the sciatic veins is, as we have said, at the heel on the inner side.
And bleeding this vein provides relief from ankle pain when it is caused by hot blood.
And the quality of bleeding this vein is such that the patient should enter a bath and hurry; then bind his ankle on the inner side with a long, thin bandage up to above the heel, as this is how it appears.
When the vein becomes visible, then perform bloodletting on it however you can manage, either by transfusion or by making an incision or a cut. For this location is safer, and the vein itself is often hidden.
For this location is safer, and the vein itself is often hidden. But if you do not find it and it does not become apparent at all, then bleed one of its branches that appears on the back of the foot and faces towards the ear; avoid nerves and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then loosen the bandage and place skin over the site of bloodletting, then bind the site. For it heals quickly.
On Winds (i.e., Flatulence) and Its Nature
Wind is produced from horns, air, and glass.
And wind evacuation occurs in two ways. The first way is with scarification and bloodletting; the second is without scarification.
And this wind evacuation that occurs without scarification happens in two ways. 'Or it is done with fire.' 'Or it is done without fire.'
'And there are fourteen locations on the body where ventoses that involve scarification and bloodletting are administered.' 'Of these, one is the "Ventosatio Alnocrati," which is located at the back of the head; another is "Alkehel," which is situated in the middle of the neck; there are also two called "uentosae Alhagdahim," located on both sides of the neck simultaneously; one is found beneath the jawbone, known as "uentosae menti"; two are present at the elbows ("uentosae duarum spatularum"); one is situated at the buttocks ("uentosae Alachosos super finem caudae"); two are found in the middle of both arms ("uentosae duorum focilium"); two more are located on the thighs ("uentosae duorum crurium"); and lastly, two are present at the ankles ("uentosae duarum cauillarum").'
'And indeed, ventosation does not draw blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore no strength is lost from them, unlike the case with bloodletting.' 'Nor is it necessary to apply ventosation with or without fire for any ailments caused by excess until the entire body has been evacuated.'
'However, if ventosation is necessary due to illness or habit, we apply it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and at its middle.'
'This means that among men there are some whose blood increases to such an extent that it needs to be removed through ventosation; they feel heaviness and pain in their head.'
'And among them are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck.' 'And among them are also those who find itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.'
And of these is one who scratches the place of his wound. And among them is one whose laughter is multiplied. And among them is one who finds the taste of blood in their mouth; either the tongue is ulcerated and it spits out blood. And among them is one whose sleep is multiplied. And among them is one who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and slain men, and wounds, and things similar to these.
Therefore, when we see any of these things happening, especially if it occurs on the third day of the month, we then order the cauterization to be done after two or three hours have passed.
The benefit of cauterizing the nape of the neck is this: because it relieves heaviness in the head and what flows down to the eyes. But it must be done after evacuating the entire body.
And this indeed is a cautery instead of cephalic bloodletting.
It is not permitted for one of cold temperament or with catarrh to use it. For it causes him great harm.
And therefore, the elderly and those with cold ailments in their heads should not use it.
However, whoever is assiduous about this, forgetfulness will be generated upon him/her.
And therefore, you should order the cauterizer to withdraw his hand briefly downward from the cautery, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Cauterization or Alkehel is instead of dark bloodletting and basilica bloodletting, and it helps with asthma, shortness of breath, splitting of the windpipe, coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary to briefly apply the cautery Alkehel upwards, because if placed below, it causes weakness of the heart and stomach.
Ventosa treatment, however, benefits pains occurring in the head, and eye afflictions, and migraines, and perforations, and pain in the roots of teeth; it is a substitute for basilica phlebotomy.
And you should instruct the ventosator not to press their hand with the scarifier lest they cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventosa treatment under the chin benefits illnesses in the mouth such as tonsillitis and gingival corruption, and is a substitute for phlebotomy at the two lips.
And ventosa treatment of the palms benefits against rechacham, which occurs from congestion and heat.
But ventosa treatment of the two hollows below the knees benefits more than phlebotomy of three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalic; for it attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh, and these small veins attract from other larger veins until attraction reaches the three veins.
And you should instruct the ventosator not to proceed too far with the scarifier, because the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
And the ventosa applied over the anus benefits against hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And you should instruct the ventosator to use a large glass ventosa and to make it airtight, because the location requires strong suction; otherwise small ventosas might break, and scarify with a large scarifier.
But ventosas applied to the thighs manifestly reduce swelling; for they attract blood from the whole body and benefit ancient pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder; they provoke menstruation and benefit dropsy and apoplexy; and they stand in place of phlebotomy at two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause fainting in many people.
And the benefit of ventosas on alhorcobeni is near to that of two thighs.
The quality of applying ventosas is to place them first empty and suck with moderate suction; and do not prolong the application of ventosas, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place equally; and do not cease to repeat this and continue it until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and the redness of blood appears: then scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider the dispositions of bodies.
For those who are among men with tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary to scarify them once only, no more; so that the place does not ulcerate.
And instruct the ventosity operator to widen the scarification and make it shallow; and let him moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
But if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify him twice. Indeed, the first opening makes way for the subtlety of blood and its watering; and the second for careful examination and extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very foul, then let there be a third scarification to reach the ultimate.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually or briefly, one scarification suffices us. But if we want to extract much blood, let there be many scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a deep scarification; and the equal limit of scarification is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils in the case of windy conditions, and what one should guard against when treating wind.
Indeed, in the case of someone whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and has closed pores, it is necessary to apply oils that are penetrating, soothing, and dissolvent to areas affected by wind. If it is during the summer time, such as oil of alkanet root, or violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil should be used.
And if it is during the winter time, then narcisus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or cypress oil should be used: and those similar to them.
If the excess is thick and cold, then bitter almond oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or white poppy seed oil, or castor oil should be used: and those similar to them.
If the one to be treated has large pores and soft flesh, then it is necessary to forbid them from using oil, and it is necessary that they rinse the affected areas after treatment with rose water, or cold water, or sunflower water, or cucumber water, or purslane water: and those similar to them.
He whose blood is of great moisture should rinse windy areas with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumac: and those similar to them.
He whose excesses are thick should rinse his windy areas with old wine, or sampsuch water, or a decoction of castor beans, or chamomile: and those similar to them.
It is necessary to avoid treatment during a bath, or the trace of a bath, indeed it is necessary that treatment be administered after exiting the bath for one hour, or two hours.
And one should not sleep after treatment.
What is the appropriate regimen for a patient who needs cupping or bloodletting before treatment?
And afterwards you should first consider whether the patient has been cupped or bled and is of a choleric temperament. If so, there will be sharpness and inflammation in their blood. Therefore they should take cooling remedies such as pomegranate rind, and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and saffron, and juice of cucumber: and similar remedies.
And let their food be light and avoid the flesh of geese or chickens, and condiments with salt: and similarly.
And if the patient's complexion is cold, they should take in drink honey syrup or almond syrup, or saffron made from seeds. They should also drink medium aged fragrant wine, and they should be ordered to eat sparingly. And let their food be light, and hares, and small birds, such as pigeon chicks.
And it is necessary that the intake of drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting be greater than food. And it is necessary to give in drink to certain people opium mixed with aloe, or musk, or saffron before cupping or bloodletting, or afterwards, so that the principal members may be strengthened and the blood may be purified. And they should not take it as a hot drink.
On Cupping Without Scarification. Cupping performed without scarification involves placing cups on the liver, spleen, gouty area, abdomen, navel, kidneys, and bladder since these parts do not permit scarification.
And their use is sought only for attracting blood from one limb to another, such as placing a cupping vessel on the breasts during nosebleed. Thus we use them to dissolve cold and moist congestion in the member by placing the cupping vessel on the abdomen or navel. It does so by cooling down the member, warming it up, and removing pain because it dissolves that moisture.
Similarly, it is placed on the kidneys when there is accumulation or stone formation in them. By its power of attraction, perhaps it opens up accumulations or removes stones from their place.
And similarly, when placed on the liver and spleen for removing congestion from both of them.
These cupping vessels are administered empty with merely an incision. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
Sometimes they are administered full of warm water for pleurisy conditions; and this is done by filling the cupping vessel with only hot water or water boiled with suitable herbs.
Procedure for applying a cupping vessel with fire:
The mouth of the vessel should be two fingerbreadths wide, as we have made it; and its depth should be half the length of the palm. And on one side of it, around mid-height, there should be a small hole just large enough for a needle to enter. It should be made from pure copper or glass, with thick, smooth, equal, and polished edges so that it does not injure the limb when placed upon it. In its center, there should be a crossbar of copper or iron where the candle with fire is placed.
And now make this cupping vessel large, larger than the one previously described, and somewhat smaller depending on the condition and age of the person using it.
The cups for children and those who are thin are different from those for men and those with large bodies.
The proper way to place this cupping vessel with fire on the limb is to light a wick of clean linen or a small wax candle and place it on the crossbeam in the middle of the cup, so that the fire is around the lower part of the cup without burning the patient's body.
Then place it on the limb and hold your finger over the hole I mentioned until you feel a vacuum being created. When you need to, remove your finger and steam will escape through that hole, releasing the suction immediately.
Then relight the wick in its usual manner, and repeat this process as many times as you wish.
But the cupping vessel used for pleurisy with water does not have a crossbeam or a hole. It is only placed on the limb when it is filled with water.
And this is its shape:
The larger this cupping vessel is to hold more water, the better it is.
Chapter on Bloodletting Suspensions.
Bloodletting is used in many cases where it is not possible to apply cupping vessels due to the small size of those parts, such as the lips and gums. Or on bare flesh without skin, like fingers and noses.
The quality of using them is to take the leeches from clean, sweet waters, free from decay.
Then let them be kept for a day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, with nothing left in their bellies. Then the body should first be evacuated through bloodletting and cupping. Next, wash the limb of the sick until it becomes red. Afterwards, place them on top of it.
When they are filled and fall out, if suction of the spot with cupping is possible, then it is most beneficial for healing: but if not, then wash the spot with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and squeeze it out.
If the flow of blood continues after the removal of sanguessuga, and this is to be drained off: then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the drainage ceases.
If blood increases abundantly, then sprinkle over it powder of ground zed, or nuts, and other similar styptics until the bleeding stops.
Or place on the spot half a dozen peeled beans and leave them until they stick to the spot, for blood will stop.
And if repetition of sanguessuga is necessary, it should be done when possible, changing them.
But if sanguessuga are prohibited due to suspension, then wash the spot with fresh blood. Or stick needles into the spots until some blood comes out. Then place them, for they themselves adhere immediately when they sense some blood.
So when you wish for them to fall off, sprinkle over them some ground aloe, or salt, or ash and they will fall off immediately.
This chapter is also very necessary many times in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones.
Know this, O sons, that many foolish physicians and laymen boast about this chapter, having never seen the ancient books nor read even a letter from them.
And for this reason, this method is unknown among our learned people in this land. But I never encountered anything good in it at all, and I obtained nothing from it except through diligent reading of ancient books and careful study of their contents, until I extracted this knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and study for the length of my life.
And now I have described to you from that everything which contains my knowledge on this chapter; and regarding what has preceded my experiment, after abbreviating it for you and relieving it from the burden of lengthening, and abbreviating it again at the end of abbreviation, and displaying it at the end of declination, I have formed many shapes from the forms of instruments used in it, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter 2.
It is necessary that we say at the beginning of this chapter summaries of speech and headings, to whose understanding the craftsman is compelled above all else to stand firm on their truth: namely, so that you and those who are eager may know or learn this noble art from you.
I say therefore that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion occurs to someone, then it is necessary first of all to hurry to phlebotomize them and loosen them, or both at the same time: unless something prohibits this, such as weakness of strength; or if the person who has experienced this is either a child or an elderly decrepit one; or if the time is one of intense heat or extreme cold.
Then let them be satisfied with cold vegetables and poultry meat; avoid heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from bleeding and no longer fear the escape of material to the limb, then let the patient return to their former diet as they were accustomed.
When the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary for the patient to eat nutrient-rich foods that are thick and heavy with viscosity, such as porridge made from cooked wheat flour with water, and rice, and heads and feet of cattle, and entrails of sheep, and eggs, and fresh fish, and dense wine, and similar things. This regimen causes the fracture to coagulate more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones in elderly men and the decrepit do not always adhere and consolidate according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs. However, those which are consolidated and adhered at the end of growth are like the bones of young children.
However, nature adheres something similar to glue around the broken bone on all sides, which is thick and sticky, so that it adheres and binds until they are glued together and bound until they reach full strength and firmness as they were originally, unless something prevents this. Therefore, it is necessary to provide nutrient-rich foods for the patient's diet that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Know that fractures have different forms according to the diversity of limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from one of the backbone; and similarly all other limbs are diverse from each other. And I come with a reminder of every kind of fracture set forth in its own chapter distinguished from others. And kinds of bone fractures are also differentiated within themselves.
For it becomes fractured in an arch-like manner, except that stars [small fragments] may also occur therein. And sometimes it becomes fractured along the length of the bone: and its fractures are jagged, that is, star-shaped [irregular], with projections resembling those found in a reed when it is prepared for writing. And not projecting: and there is fracture with wounding and dislocation at the head, and there is fracture that is a small crack.
And for each kind there is an aptitude or appropriate tool for its restoration, as will come to mind, set forth in their proper places.
And from that which indicates a bone fracture is its crookedness and prominence, and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when pressed by your hand.
Therefore, when there is no apparent crookedness, nor sound upon touching the bone with movement, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture in that place. Indeed, it is possible for there to be a small crookedness or crack. Therefore, do not move it with your hand and compression at all, but rather apply medicines of which there is remembrance, suited to the place, afterward bind it with a fine bandage.
And know that when the place becomes curved and splits into two, beyond the swelling that occurs there, still all parts are removed from their comparison. Then it is necessary for you to begin from your own hour for its rectification, leveling it before an inflamed boil appears.
But if an inflamed boil appears on him, then let it be for a few days until the boil quiets down. Then level it according to whatever method is possible with gentleness and skill.
And know that its restoration and leveling are easier than those of bone where swellings occur.
Then bind it according to what comes to your memory about it.
If however there are swellings in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both sides if it is a hand or foot. Or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
And let the position where you place the limb be equal to its natural shape until when the broken parts of the limb are extended. Then try to return these additions with all skill and according to whatever method you can in their places: and beware according to your strength that no pain or injury comes upon the patient through your operation, and try according to your strength to apply one of two bones with its partner according to better forms.
And at that hour, it is necessary for you to test and touch it with your hand. If therefore thou seest anything different there, correct it, and make it even by the quantity of thy virtue.
And beware of violent stretching and strong compressing, as many foolish ones do. For oftentimes they cause by their operation an hot swelling or a contraction in the member; as we have seen it happen oftentimes from their operations.
Then apply after the equating and appropriate operation, and straitening of that member, rest and tranquility, and instruct the patient concerning it. And let him take care not to move it during his watchings and sleep, at his turning himself, tossing about, going out, and all his movements with all his might. And that he should avoid such a position of the member as may be followed by pain. This means that whenever he feels pain or injury from a certain position of the member, then it is necessary to change it to another position where he does not feel pain.
And beware with him that his position be equal and straight, so that there may not happen to the member crookedness when it is restored.
And the degree of straitening the broken limb should be, as I have described.
Know that fractured limbs differ in their weakness and size and shape.
Therefore those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, etc., should be bound with soft, thin cloth. But those that are large, such as the thigh and leg, should have a broad, hard binding applied to them.
For a wide band binds large limbs evenly and tightly on all sides, so that no wrinkle enters it.
Then, after your equating, begin to apply an appropriate plaster on soft wool over the place of the fracture. Then begin wrapping the bandage around the place of the fracture itself with three wraps, or four, depending on what the limb deserves: and press your hand briefly with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of fracture, and tie less tightly than you had previously tied the fractured area. Then extend yourself with the wrapping from the place of fracture briefly, and gradually loosen the tightening until you reach a healthy part.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the place of fracture with wraps. Afterwards go with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And your operation should be in tightening and loosening of the wrapping, as we said in the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings soft wool or cloth with which to equalize the crookedness of the fracture if there is any crookedness; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another bandage over it. Afterwards immediately apply splints appropriately made if there is no swelling or hot abscess at the place.
But if there is swelling or an abscess at the place: then apply over it what sits upon that abscess and removes the swelling: and leave it for several days. Then tie over it splints.
And the splints should be from the halves of a wide reed, planed and wisely formed; or they should be made of wood from which cribs are made, such as those made of pine, or gerad, that is, branches of palm tree, or calinghi: and the width of all the splints should be according to this shape and form.
However, it is necessary that the splint which is placed over the very fracture itself be thicker and wider for a short distance than the other splints; and the length of the splint should be according to what is permitted by the limb from its size and thickness.
Then bind over the splints with another bandage in the same manner as the first binding. Then bind firmly from above with threads, as we have said concerning binding; and the binding should be tighter over the place of the fracture itself; and the further it is elongated from the fracture, the lighter the binding.
It is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and that they be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operations of foolish people who put their threads together from twisted linen chords, it is a great mistake; because the binding falls off with them beyond its nature.
And fine threads again are not suitable; because you will not achieve through binding what you desire with them.
It is not necessary that there be less than a finger's breadth between splint and splint.
But if the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints after binding on healthy places, then place underneath them soft tow or dyed wool until nothing hurts him from it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and a disruption occurs in the skin, I will come back to it with a reminder in the second chapter according to its particularity.
And know that not every broken limb should be bound with splints from the first day. This is because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place splints on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of a hot inflammation.
And this is the method of poultices with which the ancients restored [fractures and dislocations] that are placed upon them.
The common method of the abbreviated poultice that restores fractures, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children, because it is from something that neither heat nor cold prevails.
And you should take from the flour dust, which is the bran that hangs on the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone; and prepare it as it is, except that you sift it with egg white; and make its consistency not too thick nor too thin. Then use it.
Another method of poultice for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists. Take aloe, myrrh, acacia, enula, and mugwort; their juice mixed equally, along with myrrh ส X, and both types of aloes ส V each. Grind all together, sift, and mix with alethil water: or with egg white if the patient's constitution is hot. Then apply this poultice. For it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, beneficial for many people.
Another method of poultice that is also beneficial for fractures and twists. Take mugwort, mess [marshmallow], and white mallow equally ส X each, along with myrrh ส X, both types of aloes ส V each, acacia ส VI, and bole armoniacum ส XX. Grind all well and sift, then mix with water or egg white; apply.
Method for poultices on joints and bones displaced from their places, to alleviate pain and heal separation of bone and fracture. Soak wool in vinegar and boiled oil, then apply it to the location.
But this poultice has no power to restore [the bone], but it is good for soothing inflammation from heat and expelling pain specifically.
Method of a poultice that restores broken bones. Take leaves of figs and leaves of wild poppies; grind all together and make a poultice from both.
Method of a short poultice for the restoration of a bone fracture; and when you wish to dissolve remaining pus. Take equal parts of aloe root, camomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour; grind all together and mix with wine if the limb is not already warm.
But if it is already warm, then mix it with moistened coriander water or with plain water and use it.
Another method of a stronger poultice for the dissolution of hard abscesses during limb restoration. Take equal parts of aloe root, linseed, balm, mullein, sesame seeds, violet flowers, and camomile; grind all together and mix with willow water, sweet water, or wine. According to the warmth of the limb and its calm heat.
Hippocrates said in his book that nothing should be applied to a broken limb during its restoration except for a cerate made from wax and oil; not anything else. And he described it as being of moderate thickness.
But Galen thought that substances which have a drying effect on heat, such as myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, should be applied to a broken limb during its restoration, along with those we mentioned earlier.
Method of a poultice that helps heal wounds and alleviate pain. Take equal parts of myrrh, chickpeas, human hair clippings or bird feathers, aloe, and salt; grind and sieve them together to make a poultice.
The amount should be such that it remains on the bandage; then dissolve it if there is no pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its place. Do not dissolve it for many days. But if there is severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the place [of the dressing], then promptly dissolve it within an hour and remove the plaster. Then take a soft cloth or soft marine sponge, wet it with warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
But if there is severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the place [of the dressing], then promptly dissolve it within an hour and remove the plaster. Then take a soft cloth or soft marine sponge, wet it with warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place over it a pad soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil; tie it on overnight until you are assured that there is no more heat [from the wound] and the swelling of the limb has subsided and its pain has gone away.
Then repeat the dressing for a narrow bandage and a small plaster; do not tighten it with your first binding too much, and use fine ones until it heals.
If you see that the inflammation, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have completely subsided, and there is a need for a plaster and bandage, then repeat the procedure as you did at first evenly.
But if none of the things we have mentioned happen to the limb, then do not dissolve it unless after three, four, five, or seven days. And when it has been left for twenty days according to what you see from the release of the limb as we have said, until when the fracture adheres and the flesh coagulation approaches over it, then also increase the binding more than your first one entirely. Also add more to the thickness of the patient's food according to what was previously mentioned.
But if you see that the place of the fracture has become dry and thinned more than it should, then know that nutrition is being prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, apply it with warm water at every spot where you dissolve it, and let it remain there for all three days to slightly tighten the strapping.
By this operation, nutrition runs to the limb and healing is quickened.
But what those foolish restorers of fractures do instead of another, when it does not restore first as it should and restores crookedly, is an error from their operation and a great cause for fear: if it were right, the ancients would have said so in their books and worked with it.
And I did not find any trace of theirs at all in that matter, and it is better that it should not be done.
Chapter on Head Injuries
There are various kinds of fractures and many forms; their causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from being struck with a sword: the blow removes the bone all the way until it reaches the spongy tissue beneath the bone, just as an axe does to wood. And because of this, this kind of fracture is called "Axial.
Or the sword strikes something of the bone and cuts its surface but does not penetrate all the way to its end. This kind of fracture is called "Kalaan," which means "simple cut.
And there are two kinds of wounds: one with two fractures, either large or small.
There is also a fracture that is crushing or grinding; its cause is being struck by a stone, falling onto stones, or something similar.
And this fracture can also be penetrating, approaching the periosteum beneath the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone. This kind of fracture is also one of the two kinds of wounds that can be either small or large.
Also from fracture is one that is hidden within the bone like a hair's breadth, and it is called capillary fissure due to its smallness.
And among these is a fracture that occurs by accident or from being struck by stones and similar objects which cause a splinter of bone to penetrate into the interior, resulting in a cavity like that seen in hollow bronze vessels when they are struck.
This most commonly happens in the heads of moist bones such as those of children.
And all these kinds of fractures have their treatments separately described, and I shall come to each one in its proper place with a reminder.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures by detecting them through touch and examination using probes, and by removing the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The capillary species is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone and cleaned off, and rubbed with cautery; for the fracture appears black.
But in treating a fracture, first consider the condition of the patient. Then if you see from these symptoms that there is a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting, convulsions, loss of consciousness, loss of speech, syncope, acute fever, protrusion of the eyes, redness of the eyes, and similar accidents in many ways, by all means do not attempt to treat it. But if you see no fearful symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin treatment.
This is, if a wounded person comes to you at first when he is wounded, especially during the winter season, then it is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it occurs during the summer days, then you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before corruption sets in under the bone from pus, and those accidents which we have mentioned happen.
If a bone fracture has already reached the cerebral meninges and is accompanied by fragments, contusion, and displacement, then it is necessary that you cut into the comminuted and crushed portion according to what I tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person and clean around the bone according to whatever way is possible for you, and according to the shape of the wound and what is light for the patient.
If during the exposure of the bone there occurs a flow of blood or a hot abscess, then apply to it what is necessary. And you should fill the space with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil. Then allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides, and be secure from blood flow. Then begin the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is that you cut the bone with an incising knife having a narrow point; and this is its shape:
Then use another, broader incising knife for a short while; and this is its shape:
Then use yet another, even broader incising knife.
The second method is that you have a set of various incising knives at hand, some of which are broader than others, and some of which are shorter than others. Their tips should be very sharp, and they should be made of soft iron or steel. Use them with ease in striking the incising knife so that it does not shake its head and harm itself.
If the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before using the incising knife with trephines called 'Terebras', which do not penetrate deeply. They are not so named because they do not pass through the thickness of the bone to the other side.
And you should have many of these trephines on hand, each suited to the thickness of the bone, so that you have one for every skull. The sharp end of each trephine should be of a length and width suitable to the thickness of that particular skull.
This is the form of three types of trephines or trepans.
The quality of drilling around a broken bone is to place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then move the trephine to another location and place what is between all the holes equal in thickness to the radius or approximately that.
Then incise with the knives what is between all the holes from the bone and make it as thin as possible at its end of fineness, as we have said, until you remove the bone by hand or with some other tool prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers or fine forceps.
And you must take every precaution to ensure that the trephine or knife does not touch any of the sinuses.
Once you have surrounded the bone with your trephine and separated it from the sinuses, if it is continuous with the bone, and you have extracted it, then you should shave off and level its remaining end on the bone with another similar instrument. But it must be thin and sharp, more so than other knives.
If there remains any small bone fragments or splinters, then you should remove them gently with the appropriate instruments that you have. Then dress the wound afterwards with bandages and ointments as we said.
And there is another method of operation that is easy and far from causing fear, which Galen also described and praised highly, namely this. First of all, it is necessary for you to begin uncovering that portion of the bone from the place where the fracture appears most severe and obvious until, when you have uncovered that part, you place under it the pointed end of this trephine, which has this shape:
And the round end gently does not cut anything, but its pointed part on both sides extends lengthwise like this: so that the round end leans against the bone with its sharp face incident upon it.
Then strike the trephine on one side with a small hammer until you have cut through the bone easily as it turns; and be careful not to strike so hard that something happens which you would fear greatly.
But if the surgeon were not more foolish than other people and ignorant of this matter, and not asleep, then if there remained any attached bone fragments from the bandages in certain places, he would cut them off with the round end of the trephine itself and easily free it. For it is freed from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the periosteum and what is cut off from the bone is its outer surface, and there remain on it rough edges and sharp splinters: then you should shave off that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you may be able to use the most suitable and appropriate ones according to what the operation demands and the shape of the fractured bone. You should first shave the bone broadly with a wide razor. Then use a finer one afterwards.
You should first shave the bone broadly with a wide razor. Then use a finer one afterwards. And continue doing this until you reach the point of using the finest and sharpest among them.
In each small capillary fracture or fine breakage, you should provide care according to what leads to its proper correction.
But there is one thing that cannot be concealed from anyone who studies this art and has stood on what we have written and demonstrated concerning large fractures.
But if the periosteum is exposed and retained when you remove the bone, then take a linen cloth of appropriate size, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound opening. Next, take another cloth doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Then do this as easily as you can so that the bandage is not too heavy.
Then apply a wide bandage on top of it and do not bind it too tightly, except to the extent that it holds the wound. Leave it like this for one or two days until you are secure against heat inflammation. Then remove it and apply afterwards medications that have a surplus of dryness, such as lily roots, barley flour, frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and others like them. And make from these medicines a powder which is dusted onto the wound like dried substances.
And generally apply to it every medication that has the property of cleaning and not biting [the wound]. And take care, according to your ability, that the wound is clean during its healing process, neither having dirtiness of ointment nor filth.
And take care, according to your ability, that the wound is clean during its healing process, neither having dirtiness of ointment nor filth. And do not allow pus to accumulate at all, for when pus collects on the cerebral membrane, it corrupts and decays it, and afterwards great evils occur to the patient. And indeed, this happens especially when the bone is cleaned from its wound, particularly if care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, if the accidents we have spoken of happen to the patient, know that it is certainly harmful.
But if blackness does not occur except from the medication that is placed upon it, and it is by virtue of this medication that causes this blackening: then take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and mix them with a linen cloth. Then place it upon the wound; afterwards care for it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that only the upper two parts of the nose are broken simultaneously or one at a time, because it has two bones. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break; rather, it can only be rubbed, twisted, or dislocated.
If one of the two parts is broken, then insert your little finger into the nostril and gently bring that fracture back into place with your index finger from inside and your thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. This should be done skillfully and easily. And see to it that you do not cause pain to the patient during your procedure.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you cannot reach it with your finger, then use the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
If the fracture is on both sides, then make an identical mold and hurry to fix it with restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible. And if not, then on the seventh or tenth day, once the swelling from the heat of inflammation has subsided.
Then insert a linen wick at the end of the nose if the fracture is on one side, or two wicks if it is on both sides, and ensure that the thickness of the wick fills the nostril.
And some ancient restorers said to soak the wicks in butter and change them every day. But I do not consider this necessary, instead it is better to soak the wick in egg white mixed with flour dough. Then leave the wick until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage solidifies.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the wick, after it has been wrapped in soft cloth. This method holds the nasal fracture more firmly and does not hinder the patient's breathing.
This procedure is not necessary. If you wish, do this: if you wish, use wicks.
But if inflammation occurs again while treating the fracture, apply a plaster to the nose with wax, or fat infused in rose oil, or a little diacathus.
But if inflammation does not occur, then apply plasters made with sesame flour, powdered incense mixed with egg white. Then place soft lint on it and do not bind the nose at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken in small pieces or shattered, then you should cut above them and remove them with appropriate instruments. Then suture the wound and care for it until it heals using plasters or ointments suitable for that purpose.
But if a wound occurs between the nostrils, then you should dress it with linen cloths and insert a lead cannula until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
If the lower jaw is fractured and there is no wound: observe if it is broken only on the outside and not split into two parts facing inward. Its recognition will then be easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left hand's index finger into the patient's mouth. Likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, insert your right hand's index finger and push the convexity of the fracture from inside to outside with ease using your other hand placed on the inner part of the bone, thereby aligning it properly.
But if the fracture of the jawbone has already separated into two parts, then you should apply traction from both sides according to its straightness until it can be aligned.
If, however, the teeth have already been shaken loose or dislodged: then tie those that you expect to remain with gold, silver, or silk thread. Then place a splint on the fractured jawbone. Then place over it a doubled cloth and then place over the cloth a well-made large bandage or an equal piece of sole leather cut to the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it from above according to how you prepare the bandage and let its application remain until it is not disturbed. And order the patient to rest quietly and provide them with soft foods.
But if you think that something has altered its shape in one of several ways, then hurry and remove it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it and apply a plaster made of powdered barley with egg-white or sesame flour after you have removed the caustic agent. And place soft wool over the plaster.
Therefore while that plaster remains attached to it and the bone's position is not altered, leave it undisturbed until it heals, or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened over a period of three weeks.
But if a hot swelling occurs during this time, then administer the remedy that we have mentioned several times for its suppression until the swelling subsides.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider. For if now a fragment separates from the bone or from the periosteum, then be careful to remove those fragments of periosteum with what you think is suitable for their removal using instruments.
But if the wound's opening is constricted, then dilate it with a scalpel according to your judgment of what is necessary.
Then when you have removed the periosteum and nothing remains of it, whether then the wound's opening is large or not, place over it one of the plasters suitable for that purpose which promotes healing until it heals.
On the restoration of the jawbone when it breaks.
The jawbone is most often broken on its anterior part near the humerus and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Either it breaks and separates into two pieces without any displacement or overlap; this is easier to repair.
Or else [it happens] with displacement at the bone joints; this makes restoration more difficult.
Or else there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And the operation when there is a fracture without a wound is as follows: Ensure that two assistants are present, one to hold the broken jawbone in place and the other to extend the neck towards the affected side.
Then gently bring the fracture together with your fingers until it is properly aligned and there is neither prominence nor depression.
But if you need further extension, then place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's chin, sized according to your needs. Then extend and elevate the jawbone while compressing the ball with your hand until the fracture is properly aligned.
If you cannot draw the end of the jawbone outwards because it has reached too far back, then have the patient lie on their back and place a folded cloth under their shoulder. Have an assistant press down on their shoulder until the bone that is recessed elevates upwards, then align and gently bring together the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel a sliver of bone stuck in the jawbone and it moves around, then it is necessary to locate it and remove it carefully.
If it is embedded in the bone, then make an incision over it using one of the blades you prepared for this purpose. After placing a retainer under the jawbone to keep it steady, which can be made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles an ear-spoon without a hollow.
And its width should be equal to the size of the bone and its thickness that you need for this purpose. However, its length should also be as long as possible for the procedure.
And it should have two ends, one wide and the other narrow, as you see:
But if the wound you made when extracting the bone fragment is large and there is excessive bleeding, then cauterize with a hot iron. Afterwards, join both lips of the wound together with stitches.
If the disruption is small, you may not cauterize. Then fill the wound with bandages and lint according to the size of the wound's cut.
But if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
However, if the bone fracture occurs without wound or cut, then place over the bone a plaster made from ground flour and egg white. And place a soft linen cloth on top of it. Then place a small roller under his armpit if necessary. Next, take the 'himenema', which is a long round piece that the Saracens use, with a width of one palm or approximately that. Then place a doubled layer of lint over the linen cloth and plaster. Then take a star-shaped piece from thin wood, with a width of three fingers and a length likewise. And wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the star shape over the place where the 'himenema' rests on the fracture. Then place the 'himenema' over the fracture as described above. Wrap it around his neck and both shoulders, healthy and injured, so that the splint holds the fracture properly without any part being hidden from your view or moving. And for this reason, you should examine the patient every day. Therefore, whenever the swelling is softened and you see that the inflammation has subsided: then straighten it, and bind the ligament.
Then place the patient's sleep on their back, and put a small pillow under their head during the night so that help may be raised from their side. Thus, elevate the fracture of the elbow joint by raising the arm.
Or bind his arm to his neck; and do not release the bandage unless it happens incidentally due to itching or gangrene for up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see that its face has adhered to it. And increase the bandage, and let him go until he is restored and coagulation occurs.
Indeed, a fracture of the elbow joint is usually bound and strengthened for 28 days. However, it sometimes happens more quickly in certain individuals.
Chapter on the Reduction of Fractures of the Scapula
The scapula is rarely fractured, and when it is, only its edges are broken.
When a fracture occurs there and it breaks in the middle of it, and is not apparent except by touch: then prepare its reduction according to the shape of the fracture. And reduce it onto its natural figure with every possible effort that you have.
Then place over the location powder of millstone with egg white, and soft cotton, and put over it a pad made from doubled cloth. Then place over it a wide splint made of thin wood according to the size of the entire scapula, or somewhat larger than it.
But if there is a concavity under the splint in any part of the scapula, then fill it with soft cotton until the splint lies evenly.
Then bind it tightly from above with linen bandages with appropriate tension and firmness of the splint so that it does not move from its place.
And observe the bandage every day. Therefore, whenever the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again and reposition the splint if it has moved from its place; and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
The spatula (splint) is renewed every twenty or twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then untie the bandage; and you shall be safe. For it (the bone) is one of those whose fracture is not feared nor does its separation cause concern.
But if a splinter proceeds from the bone and pierces under the skin, then cut over it and remove it. And do what we have said regarding the fracture of the forked bone from the evacuation of a hot abscess, if anything should happen to it.
On the restoration of a broken breastbone.
The breastbone is sometimes fractured in its middle, but this happens rarely. Its extremities are most often broken and crushed due to accidents involving it.
When its middle is fractured and sinks downwards, causing severe pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and possibly vomiting blood, with the concavity of the broken bone being evident to the touch; the restoration of it is for the patient to be placed on their back, and place a pillow between their shoulders.
Then press on their shoulders and bring together the ribs from both sides with your hands, carefully aligning them according to any possible way that is suitable until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place on it an emplaster and bandages, and put over it a splint made from thin boards of willow or linden wood, or similar materials that are lightweight, wrapped in cloth. Then bind it tightly over the broken bone so that it does not move, winding it several times around to the back and tying it with appropriate tension.
Then examine the bandage at every hour and whenever it loosens, tighten it. And if necessity requires its removal due to itching or corrosion occurring in the area, or pain, or abscess: then promptly remove it, remove the poultice, and correct what has happened according to the manner of treatment.
Then apply a new poultice if necessary, and attach a fresh bandage until it heals.
On the Reduction of Broken Ribs.
Know that rib fractures only occur at thick points near the back and from the ends of them on the front side. And they do not get rubbed against unless because they are cartilaginous. And its recognition is not concealed to the touch during examination with fingers.
And its reduction is done thus: align the fracture evenly using your fingers in whatever way is possible until the shape is even as it should be. Then apply a poultice and secure the broken bone with splints if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is depressed inwards: then severe pain and puncture-like pain occurs for the patient, like that which happens to someone who has pleurisy. This is because the bone pierces the pleura, and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood also occur. This is difficult to treat.
And the ancients have devised many methods for this, and among them are those who say that you should place food for the patient that generates heat and swelling, so that the belly becomes inflamed, extended, and presses the fracture outwards.
But we reject this, lest it quickly cause a hot abscess if it does not occur naturally. But if it has already occurred, then apply [the treatment].
And some among them said: place a cupping glass on the location, then suck it out forcibly, and it resembles reasoning. However, it is feared that the cupping glass might draw superfluities to the place due to the condition of weakness.
And some among them said: it is necessary to cover the place with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil; and they should place cotton between the ribs until it is filled up, so that the bandage may be equal when wound around according to its roundness.
Then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medication.
But if the pain is too severe for the patient to tolerate and they are being pierced by the sharp veil-like pricking of the bone, and we fear for the patient, then it is necessary to cut open over the place and expose the broken rib. Then place upon it the instrument that maintains the sifak's wound, the memory of which has been mentioned earlier; and cut through the bone easily, and cut into it.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitches; and treat it with poultices until it heals.
But if a hot abscess occurs in the meantime, then quickly, pour cotton soaked in rose oil onto the place and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an abscess.
Meanwhile, let them lie on the side where they are sleeping until it heals.
[Chapter] On the restoration of fractures of the dorsal and cervical vertebrae.
Indeed, fracture occurs in the bones of the neck sometimes, and rarely do they become worn down; likewise with the vertebrae of the dorsal spine. Therefore, when this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not, then consider For if you see that his hands have become softened, paralyzed, and lifeless; and he cannot move them, extend them, or contract them; and when you press them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it and does not feel any pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in many cases it is fatal.
But if he moves them and feels the pressure with your fingers and the prick of the needle: then know that the nape of his bone is safe, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
For if it happens to him like the disease of the shoulders, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not: then consider his feet. If you see that they have become softened, and what has happened to them is similar to what happened to his hands; moreover when he lies on his back, wind and excretion come out without his will; and when he is made to lie on his stomach, excretion comes out without his will; and when he lies on his back again, and wants to urinate but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Therefore do not labor in treating him.
But if none of these things happen to him, the case is lighter.
And his treatment in this case is to try to sedate the hot inflammation thus: by placing only rose oil or oiled chicken yolks on the diseased shoulder bone.
Apply this to him several times a day until when the hot inflammation is sedated; then place one of the strengthening, drying emplastra on that spot, and bind it with a bandage. And order the patient to remain quiet and at rest. Nor should he sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
But if it happens at the friction of a bone separation or something already detached from it: then it is necessary to incise the skin and remove that. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching. Then dress it with some flesh-colored substance from ointments until it heals.
But if the end of the tailbone breaks off and there is a fracture: then it is necessary to insert your left thumb into the anus, and with the other hand, align the broken bone as much as possible, and repeat until equal.
Then place a poultice on it and remove it; and dress the wound with the same treatment used before until it heals.
Paragraph on the restoration of the Achilles tendon.
Chapter 11
The bones of the heel rarely break. But if they do break, then the fracture is not complete unless there are comminutions at their extremities; and they split lengthwise and bend inward, causing pain and bruising in the affected area, and the limb becomes lame.
And its restoration is as follows: place your hand over it until you feel the shape of the fracture.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then align it according to what you prepare for yourself from equating until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is lengthwise or has already bent inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. When you have aligned it, place a poultice on it; then place a splint made of wood or leather over it, and secure it with bandages so that you need not fear displacement of the fracture or removal of the splint.
And make the concavity of them equal with what fills it until the bandage takes hold according to equality; and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
But if a hot abscess occurs: then cease from stretching it and its restoration until the hot abscess sits; and place upon it what sits upon it according to what preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone or it becomes crushed, extract it.
Chapter on the restoration of fractures of the lower arm.
The elbow is that which is between the elbow and the head of the ulna.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One method is: take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness in this shape, which follows.
And two bands shall be tied at both ends.
Then let it hang from a raised place, and the patient shall sit on a chair. Then he should throw his broken arm over the wood until it reaches its elbow, in the middle of which is attached a curved piece of wood.
Then hang something heavy from above so that the assistant may extend it towards the lower part. Then let the physician bring together the fracture with his hands at once until the fracture returns to its proper place.
And another method is for the patient to lie on their back and hang their hand from their neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants to hold what is above the fracture with their hands and for each of them to extend it towards his own part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind beneath the fracture with one bandage and above it with another bandage; and let each of the two assistants extend them towards their own parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary to place one bandage under the elbow and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to place a bandage over that location and over the elbow itself.
Then align the fracture with ease without exertion until it equals what is necessary, and apply it properly. Then bind it if there is no hot swelling.
But if a hot swelling occurs, then leave the bandage loose for seven days. And place on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the swelling subsides. Then bind it again; and the method of binding is to put the plaster over the fracture.
Then place a fresh cloth wrapping over the plaster. Then bring the arm close to the splint, and let them place their hand open on their shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind over the splint arm so that it stays in place without hindering anything or being disturbed by any part of the broken bone.
But if you fear that something might be disturbed from the broken bone, then use splints. And it is necessary to place over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the others. And let the width between each splint be the thickness of a finger, and let the length of the splints be equal to the fracture with an additional three fingers on either side.
Then bind over the splints with the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary for your binding to be tighter over the location of the fracture. And the more the fracture extends, the looser the binding should be.
If you see that the splints and bandage are set properly, as we have said, when you put the limb back in place, then do so. And if you fear hot swelling, then leave the bandage and splints loose for seven days, as we have said.
Then observe the ligature on all three days so that itching or swelling does not occur, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb due to tension from excessive tightness of the bandage. Therefore correct that entirely according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing bad will result from it, then do not loosen the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back with their hands over their stomach, and place under their buttocks a bolster filled evenly with wool for support.
And observe at every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb does not loosen nor the ligature become slackened. Therefore correct it all with your own strength.
And give food to the patient according to the order that we have previously set forth, so that at first the food is thin until the bone starts to grow together, then it is necessary to increase their food.
For the custom is for splints and bandages to remain on for forty days. Therefore at that time they should be removed, and a warm bath should be given, and it should be treated with ointments that straighten it.
But if the fracture is ugly and crushed, then do not remove the bandage and splints from it until fifty days have passed or two months.
Chapter on the Reduction of a Broken Arm
The arm is composed of two bones called the two hollows (humerus and radius).
One of which is small, namely the one that follows the thumb. And the other one is large, and it is the one placed beneath the small one from below.
Therefore sometimes only the large hollow breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, and sometimes they both break at once.
When therefore the small upper hollow breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower hollow breaks, its fracture is bad, and its healing difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break at once.
If therefore the bone that breaks is the small one above, then it befits the physician, in its restoration, to place a slight extension gently until it becomes even.
But if the bone that is broken is the large one, then it is necessary for him to apply strong traction very forcibly.
And he must put his hand in the shape of a fist upon its restoration, and stretch out its extension over the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers towards the top, and let the lower joint be below all the fingers or the rest; and let the patient sit square upon himself, and let there be a pillow before him, or directly in front of him at the proper height, so that the patient does not suffer discomfort.
Then let the assistant stretch out the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage. And another assistant should likewise stretch it out from above.
Then let the physician set the bone until he brings it back into the best position possible.
But if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then strive with all your strength to replace each fragment in its proper place.
But if there appears a separated fragment that pierces the skin and there is no hope of restoring it, then cut over it and remove it according to the manner which we have described earlier.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that in its own chapter, so take the treatment of it from there.
But if a hot swelling occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then take a cloth and make a plaster with wax and rose oil, medium in thickness between thick and thin; and apply it over it with a thin bandage until when the swelling subsides. Then remove the plaster, and place an emplaster made from flour dust with egg white. Then apply splints, and let the splint placed over the actual fracture be somewhat broader and stronger.
Know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases: whether there is a fracture in one joint or two joints at once.
Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture more strongly and more tightly, and a little bit higher with the bandage above the fracture or below it: or place a softer bandage than its usual tension for a short time, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft, wet cloths: and not hard or rough. And the thread with which it is tied should be made of linen properly, medium in thickness between thin and thick, as we have described.
And examine the limb and its ligaments after some days. But if something occurs that requires correction, such as itching in the limb: then you must embrocate the limb with warm water until the itching ceases, and leave the limb unrestrained until it calms down, then repeat the bandaging.
But if the bandage has already softened and the bone is now moved away, and similar things have occurred: then correct it all with your skill and examine it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightness of the bandage, then you must soften it for a short time and leave it for several days until nourishment flows to it again, then tie it.
But if nothing of what we have said happens to the patient, then you should not remove it unless after twenty days or thereabouts.
Then hang the patient's hand over their neck. And let their neck be level, and it shall be kept firm with its own strength against violent movements. Make him lie on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or at most forty-two days; sometimes it may be restored in eighty-eight days. All of this depends on the dispositions of temperaments and the dispositions of strength.
Here begins the chapter On the Reduction of Fractures of the Hand
Know that fractures of the comb of the hand and joints of the fingers rarely occur. And it does not happen to him except with frequent attrition.
When therefore a fracture of the palm or attrition occurs, then the patient should sit squarely and before him there should be a seat of equal height. Then place his hand upon it, extended.
Then let the assistant extend the broken bone, and the physician shall align them until they join together with good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and wadding if there is no hot abscess. Then place a splint over the top according to the size of the place, and you have now wrapped it with linen cloth.
But if the fracture is towards the lower part near the palm of the hand, then make a spherical shape from cloth and order the patient to wrap it around with their fractured palm; then bind it with a long piece of cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, soft so that it may be applied to the body of the palm; and bind it as necessary.
But if the fracture is towards the outside, then you should place a splint above and another below at the palm; and let the hand be held straight with fingers extended. Then apply a bandage in the same way as the hand is wound, and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
If some of the joints of the fingers are broken, then if it is the thumb, set it according to what is appropriate. Then bind it with a splint: and if necessary, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not moved.
But if the fracture is in any of the other fingers such as the middle finger or the index finger, or the little finger and the ring finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the healthy finger that follows it; or all should be bound together in continuity, which is better. Or place over it a small splint as we have said for the thumb.
And consider during your restoration, and after this arrangement, apply a warm poultice, and counterpose with what is appropriate when something happens from it, according to how its story repeats itself.
Paragraph: On the reduction of a fracture of the hip.
The hip bone is often broken and it is apparent to the senses because it turns inward and backward.
And its reduction is done by binding one ligature above the fracture and another below it. And the patient should lie face down.
Then each assistant should stretch their ligature according to equality on their respective side when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if there is a fracture near the root of the hip bone, then let one ligature be on the chest side so that the extension falls upwards and another ligature below the fracture.
And similarly if there is a fracture near the knee, then let one ligature be near the knee so that the extension falls towards the lower part.
Then the physician should set the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural shape and joined together with good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a poultice and bandage if there is no inflammation in the limb. If an abscess forms in him: then let it be for some days until the abscess becomes warm, then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be as follows It is necessary to wrap a hard piece of wood over the fracture, that is, a splint; and fold it twice or thrice, with some excess remaining. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the ankle joint
Next, insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee towards the lower part, so that the ends of the thread come out from above on both sides. Then wrap around the leg and thigh what is left over of the splint.
Next, place stars on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place one star on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the gaps between the leg and thigh with soft cloths so that the bandage is even.
Next, begin with a firm wrapping from the middle over the fracture site with three or four turns. And as you extend the bandage further away from the fracture site, make your wrapping tighter and softer, and more gentle.
Then tie the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg. Therefore, tie three stars each with both threads from above. Then go down with the two ends of the thread until you reach the ankle bone. And tie both threads and also the ends of the stars on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its place.
Then leave the bandage in place until healing occurs, ensuring that no injury, abscess, inflammation, or similar condition arises. If anything happens Then promptly come with its solution and correct whatever has happened according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a sharp fragment of bone sticking out, then it is necessary to smooth it down if possible. And if not, cover it with a bandage and remove it: and treat him according to what has preceded until he is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip becomes dislocated, besides those added ligatures, as we have mentioned in the aid and the arm.
However, upon its restoration, it does not happen that the patient limps. But if it is restored alone, without applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary for him whose it is to limp always.
And know that the hip is dislocated for fifty days or it may be added a little or diminished a little: all this depends on the diversity of temperaments and other dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee-cap.
Know that a fracture of the patella rarely occurs, but wear often does.
But if it occurs to it [the patella], then there is only either a crack or a hole in its parts. And this occurs with a wound and without a wound And it stands on top of it all with sensation.
And its restoration is such that what was broken off from its parts should be made even with it using fingers until it adheres and joins together according to the possibility of making even and easy [and] fashioning.
Then apply a plaster of sesame flour or fine flour with egg white and place over it a round bandage if you need one, and bind it with an appropriate ligature.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have described in other fractures, such as warm inflammation and similar ones, so that you may oppose every accident with what is fitting for it until it heals.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one thick called the tibia and the other thin called the fibula.
And similarly for both types of fractures that occur in the two bones of the arm, restoration is done equally and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken at once, the leg becomes disabled on all sides.
And if only the thin bone is fractured, the leg turns towards the front.
And if the thick bone is fractured, you will find it below and it is one of those that do not hide from you.
Then apply extension, alignment, and wiring according to what is equal in the two bones.
However, if it is a nasty fracture of the leg with many splinters, then extension should be less and gentle in easing.
And in the leg there is something similar to what is done on the arm. And it should be that when you align the splints and complete all your operation, then take two strips of pinewood used for making soles and put them under the table boards: and make them from the palm-sized ones. Choose those which are not too thin nor too small and let their length be equal to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap each bandage around twice according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two bands at three points, at both ends and in the middle. For when the tying is tightened, the leg inclines to the right and left, but it stands in good position.
And now a splint made of wood according to the length of the leg should be applied and the leg placed on it so that it may keep it from moving.
But especially it is necessary to do this when there is a wound along with the fracture.
Then observe the leg every day, and give it your utmost care from the time of amputation or inflation, or any other cause. If any of those things happen, then apply to it what is necessary until it heals, God willing.
On the fracture of bones in the foot and toes
Indeed, there has never been a case of a calcaneus bone being fractured.
But sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and even rarely in the toes; and they are mostly subjected to sprains in many positions.
But if fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones raised above each other, then let the patient place their foot on the ground as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that bone which is raised among them; then press or step on it until it returns to its proper position.
Then apply a poultice and lay a wick on top of it; and place a small board with two flat heads under the sole of the foot.
Then bind it firmly with the foot, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things needed.
After three or four days have passed, then remove the bandage. For you will find the bones set right, whether they were fractured or dislocated. Therefore, operate on them as you see fit.
But if some of the toes are broken, then restore them and set them straight according to what I have told you about the restoration of fingers. Then place your finger on the top of the toe according to its length and let it be a little wider; then place that board which I told you about under the foot and bind it firmly with a suitable bandage.
But if two or three or more of the bones are broken, then place a splint suitable to each toe wrapped in linen on top of them; and bind the board under the foot and let it stand on one head of the board outside the sole of the foot so that it holds it firmly.
And you should not forget to consider all that I have told you about other fractures from accidents which we discussed, and apply each appropriate remedy.
On the fracture of a woman's vulva, and of the breastbone, and of the male pubic bone.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit on a square cushion. Then tilt her backwards slightly towards her back and hold it there.
Next, the midwife should fill the woman's vulva with cotton until it is full; and let it be formed into a ball-like shape in the vulva.
Then shake the woman gently, and gradually lift up her back. For that cotton comes out until it forms a ball-like shape before the vulva, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then place a pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, let her remove the cotton gently, then urinate; and replace it according to how you first inserted it. Then return to her pillow.
She should do this for about seven days, after which the bone will be healed.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep and tie a reed tube over its opening, then insert the whole bladder into her vulva. Then blow air through the tube with force until the bladder expands within the vulva, for the fracture will be reduced.
Then fill it with cotton and let her remain like that for several days, as we have described, until she is healed.
And when the breastbone of a man or woman is fractured, then use for its reduction and alignment what we have described for the bone of the ankle.
And it is not hidden that there is no rectitude in these fractures if they are near each other, especially in those who have some practice or use.
And understand my book much, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many dispositions the straight path towards its restoration and tightening: therefore, understand.
In the case of a fractured penis, take the neck of a goose and insert the stick into it. Then place over it a wrapping made of cloth, wrap it around, and let it remain for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed if God wills.
ยถ On the restoration of bone fractures when they are accompanied by wounds.
It is fitting for one who suffers a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if it is large like that of the thighbone or shinbone, etc., to perform bloodletting on them immediately: if you find the conditions favorable for bloodletting, as we have previously mentioned.
But if the wound is flowing blood, then it is necessary that you quickly proceed to cauterize it, using powdered myrrh if nothing else is available.
Then begin restoring the fracture on the same day itself, and do not postpone this unless gangrene occurs.
But if gangrene is warm, then delay its restoration until the ninth day until it settles down. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days entirely, for you would cause him harm thereby.
But if the fractured bone is protruding from the skin and exposed, then it is necessary that you try to reduce and align it with your hands using gentle pressure.
But if its extension and alignment cannot be prepared by hand, then reduce it using this instrument. And there is an instrument made of iron, its length being that of seven fingers or eight, and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the quantity needed for that treatment in all kinds of fractures.
And it should be round, with a small thickness so that it does not double over upon itself during compression at the time of operation; and it should have a sharp point at both ends. Its upper part should be thick from its middle to its lower end.
This is its shape.
In this operation, place its sharp curved end over the prominent end of the bone and push it with one stroke until the bone returns to its proper alignment.
Therefore, strive to align the ends of the fracture together.
But if the ends of the fracture are too thin and do not accept the instrument well, then you should cut off the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it.
But if you cannot reduce them at all with the instrument described above, then cut it with a suitable knife from those mentioned earlier, or saw it with any saw in whatever way is possible for you.
Then shave off what remains on the bone, such as any roughness and small ridges.
When the bone is reduced but the patient still feels intense pain after the reduction, know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place.
Then do this: For you should give the patient a large splint when the restoration of the bone which you are performing is completed.
Then dip a cloth in black wine vinegar. Especially if it is summertime. And do not place anything oily on the wound, nor anything containing oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption to occur in it.
Then administer astragalus (castor bean) poultice at the hour of bone restoration. And leave the wound open; thus, cut with scissors a hole in its folds according to the size of the wound.
And beware of all caution not to bind a wound that has been fractured. For many foolish physicians have done this and brought about the death of their patients or corruption or pus. And let your binding be soft, gentle, and different from the bindings used for other fractures.
But if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that certain ill accidents may occur as we have described, and you find pain suspended in its place, then it is not necessary to apply an astragalus poultice. And make them dressings of hard cloths in the place of the astragalus poultice, and bind it with these.
But when after one day or two days you see that the wound is beginning to generate pus, then remove the cloth which you placed upon it with wine. Then apply lint and ointments according to our customary practice for treating wounds, such as the ointment Tetrapharmacon, and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it solidifies and heals.
It is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows out of it freely towards the lower parts.
But if many days pass without the wound healing or the pus being discharged from it, then know that there are small bone spurs present. Therefore, you should examine the wound with probes. How many of those bone spurs are separated off, remove them and extract them out. And those that are not separated off but cause pain in the limb and bring about suffering, attempt to cut them open and remove them in any way possible for you.
But if a wound is inflicted by a weapon or ulceration occurs, that is, gangrene appears or another type of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply remedies suited to each case with their appropriate treatment, the order of which has been described in its respective chapter.
And in those cases where it is necessary for my speech to remain steady and when you have full attention upon breaking a bone that protrudes from the limb, such as the thighbone or shinbone, and similar bones from major limbs, do not attempt to reduce it by traction, for many times death has occurred because of this, rather leave it alone until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you think fit, otherwise leave it alone.
On the treatment of swelling at the site of a fracture.
Many times this swelling occurs at the site of a healing fracture Especially those near joints: and it produces a distorted shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from functioning naturally
Therefore, if the swelling is recent, apply medicines that have an astringent effect, such as: aloe, frankincense, myrrh, tragacanth, and acacia, among others.
Thus take some or all of these ingredients and mix them with astringent wine, egg white, or vinegar. Then apply the mixture on linen to the swelling and secure it in place with a good bandage
And leave the bandage untouched for many days without removing it Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling disappears
Or bind a lead plate upon it appropriately. For lead has the property of drawing out anything feared from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard lump and is pressing urgently for removal, then lay an incision over it from above and cut away the superfluous protruding part; or shave it with some razors until it is removed. And take care of it until it heals.
Here ends the treatment when the restoration is made and the limb remains afterwards thin, not according to its nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored and the limb remains afterwards thin and weak, this happens only for many reasons. One of these reasons is an excessive loosening and tightening of the ligaments not done as it should be; or because of an excess in constricting the ligaments so that nourishment cannot reach the limb; or because of an excessive use of ointments at the wrong time; or because of a scarcity of blood in the patient's body and his overall weakness.
The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his body soft until his blood increases. And administer a bath. And bring him joy and gladness.
Then apply pitch on the limb so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. And continue applying warm water ointments to it until nourishment flows and the limb returns to its natural shape.
Here ends the treatment of bones that are restored crookedly.
When it happens that a limb is restored crookedly after its healing and there is prominence of the broken bone or swelling which disfigures the limb but does not prevent it from functioning naturally, then you should not pay heed to anyone who suggests breaking the limb again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and bone-setters who have done this in our land.
Indeed, this operation is very blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be fatal.
But if the limp and stiffness are recent, then it is necessary to treat with warm water in which soothing herbs have been cooked, such as mallow leaves and roots, and marsh-mallows, and similar ones. And make for him an ointment with a softening plaster, such as well-made wax ointment.
Or take the mucilage of mallows' roots and beat it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and plaster it on.
Or take ripe figs, grind them with pigeon dung and other substances which are named among medicines that reduce hardness.
And sometimes stiffness is loosened by persistent, gentle friction using wet hands. And movement of the limb should be encouraged towards all parts at all times.
But if twisting has already preceded and become strong and turned into a stone, and there is need for its treatment with iron: then it must be cut above it, and the continuity of bone must be loosened, and what has flowed out from stiffness or bone must be cut away with fine cutters: and care must be taken to facilitate movement in it.
ยถ On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one or more joints from their normal position. Therefore it prevents movement and spoils the appearance of the limb. And causes sharp pains and severe injuries to occur in the patient.
Therefore when dislocation occurs it is necessary to hasten its reduction without any delay.
For if there is delay, the place becomes inflamed, and perhaps also the reduction of the dislocation itself.
Therefore it should not be moved or extended during the inflammation period. For often it causes spasms and painful injuries.
But when this happens, then you should proceed to perform bloodletting on the patient. Then it should be left alone until the inflammation subsides.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be gently reduced (i.e., placed back in its proper position).
And the entire limb should be wrapped along with that which is to be remembered in its place.
Indeed, I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, also according to what precedes in fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Chapter: On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws rarely dislocate, except in rare cases.
And dislocation of both occurs according to one of two methods. Either they are removed from their places by a slight movement and softened for a short time; The shoulder joints are dislocated completely, until they become softened towards the chest area, until the sick person runs and cannot hold it or close their mouth, and their tongue becomes twisted with speech.
If the dislocation is minor, it returns to its original state more often on its own with less effort.
If the dislocation is complete and intact, then it is necessary for reduction to be administered quickly and not delayed at all. And so the attendant should hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert their thumb of one hand into the root of the jawbone on the side of the dislocation. Or they may insert both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides. And the remaining fingers of their hands should be outside where it is suitable.
Instruct the patient to cleanse and rinse out their jaws thoroughly on all sides. And the physician should place the jawbone in its proper position and press it until it returns to its original place.
But if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated at once, then administer a warm vapor with water and oil until the reduction becomes easier for both. And do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When they have returned to their proper places and the patient's mouth is closed and no longer feels soft, then place over them small pads of linen with wax prepared with rose oil.
Then it should be bandaged gently with soft bindings.
And let the patient sleep on their back with their head supported between two pillows so that they do not move it to the right or left. They should not attempt to chew anything and should be given only soft food until the pain has subsided and the jawbone is healed, at which point they may eat what they wish without difficulty.
He should not exert himself in eating, drinking, and yawning until the jawbone is healed.
But if the reduction of the two jawbones proves difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places, then fever and frequent sighing may occur, and perhaps the sick person's stomach will be loosened, and perhaps they may vomit pure bile.
Therefore, when you see that [the condition], know that it is fatal, and often the person to whom it happens dies within ten days.
On the reduction of dislocation of the shoulder blade and end of the arm.
The collarbone does not dislocate from its inner side due to its continuity with the chest. And sometimes it dislocates outwards; this is evident to the senses.
To reduce it, have the patient lie on their back and stretch out their arms. Then press the spot firmly with your palm, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a plaster and bandages, and bind it.
The ends of the bone that follow the elbow and are connected to it rarely dislocate. If it does dislocate on some day, then it must be reduced and set according to what we have said, and what is prepared for you.
Then apply a plaster, bandages, and a splint. And instruct the patient to remain calm and quiet until it heals.
And with this same treatment, the end of the arm is reduced when it becomes separated from its place as well.
On the Reduction of Dislocation of the Arm
You should know that the arm does not dislocate except in three ways:
One of which is, that it dislocates towards the region of the armpit below. The second is, that it dislocates towards the chest area. And perhaps it dislocates to the upper part of the arm bone, which occurs rarely.
It does not dislocate towards the back due to the spur. And it does not dislocate forwards due to the nerves.
Indeed, it most often dislocates and comes out towards the armpit below, especially in those whose flesh is thin. Because it goes out quickly and enters quickly in them.
But in those whose flesh is much, it is the opposite of that, namely that it goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps some people suffer an injury or accident, and the arm bone becomes swollen with a hot swelling, and it is thought because of this that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you should examine it until you stand on its certainty, and then proceed with its treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it is towards the armpit below, and you should distinguish between the dislocated arm bone and the healthy one. For you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find a depression in the head of the arm bone, and under the armpit upon touching the head of the humerus as if it were an egg: and the sick person cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you will find a clear touch upon feeling, and it cannot be hidden.
The reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent, or if the sick person is a child.
And its reduction is performed by raising one's hand upward. Then place your thumbs under the armpit and raise the joint with force upward to its proper position; and the assistant shall raise their hand and stretch it upward. Then place it below; for it quickly returns to its place by itself.
But if it does not return through what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred at first, then it is necessary for the sick person to bathe in warm water, and to administer an ointment which softens and soothes, such as if the roots of althea, fennel, and melilot are decocted in water.
Then the sick person is placed on their back; and under their armpit, place a ball and wool that are equal in softness and firmness.
Then the physician places their heel on the ball and raises the head of the shoulder joint with strength, while pulling the sick person's hand downward.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have someone present who is taller than the sick person stand on their side and insert their shoulder under the armpit of the sick person; then raise the armpit upward until the sick person is suspended in mid-air. And another assistant pulls the hand of the sick person downward towards their belly. But if the sick person is light, then something else must be suspended with them to weigh them down; for the dislocation immediately returns.
And it is also reduced in another manner: place on the ground a long piece of wood with a rounded head, like the pestle of a mortar, which is neither too thick nor too thin. Then place beneath the sick person soft cloths on top of the head of the wood, with the sick person standing along the length of the wood.
Then stretch out their hand towards the lower part on the other side and stretch out their body with force from the other side; for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But if its reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this remedy: Take a piece of wood whose length is the measure of two arms, and its width the measure of four fingers, and its thickness the measure of two fingers, with a rounded head to facilitate its entry into the depths of the joint, in this shape.
Then wrap soft cloths around the round head of the wood so that it does not harm the sick person.
Then place the wood under the joint of the sick person so that their hand or arm is stretched out over it towards the lower part and tie the wood to their arm and the end of their hand.
Then place the arm on the step of a ladder along its width, stretch out the hand towards the lower part, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side. The joint enters immediately.
Therefore, when the entry of the joint is complete in whichever way is possible, then place under the joint a ball of equal size made of wool. Then apply the plaster prepared from flour with frankincense and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it rolls down from above.
Then bind with a suitable bandage under the joint and wrap it around the plaster from above; and tie their hand to their neck, and let it remain without moving for seven days.
And food should be given sparingly to the sick person until the member is strengthened; because it is quicker for its healing.
Then increase food after seven days or five, and encourage movement. If it becomes firm and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to moisture that affects it or another cause, then a cautery with three holes should be applied to it, as prescribed in the chapter on cauteries.
But if all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, and the joint does not firm up, and the plaster and bandage are reapplied repeatedly, and it still falls and cannot be raised upwards, then know that its nerves which are at the head of the shoulder have either been cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
The dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple or reduction to the back happens with pressure and extension using hands until it returns, and then apply the remaining bandage and care until it heals.
If heaviness occurs in the member after healing and slowness of movement happens, then the sick person should take a bath many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty as well; indeed it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front or back.
And its dislocation will not remain hidden from you; for it is evident to sight and touch, in whatever form it may be dislocated. And when you relocate a dislocated elbow joint, it becomes clearly apparent. For the joint is caved in and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own humerus.
And it is necessary that you act quickly to reduce the dislocation before heat and inflammation occur.
For if heat and inflammation occur, reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal entirely, especially when the dislocation is towards the back. Indeed, among all kinds of dislocations, this one is the most severe and causes greater pain; and death often occurs alongside it.
And its reduction when possible is to extend the patient's hand with both hands of the physician; let the arm be stretched out and the hands of the doctor be above and below the elbow, then push the joint back into place using the tips of his fingers together or with the root of his palm until it returns to its proper position.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front, then reduce it in this way: extend the patient's hand with your own hand until you strike the dislocated elbow with the root of your palm.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong and forceful traction; let two assistants extend the arm and hold it in place during traction.
Then rotate the arm in any direction after wrapping a long doubled cloth or wide bandage around it.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: that it may be one of those which aid in lubricating the joints with ease. Then push the joint forcefully until it returns to its original position.
And after reduction, a plaster containing absorbent and the white of an egg should be applied to it, along with appropriate bandaging. Let the arm hang from the sick person's neck for several days.
Then let it be loosened. If the joint becomes firm in its place, then untie the bandage from it and leave it alone.
But if you see that the joint is not properly secured, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for a few more days until it becomes secure. Then untie it.
If however heaviness and inflammation occur after the reduction of the joint, then apply moistening in bathing, gentle friction, and compression until it becomes aligned, or place over the joint the fat of a young lamb. Then bandage it, leaving it on day and night. Then remove it and place him in a bath. When he begins to sweat, then rub the joint with gentle friction. Then repeat with the fat of a young lamb three times in succession along with entering the bath until it becomes softened.
If you wish, place over it fresh donkey dung warmed with butter and bind it tightly.
Do this several times. For it will soften and return to its natural condition.
This is the treatment for dislocation of Al-Mahassen.
The shoulder joint is frequently dislocated, that is, the articulation between the arm and hand.
And its reduction is easy. Unlike other joints. But it is necessary that the reduction of its dislocation be done quickly at the time when it occurs, before the place becomes inflamed; otherwise a hot swelling will occur.
And the reduction of its dislocation is performed by placing the dislocated shoulder of the sick person on a board, and having an assistant hold their hand thus; then the physician places his palm upon the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its place.
But it should be considered whether the palm has already fallen back towards the belly of the hand: if so, let the sick person place the back of their hand upon the board during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be internal upon the board, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed upon the board, so that the physician's hand may fall upon the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, this is good; but if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster for swelling and dismiss him, without repeating the procedure.
For if it does not tolerate reduction, nor can you perform it after some days have passed, although the joint remains according to its twisted condition and causes no harm to the sick person except that the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp anything; then know that either the nerves have been severed or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no remedy for it except to burn it with a cautery near its place. And perhaps it will do no good.
When Al-Mahassen does not return, then apply the plaster which I have described. Then it should be bound and left for five days. Afterwards it should be loosened and released, and the hand exercised.
If however it lacks movement and heaviness occurs therein: then soften it with warm water and friction several times until it becomes softened.
Chapter on the Treatment of Dislocation of Fingers.
When a finger is dislocated to any part, or from the fingers to the back of the palm or its belly: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it towards the part to which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is equal to straight on that day itself.
When night comes, bind it according to the same description: and do not cease loosening it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it is bound firmly.
And do the same if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand: and bind it to that part, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do likewise when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter on the Treatment of Dislocation of Vertebrae of the Back.
When complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no treatment for it, since death quickly approaches the sick person.
And the sign of this is that excretion from the sick person exits without volition and they cannot hold it. And some of their limbs become softened, either both legs or both arms, or one of them, or a single vertebra becomes displaced from its place.
For often it is displaced because often displacement occurs in four directions.
That which is displaced towards the back is called Kyphosis.
However, its treatment is that you should consider this, if Kyphosis occurs from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing from it at all.
But in that which occurs due to chance, or impact, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken at length about methods of treatment. Of which the outcome is often poor.
But I have already shortened it from that [text], which, due to its closeness to me and my intention for explanation, has little excuse because of the abundance of it. And I have formed an instrument for it in a different way than they showed it and explained it.
I say therefore that in kyphosis which occurs from the front part, there is no means of correction or healing for it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And they are not treated except for that which occurs on the back properly, as I narrate. And it is thus: let the sick person be extended face down on an equal bench near the wall, and let a damp cloth be placed under him so that his chest may not be injured.
Then let a straight piece of wood be placed fixed in a hole in the ground at the end of the bench near his head, and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the bench. And let an assistant hold onto the wood and let it not be firmly fixed in the hole. And another assistant should hold the other one.
Then wrap it around the head of the sick person and underneath their armpits with a soft, strong ligament. Extend one end of the ligament to the piece of wood near his head and tie it there.
Then tie another ligament around his hips, above his knees, and at his thighs. Then gather all the ligaments together and tie them to the other piece of wood that is near his feet.
Then all assistants should pull on the ligaments towards the end of the wood. And the two pieces of wood should not be removed from their places where they are fixed, but they should not be firmly fastened, as we have said.
And the physician shall place his palms on the shoulder-blade with force until it returns to its place or he places a board upon it. Then he shall attach his feet to the board until it returns to its place.
But if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three cubits. And hollow out in the wall we mentioned, near the sick person, a place into which the end of the board shall enter. Then place the middle of the board on the shoulder-blade. And let the physician place his feet on the other end. And tighten well until the shoulder-blade becomes constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a windlass which is wound around your hand. And this is how you should do it: Drive two pieces of wood into the ground at the foot of the bed where the head of the sick person lies, each piece being about one cubit long.
And let the distance between each piece of wood be one palm. And now there should be a hole made in every place through which the windlass runs, and let all the wood be fixed firmly into the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood, which is the windlass around which the bandage will be wrapped in the two holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole where the piece of wood is secured, whose length is one palm including that which is wound around it. And similarly there are two holes on the other pieces of wood.
Then tighten the bandages which you have wound around the chest of the sick person with the windlass that is at their head, and the bandages which you have wound around their legs with the windlass that is at their feet.
Then let there be someone standing by every windlass who will turn their hand with a bandage around which the windlass is wound. And the physician should apply pressure evenly using the sponge according to what has been said.
This is the form of the windlass which follows.
Then after the sponge returns and the area has been pressed evenly, you should then place an absorbent plaster made from egg white. Then apply a wick. Then place on top of the plaster a star-shaped piece of metal, its width being about three fingers or roughly that size. And its length should be as much as to take the place of the prominence and cover the healthy area above the sponge.
Then it should be tied with the bandage that we have mentioned. And the sick person should use a soft diet until they are healed.
But if there remains some prominence at the site at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and alleviate with the application of the board that we have described over a long period. And now a lead plate is applied.
Sometimes prominence occurs at the last lumbar vertebra and it is thought that dislocation has occurred, and this is the bone that now protrudes. Therefore, no treatment should be attempted with this medication as it might cause death.
ยถ On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Ankle.
Know that the articulations of the ankle and elbow do not become dislocated except by dislocation alone; nor do they suffer what happens to other articulations from slight displacement or excavation.
And indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated in four parts. That is to say, it is dislocated towards the front and back.
And indeed, it dislocates mostly inward, and a little outward, frontward, and backward.
And the treatment of inward dislocation is as follows: when you align the healthy leg with the sick one, the thighbone is longer and the knee joint sticks out more than that of a healthy person. The sick person cannot double their foot at the groin, and the area around the groin is inflamed and swollen due to the head of the femur having reached there.
And the sign that outward dislocation has occurred is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned above.
And the sign of forward dislocation is that the healthy leg is extended beyond its normal position, but cannot be bent at the knee without pain. If one tries to walk, they cannot do so by stepping forward, and urine retention occurs, with swelling at the groin and a limp on the heel.
And the sign of rearward dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended and cannot be bent before the hip joint; moreover, the leg appears shortened on one side, with softening at the groin, and the head of the femur lies at the position of the hip.
However, if the dislocation is old and has become set in place over time, you should consider this when attempting reduction. Then, if you attempt reduction and it remains as before, there is no cure for it at all. Therefore, one should not proceed with presumption.
But if the dislocation is recent and of one of the four types, then quickly attempt to move the joint back into place by extending it both inwardly and outwardly and moving it from side to side. Perhaps this will suffice and no further treatment will be needed.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant to extend the leg from below, either with his hands or using a bandage tied above the knee. Then another assistant should hold the arm from above and insert their hands underneath the armpits. Then, bind with a soft cloth around the root of the hip bone, holding one end of the bandage in each hand.
And the extension should be either from the front of the groin towards the pubic region or from behind towards the back.
And all extensions should occur simultaneously until the patient is lifted off the ground with their body hanging suspended.
This kind of extension is common to all four kinds
If the dislocation returns as we have said, then that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to perform the specific treatment I will describe for each kind.
In reducing this [dislocation], when it is towards the inside, it is necessary to lay the patient on their healthy side. Then place a bandage over the root of the hip, where the head of the femur is and the area below the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the groin towards the upper part of the body, to the region of the armpit.
Then have another strong helper take hold of both of his arms and push the thick part of the injured hip joint outwards with force. Now it has returned to its proper place.
This method is easier than others for reducing this limb.
But if the patient resists you and refuses to undergo this treatment altogether, then it is necessary to tie both of their feet together with a strong, soft bandage over the heels and knees. The length of each should be four fingerbreadths from its counterpart, and the injured leg should be extended two fingerbreadths more than the other.
Then suspend the patient over the top of a beam that is in the house so that their feet are two arm-lengths above the ground.
Then instruct a strong youth to protect the head of the hip joint. Have another youth suspend himself from the patient's arms. Then have another youth push with force while protecting the hip joint, for the joint will quickly return to its proper place.
But in reducing it back into place when the dislocation is towards the outside, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on a bed as we have described for those with humpbacks. And then tie the bandage tightly across their thigh and across their chest properly.
Then place two pieces of wood, one at his feet and another at his head. Then place an additional piece of wood firmly on the middle of the bed. Wrap wet cloth around it so that it does not harm the patient. Place this wood between their thighs to prevent them from being pulled downwards during extension.
Then each assistant should pull towards his own side, and the physician should gently guide the reduction with his hand.
If it returns to its proper position, then that is good.
And if not, place them on the board and press down evenly as we described for kyphosis. But note that the patient should lie on their sound side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then the sick person's leg should be extended quickly. This is also done on a bed, and the physician should place the palm of his right hand over the patient's groin. Then grasp it with your other hand and using that grip, extend it downwards towards the knee area.
And if the dislocation is towards the back, then it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards. They should be lifted up off the ground and placed on a hard surface as needed when the hip joint dislocates outwards, as we have described earlier for how they should lie on two chairs. This position should face upwards with their legs extended, as we recently mentioned.
And it is necessary to apply pressure with a board even on the place where the joint emerges while reduction is completed as needed.
The sign of its reduction will not be hidden from you. When you extend both legs of the patient and see them equal, and the patient tightens their thigh and stretches it without resistance, then know that the limb has returned to its proper place. Then join the two hips together, apply a plaster, and secure with linen bandages, i.e., a splint, so that the hip joint does not move to any part. The patient should rest quietly for three or four days.
Then untie the bandages and plaster, compare one leg with the other. If you see them equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation is now stabilized. Then allow the patient to walk without restriction.
But if you observe any softening, then return and apply another plaster to it, securing it with the same binding as before. Leave it like this for three more days.
Then remove the plaster and have the patient walk slowly on both legs for several more days until they are fully strengthened.
On Dislocation of the Knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards, that is to say backwards.
And it does not dislocate forwards.
The sign of this dislocation is: when you order the patient to place their leg on their thigh. If it does not adhere with the hip, then know that the knee has been dislocated.
The reduction of all types of its dislocations is done by making the patient sit upright so that they can already stretch out their leg over it and adhere your back to their face: and place their foot between your feet.
Then press their knee with the palms of your hands and stretch out your fingers over their knee. Then apply pressure with the palm of your hand on both sides of the knee with force. And another assistant should stretch out their foot until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of reduction is when the leg adheres to the hip gently, not forcibly.
Then bind it up and keep the leg close to the hip. Then tie them together with a bandage for three or four days. Then loosen it.
And the patient should not use their limb for some days until they are healed.
If reduction cannot be achieved, then apply strong traction with bandages, as previously mentioned in the treatment of ankle dislocations, until it returns to its place.
ยถ On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel
The calcaneus is sometimes displaced by a small movement and sometimes completely dislocated. Its dislocation occurs either inwardly or outwardly.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the direction in which it has been dislocated.
The treatment of its displacement is easy reduction: it should be extended gently with the hands and made equal until it returns to its place.
But in the treatment of its complete dislocation, it is necessary to make the patient sit upright and for a strong assistant to hold them firmly from behind, in the middle of their back.
Then with your right hand grasp his foot from above and with your left hand beneath it at the ankle joint.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand Then use your left hand to grasp two fingers
Then stretch out your left hand and press the sole of the foot towards the thigh without exerting force.
Do this twice, as I have described.
Then on the third attempt, press the sole of the foot against the thigh and pull the ankle joint
If on the first or second attempt according to this method the foot returns and you see that it is even, then it is good. But if not, then repeat the procedure until it does return.
But if you are unable to reduce it as described above, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground. Then firmly plant a staff on the ground between their thighs and wrap them with cloth so they don't get hurt
Then have an assistant hold the patient's hip. After that, extend the other foot with their own hands or with a bandage tied around the ankle. Then all assistants should pull together in opposition to the extension of the patient's limb. The staff should stand between the two hips of the patient, preventing the body from being pulled downwards during extension
Then the physician reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below For the dislocation returns quickly
When the dislocation has returned and you are sure of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bandage it firmly with bindings. Bind the foot to the thigh with a bandage
It is important that you avoid or be cautious about damaging the nerves above the heel bone lest a tight bandage should injure them.
Then leave him for two days, or three. If the bandage softens, tighten it again; then on the third or fourth day, loosen it. Prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that time, there is no certainty that the dislocation will not relapse and be ruined, so that it cannot afterwards be cured.
If a hot abscess forms on him, then it is necessary to treat it with the method described elsewhere under 'Treatment', and apply ointment until it is removed.
On Dislocation of the Toes of the Foot, and its Treatment
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them should be reduced with slight extension without difficulty; indeed, this is not difficult, rather it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in some nodes of the back of the foot, then have the patient sit with his foot on an even surface with the ground or on a table, and stand as if walking.
Then you stand and place your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with strength until it returns and you see that it is reduced and there is no longer any prominence at the site.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board that can hold the whole foot, with two handles. Then bind it with an appropriate bandage for three days. Then loosen the bandage and have him rest from walking for many days until it is secured against relapse.
Regarding kinds of dislocations with wounds or fractures.
When something happens to the patient and you attempt treatment and restoration, death often follows. Therefore, one should not presume to undertake such a case unless they are skilled and experienced, compassionate, cautious, not hasty nor reckless; and they should initially use medicines that only reduce heat, and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for recovery from such a grave condition, with gentleness of illness, and where there is some sign of hope. Therefore, attempt reduction immediately at the onset of the injury before a hot abscess forms.
If the limb returns to its proper position as desired, then apply a regimen that reduces inflammation; and treat the wound with appropriate drying ointments.
If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and pieces of bone are separated, then attempt to remove them, and do as mentioned earlier for simple injuries regarding their locations.
But take care according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering into a path of fear; as I have previously taught you.
For it is better for you before your Creator and more lasting for your glory, and safer for your body among those of your time.
