After I completed for you, O Son, this book which is the last of medical knowledge with its supplement, and I reached its end through its explanations and clarifications, it seemed fitting to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of practice, that is surgery, by hand.
Since manual operation has been prostrated in our region and time, and has altogether been deprived until its knowledge may have perished, and its trace been cut off, and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in ancient books which were altered by hands, and error and hesitation occurred to them until their intentions were closed, and its way was lengthened, it seemed fitting to me to revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise therein according to the way of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation: and that I may come with forms of instruments for cautery, and other tools of operation, through addition of clarifications and expediting what is necessary.
The reason why no good artisan of it with his own hand is found in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its author must exercise himself beforehand therein in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated until he knows the joints of members, their forms, their connection and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, sinews, their number and course, and pulsating veins and quiet ones, and their outlets.
And because of this Hippocrates said that 'a name with a name is much, but with work it is little, especially in the art of hand.'
But we have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
Since whoever is not knowing what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error whereby people are killed, as I have seen many of those who claim to be formed in this knowledge and boast about it without knowledge and experience.
That is because I saw a foolish physician cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and sever certain arteries in her neck: wherefore blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed to remove a stone from a man who had grown old with it, and the stone was large. He went forth therefore unto him, and drew out the stone together with part of the bladder. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
But I myself had already been called unto to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the sick man, he would die.
And I saw another physician who received payment from a certain Duke of our land because of his medicine: and it happened that there was a fracture in the leg of a black eunuch who was with him near the heel. And the physician hastened with his ignorance, and bound the fracture over the wound with bandages and strong ligatures without allowing the wound to breathe.
Then he dismissed him according to his desire. Afterwards he let him go for some days and ordered him not to loose the bandage: and so it remained until his leg and foot became gangrenous and were destroyed.
I was therefore called unto him, and hastened to loose the bandage: and quietness followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the gangrene had already become confirmed in the member, and I could not check it.
So therefore the corruption spread throughout the member until he died.
And I saw another physician who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated afterwards, until its wickedness grew great with its owner.
This is because when an abscess is pure from black bile humor, then it should not be pierced with iron at all unless it is on a member that can tolerate it being completely cut off.
And therefore, O Son, it is necessary for you to know that an operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation associated with health, and an operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already indicated in every place of this book where an operation comes that causes fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of this and avoid it: so that fools may not find a way to speak about it and bring dishonor upon it.
Therefore take measure with care and protection, and your patients with ease and steadfastness. Use the better path leading by God's grace to health and praiseworthy success. Leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and free yourselves from that which causes you fear, lest doubt should enter upon your faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally for your profit.
For Galen has already said in certain of his admonitions. Do not treat an illness badly, lest you be called bad physicians.
Now however, I have divided this Treatise into three chapters:
Chapter one.
Concerning the cautery with fire and the cautery with sharp medicine, arranged and ordered from head to foot, and forms of instruments and implements of the cautery: and all that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter two.
Concerning section and perforation, bloodletting and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things: and all arranged and ordered with forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
Concerning restoration and reduction, and treatment of dislocations, and similar things: all arranged and ordered from head to foot with forms of instruments.
But before I mention the operation concerning it, it is necessary that I should speak of the benefits and harms of it, and in which constitution it should be exhibited.
I say therefore that the discourse concerning the benefit and harm of cautery is a long and subtle science, and a hidden secret.
Many wise men have spoken about it and they disagreed; but for me, a few words will suffice, lest I prolong (the discussion).
I say therefore that cautery is beneficial for every constitution, whether it has matter or not; except for two constitutions, namely a hot constitution without matter and a dry constitution without matter.
But concerning the hot and dry constitution with matter, they disagreed. Some said that cautery is beneficial for it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable for an illness that arises from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable to heal an illness that is hot and dry with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of that said: by cautery there is benefit for every hot and dry illness that occurs in human bodies; because when you compare the body of a man and its moistures to the constitution of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
I myself say through his words: for it has been proven true to me many times through experience.
But nevertheless it is not fitting that anyone should approach this matter except one who has already been proven and trained in the final chapter of Cautery Practice, and has known the diversity of human constitutions, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, accidents, and duration.
But as for other constitutions, there is no fear over them. And especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they do not disagree about using cautery to benefit them.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its good quality is such that it burns only the member being cauterized, and does not harm any other connected member unless there is a slight injury.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that which is distant from members, and perhaps causes difficult-to-heal illnesses to occur in a member, and perhaps even kills.
But fire, due to its fineness and good substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.
But we have learned this through experience due to the length of our service and study with this art, and our diligence in searching for the truth of things. And therefore I excuse myself for the length of this discourse.
And if it were not for the fact that this book of mine does not allow me to reveal to you the secret hidden in fire and the quality of its operation on bodies for driving out illnesses, which demonstrates by philosophical proof that it sharpens your minds.
And know, my sons, that they disagree at the time when cautery is to be performed, and they set a better time for the truth.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times: for the harm that occurs because of time is submerged in the benefit that is drawn along with cautery. And especially if cautery is performed because of pains from necessary, strong, and urgent ailments that do not tolerate delay; for it is feared that a greater harm may result from them than the slight harm caused by waiting for the right time.
And do not fall into the error, my sons, which is held only by the common people and foolish physicians, that there is no return to health after an ailment has been cured by cautery; they assert this consequence, but it is not so; for cautery is employed only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistures which are the cause of pains.
Nevertheless, cautery exceeds medicine in the swiftness of its cure, and the strength of its operation, and the vehemence of its power; it is possible that an ailment may return at some later time according to the constitution of the patient, and the location and nature of the ailment, and its strength; and what accumulates in his body from superfluities in him, and what reaches it through food and similar causes, unless he becomes ill with one in which cautery is administered.
A subtle ailment in a member with few superfluities and moistures, such as the pain of a toothache, for example, may not return. But this happens rarely.
However, the common belief that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not entirely accurate. People think that there is no cure after cautery.
On the contrary, cautery is not really the last resort of medicine; rather, it is used only when other methods of treatment have failed to bring about a cure.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than with iron, and they said this because of the fineness of gold and its exalted nature. They also said that it does not cause pus at the site of the cautery. But this is not absolutely true. For I have already proven that [cautery with gold] does not cause pus in some bodies without other complications.
And indeed cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you use fire cautery with gold, it is not clear how much heat you are applying due to the redness of the gold. Moreover, if you increase the heat, the gold will melt in the fire and become liquefied.
Therefore, the craftsman becomes confused by this. And for that reason, we use cautery with iron more quickly and accurately in our operations.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and ordered them from head to foot, so that whoever seeks something may find it easily.
Chapter 2.
Here the cautery is useful for the lordship of humidity and coldness above the brain: which two are causes of madness and multitude of flows of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat, and universally all diseases that occur from coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The method of cauterization is this: you should advise the patient to evacuate first with a cleansing solvent medicine for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient requires and their age and habit.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with a cauter.
Then take the olive-oil cautery: of which this is the shape:
Then place it on the marked spot with descent, as your hand is gradually tightened, and you turn it. Then quickly remove your hand, and examine the spot.
But if you see that now a quantity of alkiel has been released from the bone, or a quantity of zeuherbi, then raise your hand. And if not, repeat the cautery with the same iron or another if it has cooled until you see the bones which I have told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water and sprinkle it on the spot, and let him rest for three days.
Next, place upon it butter into which is soaked the mixture, and leave it there until the burn is destroyed. Then treat it with ointment tetrapharmacon until it heals.
They say that the more a wound remains open, the more pus it emits: therefore it is better and more helpful to keep it open.
And some of them say that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone and held until something of the thickness of the bone is burned.
Then shave what has been burned from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that one must come with the cautery to the final point until it makes an impression on the bone like a brand or instrument for lettering: and they think that from this place vapors of the head escape, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then treat it until it heals.
But these two methods of cautery seem to me useful only for certain people according to their nature and temperament.
I think it is better to leave it alone with care for its well-being.
For the head is weakened by breaking its natural continuity; as we have seen in other members, especially when it has a weak nature. The first method of cautery seems to me safer and better, and I use it; therefore act with caution.
Chapter Three.
When chronic headache occurs and persists in a patient despite the use of medicines such as hyeres, cochis, caput-purgatives, oils, and emplasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the cautery that I have described, and none of those remedies help: then consider. For if the head of the patient is robust by nature and not weak, and a violent chill is found: then cauterize with another cautery beneath it slightly. Then cauterize the horn of the head itself with the cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and uncover as much bone as I have described. And cauterize it with the cautery at the back of the head itself, in the place called 'the vessel': which is where the windpipe is placed, and raise your hand slightly there, without uncovering the bone. For the patient finds great pain in this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say that this cautery should be used in its place; and it is necessary that there should be a cautery for burning the horns of the head, and a finer one for burning the back of the head, which is also used for burning the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When pain and stiffness occurs in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with medicines that purify it, and the rest of the treatment that I have described for the divisions of illnesses is administered, but nothing helps: then cautery is performed on it in two ways: either cauterization with burning acute medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with burning acute medicine is this: take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends on both sides. Then incise the painful area in the temple with a wide lancet until there is made beneath the skin a place to hold the garlic.
Then insert it beneath the skin until it is hidden; then bind it with a suitable bandage of lint and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove the garlic and let the wound remain open for two or three days. Afterwards, apply butter in which a piece of cotton has been immersed until pus forms. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with certain medicines that burn, which I have written about in the twelfth book on burning medications.
Cautery of it with iron is done in this manner. The form of the cautery used for fire is as follows.
And it is called the 'Claw': because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, with some curvature and a small prominence in the middle.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand steady; you turn the iron gradually with speed, and let the amount that is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so that the artery below is not burnt, lest blood flow should occur.
Then bathe the wound with salt water and apply it to the spot; leave it for three days. Then apply butter to the wound. Afterwards treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second edge of the cautery. Beware of cutting the artery in this case, as it is not proper for an old wound.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in an old head wound.
When treating a head wound with what we have said about previous treatments and the divisions of illnesses, but the treatment does not help and you see that the illness is severe and that cautery with medicine or fire alone is insufficient, then take the cautery with the knife-like edge until it turns white. Then mark the spot of pain with a line whose length is half a fingerbreadth or roughly that amount. Then place your hand once and press it down until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
But you must take care to avoid the continuation of the jawbone that moves during chewing, lest the side or nerve that moves it be burned and cause spasm.
And beware of bleeding from the artery that has been cut off. For there is fear in its cutting, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is neither studious nor experienced. He may leave the procedure before it has even begun.
And I will come with a reminder about managing blood flow from an artery according to its method and location within this book.
But if you see that the illness does not improve with this cautery and observe the patient's body unable to tolerate it in the middle of the head as we have described, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, use the cautery with two knife-like edges that we mentioned in the chapter on arterial cautery. For this cautery causes better burning and is more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing ear pain.
When ear pain occurs due to cold and is treated with solvents and other remedies mentioned earlier but the pain does not go away, then cauterize it with fire using a cautery called 'the point,' which has this shape:
Then make dots with it around the entire ear after igniting it, as it revolves: or around both if there is pain in both ears. And lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with the hot iron; and let the amount of cautery be ten punctures in every ear, and almost that.
Then treat the areas until they are healed.
About the manner of cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture which is treated with cautery is only of kinds which occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of illnesses.
And avoid cauterizing species that occurs from drying out and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with herbs, and purgatives, and gargarisings, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the infirm person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and second a little lower from its time, and third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the infirm part. For softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you should cauterize with the cautery itself on the direct extremity of the upper ear under the horn of the head a little, and on the tympanum: whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And remove your hand with the cautery until it burns through half the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species from a cutlery knife, whose form is shown above: but it should not be too thin, as you see; and it is necessary that there be excess thickness on it a little like a knife.
Then treat the areas with what was prescribed earlier until it heals.
About the manner of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is of long standing and the treatments we have described do not help, nor does your medication bring about any improvement, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries upon each horn of his head, and one cautery in the middle of his head as already mentioned, and another cautery at the back of his head according to what is described before: and the method of cautery should be as previously stated.
And also cauterize with a cautery upon the stomach bone, which is the last resort.
Then treat him with what preceded [i.e., the previously mentioned treatments].
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that firstly the patient be given a large dose of hyera (a medicine made from the dung of a black ox) and pills to purge the brain.
Next, shave the whole head of the patient, and place upon the back of his head the plaster made from mustard described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it frequently.
For that indeed is the method of cautery: and do this according to the same order which I have described there [i.e., earlier in the treatise].
If therefore he is cured by it, that is good. But if not, then perform three cauteries on the back part of his head, descending from the upper part of his head to the lower part of his eye; and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cautery with what preceded [i.e., the previously mentioned treatments].
But if you wish to add more and the patient can tolerate it, then perform a cautery in the middle [of his head]. But if you wish to add still further, then cauterize him upon both horns.
Then treat him until he is cured; and let the cautery be of olive-oil according to the shape which has been prescribed.
On the method of cauterizing in the case of Paralysis and softening [of limbs].
Chapter X
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head using hyera, and with what we have said.
Next, shave the head of the patient; then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and cauterize every horn [temple] of the head, and cauterize behind it, and three times over the nape of the neck.
If the disease requires many mollifications of the body and the patient is tolerant but the illness is strong: then cauterize him four times with a cautery over the nape of his back, and the last one until it burns deeply into his skin, and raise your hand. Then treat him until he is healed: and thus cauterize with oil.
And how to cauterize for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first with hyera, and with the rest of the treatment which we have mentioned in the division: when the patient is great or is tolerant to accepting medicines.
But if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then gargarisms and cleansing chewables should be administered to him for many days before with good food.
Then shave his head; then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what has preceded in method: and cauterize another on his occiput, and cauterize over every horn of his head. But if the patient is strong and is tolerant then cauterize him with cauteries which I have mentioned in paralysis, and mollifications of the body over the nape of his neck and back: and let the cautery be oiled according to the method that has preceded.
But if the patient is a child then place a fine cautery, according to this method.
And how to cauterize for melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted moistures and thick phlegm then cauterize him with cauteries which we have mentioned in paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is abundance flowing towards melancholy, and the body of the sick is moistened, then give him in drink that cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in division: then shave the head of the sick, and afterwards make a turban well made of linen like a crown.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and let the sick person sitting squarely be held from every side.
Then present ointment. It is better made from old sheep butter. And warm it over a fire with moderate heat, which the finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then pour it onto his head in a circle and let it sit until it cools.
Do this for the sick person once every week with the rest of his good regimen until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small punctures around it, except where you hold your hand with the cautery: in fact, let there be a smell.
This kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it a cotton wick soaked in butter or chicken fat.
Method of cauterizing in water descending to the eye.
Chapter 13
When it is declared to you that the beginning of water is in the eye by signs which I have mentioned in division, then begin and give the sick person drink with that which cleanses his head.
And protect him from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath for several days while fasting.
Then command him to shave his head and cauterize him in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him over both temples with two cauteries if there is the beginning of water descending into both eyes at once, or on one side if there is the beginning of water in one eye: and cut off with a cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in breadth like the temples: and keep away from bleeding.
If you see anything from him, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck under two bones with two cauteries extended at the end.
About the way of cauterizing old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and continuous, and there are veins and arteries on top of them that are clearly visible on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from cold and phlegmatic excesses: then cauterize with a cautery the same as I have described for the beginning of descending water, placing one cautery in the middle of the head, two cauteries over both temples, and two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if you need additional caution, then carefully cauterize each side of the eye over the eyebrow with a small cautery.
About the way of cauterizing for foul-smelling nose.
When you treat that with what we have said about division and it does not help the treatment, then hurry and give him to drink cochlias three nights in a row: then shave his head and cauterize him with a middle-sized cautery using olive oil. Then cauterize him with a small cautery-shaped cautery on both eyebrows under the hair, a little.
And protect from the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the shape of the small cautery.
And how to cauterize for softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moisture, then cauterize it with one cautery, like this crescent-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every part; and they will become elongated in two times [i.e., periods]; and let the length of all the cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not place your hand last with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that is burned, one-third of the eyelid.
And how to cauterize the eyelid when hairs grow inwards and prick the eye.
The cautery for this is of two kinds: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with burning medicine.
But before applying the cautery with fire, instruct the patient to remove his hairs, if he has them for that purpose, until they grow out and become even. But if [the hairs] prick him at their origin, then compress his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow out.
And when they have grown out and become even, then place the head of the patient on your lap; next, mark the eyelid of his eyes with a hot iron, making the mark like the shape of a myrtle leaf; let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a cotton wick soaked in egg white or marshmallow gum on the eye.
Then with fire, use this shaped cautery.
Then cauterize over the mark you made gradually in many places until the skin surface burns completely like the proper shape of a myrtle leaf.
And the sign of the cure of your operation is: if you see the eyelid of the eye now contracting and the hairs raised at the point of entry into the eye.
Therefore lift up your hand then: and let him go for three days.
Then put on him a poultice with butter until the slough is removed. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if some of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens: then cauterize that place again as you did at first.
If the hairs are below: then cauterize them until they rise to their natural place and become even so that they do not prick the eye.
You should instruct the patient to let their hair grow until it reaches its full length and is even. Make a pattern of the laurel leaf shape from paper.
Next, take an equal weight (uncia I) of known soap and unslaked lime, mix them thoroughly with care, so that it does not cool. Then take some of this mixture and spread it onto the paper pattern you made in the shape of a laurel leaf. Place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white, and have the patient's head resting in your lap.
Place your index finger on the medication and press it gently for a moment. And whenever the patient feels the medicine biting, move it gently, as its bite is like fire.
When the sensation of being bitten continues as described, then remove the medication and move it with your finger. Once the biting sensation has ceased, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And then observe whether the eyelid lifts up as it does when cauterized with fire or cut. If not, apply more medication to the area where it has not taken effect and darkened, until your procedure achieves the desired result and the eye contracts.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter on it until the burned skin is healed. Then treat it with diaphanous ointment or another one until it heals.
And during the procedure, you must take the utmost care to ensure that no medication falls into the eye.
But if the eyelid becomes softened after a few days and something from the hair falls into the eye, apply the medication again to that area where the eyelid has softened, as you did initially. Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the shape of the laurel leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and weakness. Therefore, your consideration should be this: the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who strives for excellence in this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a tear duct fistula.
When you treat a fistula and it does not improve with what we have said about divisions of ailments, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap and have an assistant hold it between their hands so that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then place a poultice soaked in albumen of egg or slippery elm mucilage over his eye. Then take the cautery whose shape is like this:
It should be hollow like the shape of a swan's feather quill from one end to the other. And if you wish it to penetrate all the way to the other end, or if you wish it to slope upwards, then test it thus.
However, this hollow shape is best for your purpose.
Then express the fistula if it is open and remove its pus and dry it out. And if it is not open then open it and remove its pus.
Then place on it the cautery which has been heated very well.
And hold it with your hand against the cautery for a short time near the eye towards the nose so that your hand does not slip or disturb the patient. Then place the cautery in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
If you reach the beginning of your cautery up to the mouth, it will be well done. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary. And leave it for three days.
Then place cotton with butter and dress it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And scrape it according to what comes up in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some first described. Pay attention to the location of the fistula and find it. Then place in its opening a thin cannula, that is, a fine tube, which has this shape. And pour into it the amount of a dram of melted lead, and hold your hand with good retention on the tube so that the patient does not move at all, lest the molten lead reach his eye.
And it is necessary to place over the eye of the patient cotton soaked in egg white or water.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it with wonderful healing.
But if the fistula heals with what we have said regarding cautery and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to perform trephining of the nose and reduce the fistula to its course through the nose according to what will come up in its own place.
On the method of cautery for cracks in the lips.
Fissures often occur in the lip, which are called 'hairs', especially in children's lips.
But when you treat these fissures and the treatment does not help, then prepare a small cautery knife with this shape.
And its hollow should be like that of a scalpel.
Then quickly place it while hot into the actual fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of them.
Then dress it with wax, until it heals.
On the Method of Cauterizing a Fistula on the Face.
When an abscess occurs at the root of a gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth; then pus forms and bursts: afterwards it becomes hard, and pus continues to flow, and a fistula forms: if treatment is ineffective, then you must prepare a cautery according to its size that can fit into the fistula. Then insert it while hot into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its bottom and end; do this once or twice.
Then dress it afterwards with what was mentioned about dressing until it heals.
If the pus is cut off and heals, that will be good. But if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotted bone according to how it comes to its head.
On the Method of Cauterizing Softened Gums and Teeth.
When the gum is softened due to moisture and the teeth are loose, and treatment with medicines does not help; then place the patient's head on your lap.
Then prepare a cautery of the shape that will be described later so that you can place a cannula over the tooth; insert the heated cautery quickly into it and hold your hand briefly until the patient feels the heat of the fire having reached the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand; then repeat the cautery as many times as you wish.
Then let the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour; then spit it out.
The tooth's movement is strengthened, and the gums are softened and tightened, thus drying out corrupted moisture.
On the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, whether it's caused by cold itself or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization is necessary in two ways: either using a cautery with butter or using a hot cautery.
The cautery with butter is made by taking fresh butter and melting it in an iron spoon or bronze vessel. Then take a piece of cotton, dip it into the melted butter, and apply it to the tip of the tooth. Then immerse the cotton in boiling butter, quickly apply it to the painful tooth, and hold it until it cools. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, immerse wool or cotton in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth. Then put a hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Cauterization with fire is done using an air tube or an iron tube. And it should have some thickness to prevent the heat from reaching the patient's mouth.
Then take the cautery with fire, whose shape you will see, and apply it to that tooth. Hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times; for the pain will be removed either on the same day or on another day.
And when using that cautery, the patient should fill their mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then spit it out.
This is the shape of the cautery.
You can use whichever end you wish to cauterize, as much as possible. This is the shape of the tube.
On the method of cauterizing boils.
When boils are filled with phlegm and cold moistures, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, and require rapid digestion, then use a hollow cautery heated over fire, the shape of which is as follows.
It has two open ends, so that smoke can escape from one end. Place the heated cautery on the boil once or twice until it reaches the depth of the boil.
If the boil is small, then place the cautery according to its size.
Then leave it for three days and apply a poultice made with butter until what was burnt by the fire falls off.
Then treat it with toothache salve until it heals in the shape of a tube.
On the method of cauterizing for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.
When excess moistures accumulate on the lung canal, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then first evacuate the patient with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at night on the root of the throat in a depressed place, and be careful not to reach the throat itself or the skin except for a small part.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra. The cautery should be shaped like a nail according to the previous method.
Then treat it with what preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing for lung ailments and coughing.
When coughing and lung ailments are caused by cold moistures, the patient does not have fever or phthisis, and the ailment is long-standing, then cauterize them with two cauteries on the fork of the neck in depressed, soft, empty places. And cauterize [them] elsewhere in the middle of the chest between the two breasts with another cautery which is like the shape mentioned before.
And if you wish to cauterize by pricking with a cautery, that is called 'Punctum', the shape of which was mentioned before in pricking ear pain, and let there be [made] thirty prickings up to nearly another.
Then treat him as mentioned before until he recovers.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this shape. Therefore the cauterization is alleviated when you use instead of one cautery three cauteries at once.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moistures and it does not return to its proper place within an hour after being dislocated, until that becomes a habit for him, then it should be reduced first. Then let the patient lie on his back or on his healthy side. Then lift up with your left hand's fingers the skin which is inside the armpit going upwards; and if the joint is dislocated inward.
Then take a cautery with two branches. And its shape is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it pierces through to the other side; and the shape of the cauterization will come out with four cauteries.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cautery having three branches, in which case the shape of the cauterization will be six cauteries, and there are branches according to the fineness of the skin.
This is the shape of the cautery having three branches.
And sometimes one is added to this manner, therefore there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the cautery crushed garlic mixed with salt. Next, make the patient lie still so that they do not move the limb at any time until it has healed.
And if there is a dislocation towards the upper parts, which rarely occurs, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a claw-shaped cautery or by piercing with multiple cauteries.
For the union is strengthened and moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When coldness and much moisture occur in the stomach to the point that it is removed from its proper condition, and thick mucus accumulates upon it, and frequent remedies are attempted without success, then the patient should be made to lie on their back and extend their legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one under the curvature of the chest equal to the length of a finger with a claw-shaped cautery, and two below it on both sides of another cautery until the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle. And space them out so that they do not join together, lest they produce pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery used for this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking those who are tormented by this cautery: and it is as follows; that you mark upon the stomach a point according to the quantity which you wish with encaustum; then cauterize it with the cautery of the prick; then treat it with the treatment that preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing a cold liver.
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness and dampness, or from thick windiness, until it can naturally discharge its surplus through a proper exit, even though the patient has been treated with what we have already mentioned without improvement, then the patient should be made to lie on his back and three cauteries of this shape and size should be applied to the liver below the hypochondria where the elbow reaches. The space between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger, and each cautery should be as long as the length of the body itself. Do not press too hard with your hand when applying the cautery.
And let the amount burned be half the thickness of the skin, without adding more. And let the patient stand on his feet.
But if he cannot stand, then let him lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize these points with a surgical knife when skill and prudence are present in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in cauterizing, burning through the entire thickness of the skin, for then the whole body will be burned and reach the intestines. Know this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When an abscess forms and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or its tunic: if it is in the flesh of the liver, pain occurs without sharpness but with heaviness; if it is in the tunic of the liver, there is severe acute pain. You now see that its treatment has fatigued the physicians.
Therefore, let the patient lie on his back. Then mark the location of the abscess with a branding iron; then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. This is its shape. And cauterize it with one burn until all the skin is consumed and it reaches the abscess so that all pus may discharge. Then dress it according to the method for healing discharges until it heals.
And one should not use this kind of cautery unless someone has prolonged study in the art of medicine and whose hands have often practiced such ailments with experience. Then alone may they dare to perform such operations.
But it is better for me to leave it at that.
On the method of cautery in Pleurisy.
The ancients said that for cold pleurisy, one should use a cautery with the roots of aristolochia in this manner. And one should take from dried roots of aristolochia a single root that is longer than the others, and it should be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and light it on fire. Then cauterize once with the cautery at the junction of the neck and collarbone, and twice with small cauteries slightly slanted towards the side that is under the beard.
And twice more with cauteries slightly slanted towards the back at the space between the fifth and sixth ribs; and once with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and once above the stomach. And three cauteries from the back: one at the space between the shoulder blades; and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, with the lower cautery being that which is between the shoulder blades.
And do not press your hand while using the cautery; rather, let it be plainly visible on the skin, with the smell indicating its location.
And some ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron like a rod, and they ignite it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess itself, so that pus may discharge, as we have mentioned in the case of liver abscess.
But with this cautery method there is fear that either the patient dies immediately or a fistula forms in its place, which cannot be healed.
Chapter 32. On the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen.
When you treat an inflammation of the spleen, as we have said regarding its treatment among the divisions of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then there are three methods of cautery for it, all of which are correct.
The first method is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to its shape, like those for the liver, whose figure has been previously described.
And let each cautery be as thick as a finger's breadth, or slightly more.
And the method of cautery should be done equally, as we have said for the cautery of the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient lie on their back with their face up.
And another method of cautery is: take a cautery with two prongs, as described in the chapter on dislocations of the arm. Then lift the skin that is directly over the spleen where the left elbow reaches when the patient's arm is extended, and make your lifting just wide enough so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two heated prongs deeply until they penetrate through to the other side of the skin. Then remove the cautery, so that four cauteries are made in total.
And if you wish, you may cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
Then care for the cauteries after you remove them, allowing them to discharge pus for many days; this is more beneficial than any previous treatments.
Chapter [33]. On the Method of Cauterizing in Hydropsia.
A cautery should not be applied to one suffering from hydropsy except by a skilled physician.
When you are treating a person with hydropsy using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned earlier, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize [them] with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, another on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the shoulder blades, and one on the chest, and another on the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it may discharge pus over a long period of time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization. Rather, it is necessary for two intentions to be joined together: and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
But the form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a nail, according to its shape. And that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its shape.
Chapter [34]. On the Method of Cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When swellings occur in the feet of a person with hydropsy and they fill up with yellowish water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the point called 'nocrati,' which is between the heel bone (auricularem) and the ankle bone (anularis). Then lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it. Then lift your hand again and do not repeat the process at all.
For yellowish water will dry up, and the cautery should have this shape.
Then perform two cauteries on each leg, with the cautery having the shape of a small knife at its end. Make one cautery along the length of the leg, one below the knee and another below that, about midway down the leg. Perform two cauteries on the hip joint. Leave the cautery open without further treatment for a long period of time so that some water may be absorbed from it. Then treat [the patient] with the remaining methods we have mentioned.
Concerning the method of cauterization in an abdominal incision.
Chapter 35
When the abdomen is swollen due to coldness and dampness, until it weakens the powers of retention and digestion which are in the stomach and intestines, and this condition is treated with various remedies but does not heal, you will see that the patient cannot tolerate cauterization because of excessive vigor. Then cauterize the area over the stomach using a large cautery according to what has been previously described for cauterizing the stomach with a ring cautery, and four small cauteries around the umbilicus using a fine awl cautery. Also apply a large cautery or two cauteries above the bladder.
And if you see abundant dampness and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize them with a cautery over the pubic region and another over the entire hip joint. You might also add two small cauteries near the large stomach.
For this is a beneficial treatment whose aid does not fail.
Concerning the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one large one, caused by thick, cold humors or corrupted dampness, and they have been treated with the method mentioned earlier for division but do not improve, then cauterize three times over the lower spine of the back just below the hip bone in a triangular pattern, and once under the umbilicus about two fingers' breadth.
And if you consider that his stomach is cold and his food is not digested, and you see his face discolored, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described, another over his liver, and one over his spleen using an awl cautery. Leave the cautery open for some time, then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you divide an artery, then heat the cautery which resembles a glowing coal. Then insert the heated cautery into the divided artery until it reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If there are many arteries, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them with the appropriate ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the stomach, it is more effective as a final remedy.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
If the patient does not respond to the incision and operation described earlier, and is afraid of it, perhaps it will heal with cautery.
When an anal fistula occurs and becomes chronic, pus flows from it and there are corrupt discharges. It is therefore necessary to probe it with a fine probe. Then determine the depth of its extent using the probe.
Then heat the cautery which resembles a glowing coal. Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches the depth at which the probe entered.
And repeat the cautery over it once or twice or three times depending on what is necessary.
And beware of burning the nerve if it is there, or a large vein, or if the fistula extends to the bladder or the intestines; then beware of all these areas.
And do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is located in a fleshy area and you are certain that it does not penetrate deeply.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
But if the site is sealed and no more material is being excreted from it even after a long period of time, then know that it has healed completely.
And if material continues to be excreted from it, then know that the fistula is penetrating deeply or there is a rotting bone at its base, or something similar.
Method of Cauterizing Kidneys
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or excess wind, and this condition weakens sexual function, then it is necessary to cauterize the area using a cautery spoon placed over the kidneys. Cauterize each kidney with an iron cautery and a claw-shaped cautery.
And perhaps we cauterize again on the following day. So there will be three cautery marks. Therefore, they will be most helpful for healing.
Method of Cauterizing the Bladder
When weakness and laxity occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, causing the patient not to retain urine, then cauterize the lower part of the pubic area over the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Use a cautery from the right side of the pubis and another from the left; let their length be equal to the breadth of the thumb. Also cauterize the lower back of the bladder with a single or double cautery, according to what is needed.
Method of Cauterizing the Uterus
When cold and humidity affect the uterus causing infertility, disrupting menstruation, delaying ovulation, and resulting in pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel using cauteries of the same length as those used for cauterizing the bladder. Also cauterize below the back of the ribs with a single or double cautery.
On the method of cauterization for the anus in cases of dislocation.
When mucous discharges reach the anus and cause its prolapse from its proper place, with one leg extended over the other as a sign, and the location of the prolapse is found to be empty.
It is necessary to cauterize the inflamed area around the anus with a cautery of circular shape. After marking with a hot iron around the circumference of the prolapsed tissue, ensure that the tissue falls into the center of the circle.
But if you do not have this cautery present, then cauterize with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery, making the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the anus and is caused by coldness and humidity, and treatment using diuretics does not help, then it is necessary to remove the thick humors with foul-smelling pills or similar artificial pills. Then cauterize him.
The method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with a cautery using burning medicines, or with a cautery heated with fire.
A cautery with fire has many methods.
One method is to cauterize the anus itself three times using triangular cauteries in this shape: . And make it either a good or bad depth. And let the space between each cautery be as thick as a finger. And let the cauteries be oiled.
Sometimes, however, a cautery is applied directly onto the head of the anus itself. So there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circular cautery, the form of which is as follows for the cautery of anal prolapse, use one that completely encircles the anus.
Burn through the entire thickness of the skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain adheres to the anus itself and does not extend up to the hip and thigh.
But if it extends up to the hip and thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip at the location where the sick person indicates that pain is felt. And also cauterize along the groove of the buttocks about four fingers from the genital region using a knife-shaped cautery.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the sick person indicates that pain extends nearly to the toes, then cauterize there where they indicate using a puncturing cautery, three or four times, or more if necessary.
And if they indicate that pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there using one knife-shaped cautery.
But be careful in all your cauteries so that you do not burn through to the nerves or a large artery and thereby cause harm or contraction to the sick person.
And indeed I have seen one person and another among those who cauterized along the buttocks and burned through too deeply, causing swelling of the thigh that spread to the foot until it became completely perforated and corrupted. Then gangrene set in, followed by death.
If pain is felt in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men have spoken concerning the cautery of the ankle, which is the subject of this method. Make a mold like this one out of iron, whose diameter is half the length of a palm; and let it have at its opening the thickness of a finger joint or less; and inside that mold there should be another mold.
And let the space between each mold be equal to the thickness of a thumb joint; and let the molds be open at both ends, with a height of about one or two joints; and make them a well-fitted handle out of iron.
Then heat it in a fire until it glows red and sparks fly off; then place it on the ankle bone of the sick person lying on their healthy side. So cauterize him with three round cauteries in place of one.
Then leave him for three days. Afterward, apply poultices with butter; and allow the wound to remain open for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, 'We have rarely used this kind of cautery, because of its frightening appearance and because we found few people who would endure it.'
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries for those who can bear it, and it finds its proper place.
But the cautery with burning medicines is like this: make two molds having a pierced ring into which descends the pin of its door made of iron or bronze, equal to their height.
And let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a finger joint, and let them be open at the bottom and top; and let them fit together like this.
Then place it on a board of lead, with the sick person lying on their healthy side. And press your hand firmly upon the board of lead. Then pour between the two circles hot water, which has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for about an hour: and let the sick person bear its biting and scorching, for he found that the biting is like fire until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and remove the hot water from the lead board entirely with fresh water; then leave it for three days.
And place upon it butter until the blackness of the burning is removed: and leave it for some days, and pus will flow from it. For this is the final remedy.
And then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or thigh, make for him another such apparatus containing water, just as you did for the lead board.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written about it in my treatise on the correction of medicines. Take quicklime and undried slaked lime each in equal portion: grind both of them and place them in a new pot whose bottom has one small hole according to the size that the sun can enter: and place underneath the pot another pot glazed: and pour upon the quicklime and slaked lime from sweet water, so that both are submerged by one finger's breadth: then press them with your hand with good pressure: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends through the lower part of the glazed pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it upon more slaked lime and grind until it renews itself.
This will then be of very strong sharpness, which is used in many operations in medicine and in the cautery of other limbs. Because it makes the action of fire itself effective.
And among the medicines are those with which ulcers are cauterized, such as tessia and manna, and chalk mixed with soap, so that each may be well combined.
And indeed Galen has reported the story of a man from ancient times who was cured of the pain of ulcers and sciatic veins by this treatment, which he greatly praised. And he said that he did not require any other treatment and that he was cured with just one application; until he reported that perhaps he entered the bath carried and came out of it already healed.
And it should be taken from green sittairga; and if the green is not found, fresh dried may be taken and ground much with some fat and placed upon the ulcer or leg or thigh where there is pain, and bound on, and allowed to remain for a period of three hours or until the patient feels relieved from the burning sensation. Then immerse him in a bath.
When his body becomes moist, then put him on a seat. For the pain subsides and the wound is healed.
And know that one should not use a cautery with these medicines unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscorides also said that goat droppings, when used with it to cauterize the sciatic vein, are beneficial for this purpose, and a cautery is made according to this method. Take wool and impregnate it with old oil and place it upon the deep hollow which is between the big toe of the foot and the heel, closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat droppings and burn them in fire until they become charcoal.
Then place it upon the wool and let it remain until it is extinguished. Then repeat this process. Do not cease doing this until sensation reaches the ulcer and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called the vaccinating cautery.
On the cauterization of back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to many causes, either by chance, or from impact, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and humid matter: and cautery is not applied except in this single type, which occurs from the infusion of cold matter.
It is therefore necessary, after evacuating the sick person with fetid pills and similar things, so that they are placed on the back where the pain is located, to draw three lines according to its width. Then, mark with a hot iron in every line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity which comes from the tolerance of the sick person's strength. And let the cauterization be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle nail cautery, according to this shape.
On the method of cauterizing at the beginning of a hump.
This illness often occurs in young infants.
And the sign of its beginning in children is: that tightness occurs upon him during elevation and movement, and you will find at the last spine of the back and its nodes, that it has already begun to rise above the remaining spines.
When therefore you see this, and wish to do this, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this shape.
And let the cautery cover the entire part of the spines evenly. And if you wish, cauterize around the spines with a point cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close together.
Then treat the place until it heals with what we have said.
And take care not to administer a cautery on a hump which occurs due to nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold moistures which flow to any part of the body, then when these pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to name this 'Podagra' properly.
Therefore, when gout caused by coldness is being treated with various methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is necessary to cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive oil.
If you wish to make punctures on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery. But if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize the entire knee with three cauteries, or four on all sides, with the same cautery of Claudianus.
If however you need more of this cautery, then cauterize it [the foot]. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but let it be about as thick as the skin.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then apply what we have said from the cautery according to its chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands? Then make punctures around the joints like two lines revolving.
But if there remain any pains in the fingers, then puncture them on every joint and on the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after some days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both on all sides.
And do not evacuate the patient from a good regimen, nor from receiving medicines. For if a good regimen is established and phlegm is evacuated, the illness will be cured with God's help along with this cautery.
On the method of cauterizing ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and an intestine or spermatic cord descends, and it is beginning to be close by: then you should order the patient to refrain from food on that day. And let him use gentle laxatives so that feces may descend from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands upon his back: and command him to hold his breath until it passes out, or the spermatic cord or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers and mark [the spot] with a cautery beneath the rupture above the pubic bone, with a sign whose upper end is like half of a circle.
Then heat the cautery which has this shape until it becomes white-hot and emits sparks. Then reduce the intestine or spermatic cord to its hollow. Then let the assistant place his hand on the spot so that the intestine does not slip out: and you have now opened between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion beneath him, and another servant is upon his legs, and another upon his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery upon the mark itself with your hand holding it upright. And hold it until you reach the bone with it; or repeat [the process] once more if you did not reach the bone on the first attempt.
And carefully observe that no intestine escapes during your cautery operation, lest you burn it and cause harm or serious injury to the patient.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is useless.
And it is necessary for children to have a fine cautery according to their size.
Then care for [the patient] with the remaining ointments until he is healed.
And let the patient lie upon his back for forty days until the wound closes.
And it is necessary that you provide nourishment suited to the duration of his treatment, which will soothe his stomach: so that no part of his intestines may be affected during excretion and digestion.
Then, when he wants to rise after forty days, then apply a well-made bandage, and let it stay for another forty days.
And reduce his labor, food intake, and drink, and prevent violent coughing.
For when he follows this regimen, he will be cured completely.
And I shall speak of the treatment of Ruptures with Incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the remainder of the abdomen and are beginning, and you wish that they not increase, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let that which is burned be like a third of it. Then treat it as we have said, and it will not increase.
And some of the first ones said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this shape.
After it is marked with the cautery, and a line is placed that goes across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the keyhole-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Regarding the method of cauterization for pains caused by a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in some limbs due to a fall or blow and persists for a long time without improvement despite treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the puncturing cautery.
And let the cautery for each member be according to its size, thickness, weakness, strength, location of the twist, and pain caused by it.
If it is cured after the first cauterization, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery upon it.
For it is customary with these pains that they shift from one member to that which is near it. Therefore you should pursue them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in Leprosy.
But sometimes lepers are greatly benefited by cautery. And especially that type of leprosy which arises from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider.
But if leprosy is beginning and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not subside nor stop, and you fear that corruption will spread over the whole complexion of the patient, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the two horns [of the forehead], and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And lastly apply your hand with the cautery lightly until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the skin layers are loosened from it; so that the expiration of thick vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize also the spleen according to what preceded.
But if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize with those cauteries which we said for the head, and one on the tip of the nose, and two on both jaws, and two on both collarbones, and six on the ribs of the back, and one large one at the buttocks near to the tailbone and one above it in its depth: and two on the hips, that is on all the hip one, and two on both knees: one on all knee joints, and two on shoulders, and two on elbows, and two on the softnesses of his chest: and cauterize him on all jointures from the jointures of his fingers hands and feet; and cauterize also over all heel of his feet and palm of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are upon the heel lest thou burn them.
Also, cauterize with a cautery on the breastbone, and another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you prolong the cautery, the greater is the benefit and advantage.
And know that the patient does not find pain in cauterization as the healthy do; because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of such size and fineness according to the members and joints as we have previously described concerning the kinds of instruments.
Then care for the cauteries with herb flour mixed with honey, and other remedies until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in Stupor.
When some member becomes paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and yet does not recover, then cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin for a brief moment. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization is applied to a certain numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, at the hip bones of the back near the exit of the nerves which move those limbs; and the numbness is removed.
But let no one presume to do this except someone who is wise in anatomy of the limbs and the exit of moving nerves.
Chapter 51
When the Albaras is cauterized and nothing can be accomplished with medical techniques, then cauterize it with a deep cautery briefly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of barley, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of sage, and dove's blood, and thrush's blood: let each be one part; mix all these together and apply them on a bandage, and let them adhere to the place until it heals.
About the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When a cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize its circumference with a circular cautery all around it, as it revolves.
But wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last point of the cautery in the middle.
But I do not think this, for I fear that it may ulcerate; and I have already seen this happen many times.
And it is better to cauterize its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
About the method of cauterizing in Adubelati (Hernia).
When someone has a hernia that is delayed in its reduction, either because of excess fluid causing it or because of the advanced age of the patient who is weak and has little blood, or because of the time it has been present, and you wish to hasten the reduction of the hernia, then cauterize around its circumference with many small cauteries, puncturing. Then leave it alone. For it will reduce on its own.
But if you wish to perform a puncture of the hernia with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the hernia until it pierces the skin, and let the cautery be slightly inferior to where it follows, so that the course of the purified fluid may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it heals.
And regarding the method of cauterizing a malignant ulcer.
Chapter 52
A corrupting ulcer is nothing but corruption that travels along a limb and consumes it, like fire devouring dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrupting ulcer in a place that can withstand being cauterized with fire, then heat many cauteries, some small and some large, according to what is fitting for the spot where the corruption is.
Then cauterize it on all sides until you have erased the entire corruption, so that nothing of it remains at all.
Then leave it alone for three days, and place powdered sulfur mixed with oil on the cauterized areas until all scabs and corruption are removed.
Then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is generated without corruption, then it is good.
But if not, then repeat the cautery on whatever remains of the corrupted areas.
And sometimes a corrupting ulcer is treated with an acrid medication. For it itself arises from the place of the cautery.
However, cauterization with fire is a quicker remedy. And indeed I have already mentioned cauterization of it with an acrid medication in the section on division: therefore take that there when you need it.
On the manner of cauterizing fingernails and warts.
Chapter 56.
It often happens that this illness occurs in the lower parts of the feet, and it is a thick, filtered substance that harms the foot.
And indeed cauterization in these [cases] is according to two methods: cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
The amount of cautery with fire should be like a hollow cautery resembling the feather of an eagle made from iron, according to the quantity that contains the nail on all sides and has sharp edges.
Then place the heated cautery upon the nail. Then revolve the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail, and leave it there for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice with wild mallows crushed with salt upon it, and leave the poultice over it during the night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with an ointment that generates flesh until it heals.
But if they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet, then you should administer cauterization with hot water. And this is done by taking a cannula made from bronze or iron or eagle's feather and placing it upon the nail or callus. Then pour a small quantity of hot water into the cannula and keep your hand steady as you rotate it with gentle pressure so that the edge of the cannula impresses upon the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find its way to the depth. And let the patient wait for about an hour until the burning sensation from the hot water has subsided.
Then leave him alone, for the nail will be removed along with its roots.
Do this one at a time until you have done them all in the body.
Then care for them after they are removed with ointments that generate flesh.
On the method of cauterizing a tremor.
When trembling occurs in someone due to coldness of the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from some other cause: then it is necessary to cauterize them with four cauteries, or five, on the spine of the back, and between every spine with a cautery, and one on the chest, and another on the stomach.
For trembling ceases when cauterized with an oil cautery, and health hastens the recovery of the frozen illness.
On the method of cauterizing 'albatheer' (a type of tumor).
Chapter 67.
Sometimes foul tumors called 'albathir' are expelled from the body, that is, pustules caused by corrupted materials.
Therefore, when they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize them with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which has been set on fire. 'Or with the root of long aristolochia.' Or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized bit by bit at the beginning of their eruption according to this method, and they do not increase; and the excess that causes them is broken up, and they are healed.
But it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing bleeding from an artery wound.
Often it happens that blood flows from an artery which has been cut during a wound made externally, or during the incision of an abscess, or cautery on a limb, and similar cases: and it is difficult to stop it.
But when such a thing happens to someone, then promptly place your hand over the artery's opening and put your index finger on it: and press it tightly until the blood is blocked under your finger and nothing flows out of it.
Then put a small olive-oil cautery into the fire, and many others likewise: and blow on them until they become very heated.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is disrupted, and put the cautery on it. Then quickly remove your finger, and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
But if blood is expelled when you lift your finger from the artery's opening, then quickly take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire.
Do not cease doing this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, lest another mischief happen upon the sick person.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it except by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract and the blood stops flowing. Or it can be tied with a strong liga Or put on it medicines that have the property of stopping blood, and tie it with an appropriate compress.
But whoever tries to stop it by tying it with a bandage and compression with cloth, or with the application of burning substances and similar things, rarely succeeds.
But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present nor any medicine: then he should begin by placing his index finger over the vein's opening, as we have described, and compressing it very tightly until blood flow from above the wound is blocked off. And the finger should not be moved, while continuously applying cold water of intense coldness from above it until the blood congeals, thickens and is cut off.
And meanwhile he should consider what is needed in terms of a cautery or medicine.
On Cutting, Piercing, and Bloodletting in Wounds, and Similar Conditions.
We have already spoken in the First Chapter about every disease in which it is appropriate to use fire cautery and burning medicine, their indications, causes, instruments, and shapes of cauteries.
And I set forth there chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same way, so that the seeker may find what he is looking for.
And before I begin this, O sons, it is necessary that you learn that what is in this chapter about cautery is even more terrifying than what is in the first chapter.
And therefore it is necessary that caution be even greater in this, since in the operation which is in this chapter, there often occurs evacuation with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of these trembling and fear arise, and many of them result in death.
And I warn you not to fall into that about which there is hesitation, for sometimes people with various conditions come to you in this art. Among them is he who becomes angry with his illness and finds death light: because of the vehemence of what he has found from his illness and the length of his wickedness. And with the illness, there is fear that signifies death.
Among them is he who offers his wealth and shares it with you, hoping for health, but his illness is deadly.
Therefore, do not consent to him who comes to you from among them whose way is like this. And let your caution be greater than your greed and desire for gain. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after certain knowledge which proves among you that he has achieved worthy success.
And use in the care of all your patients prognosis and indication about that towards which health is suitably directed.
In that there is for you assistance towards acquiring fame and glory, and remembrance and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that you may find easily what you seek from it and what you need.
On the treatment of water which collects in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
You should know that this illness often happens to children at birth or when the midwife tightly squeezes the child's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it also happens due to an unknown cause which is not known.
I myself have not seen this illness in anyone other than children, and death hastened to all whom I saw with it. Therefore, it seemed to me necessary to leave the operation on that.
I myself saw among them a boy whose head was filled with water and swelled every day until he could no longer sit up due to the size of his head. The fluid increased until he died.
This fluid either collects between the skin and bone or collects under the bone over the forehead.
As for the operation on this [condition], if there is fluid between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you should make a single slit in the middle of the head's seam with a width of about two joints until the fluid flows out.
This is the form of the operation.
If however the fluid has increased more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions following this pattern.
But if the fluid is under the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head opened on all sides, and when you press it with your hand towards the interior, water appears and does not hide from you: then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner.
After the incision, remove all the fluid. Then close the incisions with bandages and lint. Then dress it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage and treat the wound with linens and ointments.
And do not leave the head bound unevenly. Feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the size of the abscess and collection of water appear.
Because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or forehead, or on the right or left side.
Therefore, make your incision where you see the abscess and accumulation of water appear, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest there be a flow of blood and the patient dies from that flow along with the evacuation of humidity.
Concerning the Incision of Arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter 2.
If purulent matter occurs around the eyes or chest of someone, and it becomes chronic without being helped by medical treatment, then the ultimate remedy for that is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, it is necessary that the patient uncover his head. Then rub the place with a coarse cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then let the patient tie his neck with any of his clothes. Then observe where the vein pulsates. And these places are located behind the ears and depressed; they are rarely concealed unless in certain individuals.
Then mark both places with cauterization and cut each with a small, sharp instrument on either side until it reaches the bone, and let this be done along the width of the head.
If you wish, insert a small instrument beneath the artery and cut it upward with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood issues forth in a pulsating manner, which flows upwards rapidly and frequently into the inner parts.
But if the artery does not appear visibly, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers. Then mark with cauterization and feel for it until you reach the bone.
And what ought to be emitted from the blood is about six ounces, although you may emit more or less than that. All this depends on the quantity which appears to you according to the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
Then observe the wound. If anything remains attached to the bone from the cutting, then cut that off so that a hot abscess does not occur; then tie the wound with bandages made of linen cloth.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And on extracting arterial vessels found in temples.
Chapter III.
When an old headache or sharp catarrh occurs due to acrimonious humidities and heat in the temples' nerves, or old soda and similar things; and it is treated by medicinal methods of treatment without effect: then we have tried extraction of arterial vessels from the temples, or cauterization of them, as described.
And the method of operation for extracting them is: let the sick person shave the hair on the temples, and direct attention to the visible artery in the temple. Indeed this [artery] becomes evident by its pulsation, and is rarely concealed unless in a few men or due to extreme cold.
But if it is not evident to you, then let the sick person bind his head with any cloth he has; then rub the place with a coarse cloth. Or warm the place with hot steam until its appearance becomes manifest. Then take the scalpel which I made earlier. Then gently scrape off the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it and extract it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and remove it from all its surrounding tissues.
If however the artery is slender: then envelop it with the tip of the hook. Then cut off a piece from it according to how much its ends extend and contract, so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut or severed, blood will not flow upwards at all.
Then express six drops of blood from it using the hook, up to three times.
But if the artery is large: then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with a strong double thread made of silk or horsehair, so that decay does not reach it before the wound is consolidated and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligatures. Do that at that hour or another hour afterward.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery until its ends are cut off and remains in the place of the operation.
But this method is better unless the patient has a fever or is of hot temperament. For cautery is among those things which help to dry moistures. So it is the better remedy.
And after the removal of the arteries, it is necessary that the place be filled with old cooked wax and powders properly made be put upon it.
And after the dressing, treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with linen until it heals.
But if during the operation blood flows from the artery, then quickly cut it with a cautery or fill the place with wax and press your hand until the bleeding stops. But if none of these are present, then put your finger on the place until the blood coagulates. And apply cold water to the place until the pain subsides and the dressing is applied properly.
And for a lighter and easier removal of the artery, cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, the sharpness of both knives being like an almadat. But they are much less sharp than the two knives. For if they are as sharp as the two knives, both will become cold quickly and will not cut the flesh quickly. Therefore, since they have some thickness, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut quickly. Therefore this operation is better than any other, lighter, and easier.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
And let the space between two cauterizing irons be as thick as a finger. After you mark two places with the hot iron, set them aside until they reach the bone, and strike the vein in both places so that it may stretch out what is between its ends. For these cauteries do not completely harden.
Chapter IV
On the treatment of frequent and sharp pains in the eyes.
When there are frequent tears and their course is from the veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head, and no cure can be brought about by medicine with medicines; and you see the face of the patient beginning to redden, and he feels a creeping sensation in his forehead, like the crawling of ants, and his eyes are sunken and moist, so that even the lashes have become rotted away through moisture; and the eyelids are hot from the acuteness of the tears: then the ancients needed this operation for their cure, which they called 'operation with a knife'.
And first, you should order the patient to shave the hairs from his forehead. Then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced along its length. Each incision should be about two fingers long, and one should be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second a little further along towards the temple, and the third on the other side. Be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws. The space of each incision should be as wide as three joined fingers. Have ready some dry sponges or many pieces of cloth with which you can wipe away the blood.
Then insert a probe with two sharp ends, whose shape is as follows: Starting from the incision on the temple side, go up to the second incision and strip off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions together with the pericranium that is over the bone. And do likewise from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this probe and insert into the first incision another instrument called the scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other. This is its shape:
And hold its sharp edge towards the flesh attached to the skin and its blunt edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. Then cut with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except for those which are continuous with the incision up to where the skin appears.
Then do likewise from the middle incision to the other incision.
And after an equal amount of blood has flowed out, squeeze the places with pieces of dried blood.
Then place in every incision a linen cloth from old cotton and put over them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And make sure no hot abscess forms.
On the third day dissolve the suture and apply a lot of warm water rinse. Then treat it with balsam ointment and other remedies used for wounds until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On treating sharp pains and cataracts in the eyes from within the head.
When sharp, biting, persistent cataracts occur to someone: and you see their eyes wasted away, small, and the appearance of them weakened; and the eyelids ulcerated, and hairs falling out from them, and there is sharp pain in the depth of the head, causing injury, and coughing follows: then know that these accidents happen because those materials, and cataracts do not come unless from many veins.
And the best treatment for these is this. And it is to order the patient to shave his forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly longer across its width, and begin cutting from the left temple to the right temple; let the incision be until it reaches the bone. And extend your hand away from the temples which move during mastication until when you expose the bone. Then dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the wound using a boiled old cloth or linen strips. Then tie it from above with wool. And moisten the wool with wine and oil so that no hot abscess occurs.
And when you open it, and you see that the hot abscess has diminished, then you must scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth: thus if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare an ointment from them, it should be applied to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On treating what falls into the Ear.
Every object that falls into the ear is of one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is liquid, such as water and vinegar and things like them; or some kind of animal.
When a stone falls into the ear, or some other substance that does not adhere and grow within it, expose the ear to the sunlight. If you see the stone, then pour a little violet oil or rosewater into the ear. Then administer the removal of it [the stone], and cause sneezing with condiments, and hold a cloth against the nostrils upon approach of sneezing, after which you place pieces of linen or wool around the ear and pull the ear upwards.
For indeed many times does it exit with this treatment.
But if it does not exit, then administer its removal with the Gestum, that is, with delicate tweezers; the shape of which is like this.
If therefore it exits with the Gestum, it is good.
And if not, then administer its removal with a delicate bent hook of few turns.
If it does not exit through that [the hook], then make a cannula of brass and insert its end into the opening of the ear far in, and seal what is around the cannula with softened wax mixed with oil so that there may be no way for wind except through the cannula: then extract it with strong suction of your breath.
For indeed many times does it exit with what we have mentioned. But if it does not exit this way: then take a little from the helkalimbat or from dough, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught; and place it on the end of a rod after you have wrapped it with a cloth well placed. Then insert it gently into the opening of the ear after you have dried the ear.
If therefore it does not exit with all that we have mentioned, then hurry to cut before hot inflammation or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is such that the physician should first perform phlebotomy on the patient at the cephalic vein and remove blood according to his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, turn their ear towards the upper parts and find a small incision in the root of the ear at its depressed place. Make the incision crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it together with what is possible using your instruments.
Then quickly stitch up the wound with care, until it heals.
But if there is a foreign body in the ear like a grain that grows and swells, then perform its removal.
If it does not obey you for exit, then take a thin, fine hook in this shape:
And use it to cut off that kind of grain which falls into the ear. Do not do this when you think that the grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put in many pieces. Then remove them with hooks or a fine pair of forceps, or with suction as we have said, for its removal will be facilitated.
But concerning water that enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing first. Then fill the ear with some warm old oil and lie down on the side of the ear where there is water. If therefore it comes out through that [means], it is good.
And if not, then take many stones of the length and thickness of a finger, soften them with heat for a short time, and have the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear. Then let him stand on one foot on that side and strike the inserted stone gently with another stone from outside. Do not cease doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you may take one from a feather or from a reed and insert one end into the ear, and light the other end with fire until it burns greatly. Then repeat this with another reed many times, until all the water comes out. And remove it with a cannula as has been described previously on the stone.
But in the removal of an animate creature that has entered it, if it is small-bodied, like a flea or similar, treat it as I have said in division.
But if it is large-bodied and apparent to the senses, then perform its removal with hooks and forceps. And this task is easier than all those held in the ear.
But in the removal of a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said in division and in the treatise on distillation, but your treatment does not succeed: then it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun. If therefore something from the worms appears there, then remove it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula of this shape, narrow below and wide above. And insert its fine end into the ear according to how much the sick person can tolerate it, and then suck with strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then seal around the cannula with wax as I have said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what has been said, then perform the distillations that the ancients have proven effective in killing worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillation.
And let your pouring be such when you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below with a small hole, wide above.
Therefore, let the plunger that fits into the concave part of the cannula be made of well-crafted brass. If you wish, take a wand and wrap cotton around its tip in an appropriate wrapping. Then pour oil or juice or any of the medicines you wish into the cannula, with it placed in the ear. Next, insert the wand with the cotton onto it from above, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is pushed into the concavity of the ear, so that the patient feels its warmth inside. And whatever is dripped into the ear should be warmed a little with fire, and be careful that nothing very cold distills into it, for medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of accidental perforation of the ear.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs without being pierced.
And it has happened that some people have had blockage of the ear's passage due to injury or flesh grown within it.
And this blockage sometimes occurs deep inside the ear canal where it cannot be seen, and at other times it happens near the opening of the ear canal where it can be seen.
Therefore, blockage that occurs deep inside the ear canal and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in most cases.
And with the one that can be seen, you should place the patient's ear in sunlight and look into it. If you see an apparent blockage, open it with a fine spatula, whose shape is as follows: its tip should have a small width, part of which is sharp; the rest of the spatula should have two smooth sides so that it does not harm the ear.
If the blockage is due to flesh grown within the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine hook and cut it away with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
But if the blockage is deep within the ear, then take a thin, gentle probe and heat it slightly with fire. Then insert it into the ear canal.
If you find a blockage with what caused the patient's hearing difficulty, try to remove it gently; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a wick made from linen according to the size of the wound's opening into the ear, soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed properly.
Or take a wick and soak it in rosewater, then dust it with powdered saffron, and use it as such.
But if you see that the ear has begun to swell, then remove the wick and allow it to rest with another wick soaked in cerate made with rose oil until the swelling subsides. Then treat it until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear. Then use the other treatments mentioned earlier in this treatise to stop the bleeding.
On the treatment of swelling of the eyelids.
Chapter 8
These swellings that occur on the eyelids can sometimes be moist and at other times dry.
Therefore, hold them with forceps or with a hook, and cut them away from their roots using scissors. Then place powdered saffron on the area.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after cutting. For they often return when some of their roots remain. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter on the Treatment of Swelling of the Eyelids.
Chapter Nine.
It often happens that something resembling a grain in strength and hardness appears on the eyelids, and because of this it is called a swelling. It is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation for these is: first consider whether it is a swelling that has appeared on the eyelid and moves towards all parts, and its consistency is soft.
Make an incision over it lengthwise. Then tear it out from every part with ease until it is completely removed. Then hang it with a hook and cut it off.
But if its removal cannot be accomplished without first making a small incision into the eyelid, then it causes harm to the sick person.
But if the incision is large: then gather it together with stitches and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come from it. For the ointment restores it and joins it together.
And if the swelling leans towards the inside of the ear on the inner surface, then turn back the eyelid and hang the swelling with a hook. Except for needing an incision, press it from all sides.
But if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, this causes no harm.
Then rinse the eye after the removal of the swelling with salt water and care for the area with something that promotes healing until the sick person is healed.
Chapter on the Treatment of Swelling of the Eyebrows.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is fat that is produced in the skin of the upper eyelid. This happens most often to children and it weighs down their eyes. They suffer from catarrh in the mornings and cannot look at sunlight because tears flow towards them. Therefore, you see them always leaning on their faces and sleeping upon them. Their eyelids are moist under the eyebrows which have already become swollen due to inflammation. The prominence of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel it between them.
And its method of operation is that the sick person places their head on thy lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare upon it some thread, and make from that thread a circle according to the size that contains Axirnath on all sides. Then place it upon it, and press with your fingers on all sides so that Axirnath may gather in the middle of the circle.
Then make an incision with a scalpel in the midst of that moisture along its width and not deeper than the incisions made for bloodletting.
Otherwise you must cut the skin all the way until you reach Axirnath, for in many cases Axirnath proceeds from the incision like a piece of white fat.
Then remove it with a cloth that you have moistened between your fingers on the outside and roll your hand to the right and left until it disperses. And beware not to push further into the incision lest you reach the eye with the scalpel and harm it.
But if Axirnath does not appear at first in the incision, you should proceed gently until Axirnath comes forth. Then remove it as we have said.
Then soak some cloths in vinegar and water and place them on the location, and secure them with bandages.
And there are some people who grind salt and apply it to the hollow of the incision so that what remains of that moisture may be dissolved.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if a hot abscess forms there, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
On the ways of treating styes of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes inflamed so that it droops as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When additional hairs are born in the eyelids besides their natural course and grow long, they cause harm to the eye and bring about ways of illness, such as constant tears, inflammation of the eyelids, and cloudiness until it causes destruction of the eye.
And styes of the eye are treated in four ways. Or by cautery with fire. Or with acute medicine, as is mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Or styes are treated by incising and sewing. Or by means of cups, as I will explain.
You must put the patient's head on your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns easily, that is good. And if it does not turn easily: insert a needle into the eyelid where there is thread from below, and make the needle penetrate upwards with the thread close to the hairs themselves, that is, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are growing; then pull the thread upward with the eyelid and turn it back with your finger.
Then find the added hairs on the inside of the eyelid using tweezers, cutting from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
Then remove the thread and place a small wisp of cotton or cloth under the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with a cautery in the shape of a fig leaf.
However, the figure should be made according to the size and height of the eyelid, because these vary greatly among people.
For those who need to have a large amount cut from their eyelid, it should be measured according to the size that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with a fine spatula, find the space between the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one. The incision should be one near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a reed.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then strip off all of it. Then bring together the two lips with a suture using needle and fine wool thread. Remove any blood, and make what is excess of the threads adhere to both eyebrows. If you wish, use some sticky substances; if not, do not worry about it.
Then leave the suture and threads in place for three or four days before caring for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture and treat it with something that dries and tightens it. For the eyelid will swell after cauterization of the wound and its closure, but in the future it will be better.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients called Atashmir.
However, there is carefulness about the sick person involved, and it comes from good practice, not fear.
There is also another method in Atashmir: which is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks according to this following shape. Then cut off what is excess with small forceps according to this shape, making the cuts equal in depth.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and make it equal, then take a needle with thread on it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Then insert another thread near the larger tear duct and a second one near the smaller tear duct. Then bring together the threads between your fingers evenly.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation and raise the skin over which the tumor is marked, as I have described.
Then approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess should form at your incision or wound, cauterize it with caustic substances and similar ointments that have a soothing effect.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids also become inverted, such that their hairs turn inward.
Therefore, you should use what we have said about incision in this case, but the suture for both is more artful. Chapter on treating hemorrhoids with ligatures.
And it is necessary that you turn back the eyelid and cut open the wound that is on the inside, as I have described. Then skillfully make two ligatures or thin pieces of wood, whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and width less than the width of a grain. And you have already cut at both ends where you hold the threads.
Then carefully bring both together over that which protrudes from the eyelid of the eye and tie them tightly on both sides with a strong ligature, and leave it in place for several days. For the skin tied too tightly will die, turn black, and decay until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, then cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When it becomes firm, raise the eyelid and the hairs will no longer irritate it.
And this is the shape of the two ligatures which you should make according to this figure and measurement in length and width.
Chapter 12
Here follows the method for removing piercing hairs from the eye with a needle.
The operation is as follows: take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of silk, soft and thin. Then bind the ends with a very fine knot, one on each end; let the length of the threads be the span of one hand.
Then place under it another fine thread and bind its ends if you wish.
Then let the patient lay his head in your lap, facing the sun so that the operation may be clear to see, for it is a delicate or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with its thread into the root of the eyelid and push it through quickly until you draw out a natural hair from above.
Then pull the hair up along with the thread; and insert into the thread that one hair only, or two, or three, but not more.
Then pull your hand gently until the thread with its hair comes out from under the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the thread comes out without the hair, then pull it downwards along with the other thread you inserted into it until the first thread emerges from above. Then when you see the eye clearly, pull both threads together and remove them; close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then either join it with a longer natural hair and remove them both together, or leave it alone until it grows longer, and then remove it.
Chapter 13
When this inflammation occurs to the eye, it is called "lepra.
And this leprosy is either natural or accidental.
Accidental leprosy occurs from the solidification of a wound, or from an incision, cautery, or similar things.
The method of treatment for this condition is to locate the solidification and separate its lips, then place a linen wick between them and bind it until it heals.
But do not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict, for if you do so, the leprosy will return worse than before. Instead, use things that soften, such as fennel-greek; shave with water in which althea has been cooked and linseed has been steeped; and apply a poultice made from diacilicon ointment, mixed with some oil, and wrap it around a linen cloth for the cure.
And your treasure in healing is to strive by all means to prevent consolidation, according to the original form that it had at first.
And indeed this operation we have spoken of is only a certain correction of leprosy, so that the form of the place does not return entirely as it was before.
Chapter: On the treatment of leprosy that occurs on the lower eyelid and causes wrinkling or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This leprosy that occurs below is truly called "leprosy. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental leprosy occurs from a wound, fissure, cautery, or similar things.
The method of treatment for this condition is to take a needle with double thread and stain it with flesh color, then make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right until the thread emerges at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad-bladed knife. If then the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good.
And if not [the eyelid returns to its proper shape], take a probe and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two incisions meet at two angles, until they converge and form an angle: so that when they are joined together, this figure is formed, which is the shape of the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that piece of flesh, which is the acute side facing downwards, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts together: whether with a thread made of wool.
Then care for them with what we have said about softening medicines and linens until they heal.
And if a hematoma occurs from the incision and suture or cauterization: then it is necessary to make an additional planar incision beneath the hairs of the eyelid, just as before. Then separate between the two lips with linen, as we have said.
And in summary, concerning the treatment of hematoma whether it is above or below [the eye], the operation should be performed according to how the hematoma is prepared.
For indeed it [the hematoma] has many variations in shape: and a skilled artisan prepares his ingenuity with whatever means are possible for him until he restores the shape to its natural form or near it, and the patient himself, according to what is fitting for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
 Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this condition occurs in many people, such that the upper eyelid becomes adherent to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary to insert the end of a probe under the eyelid and raise it upwards or extend it with a hook: then incise the adhesion with a spatha (a blunt instrument), which should not have too sharp an edge, but rather be somewhat blunt: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatha does not harm the eye with its sharpness. Make your incision as if you are scraping away the adhesion easily, until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion heals completely.
Then pour saltwater into the eye and rinse it with water or distill a solution of sulfur dissolved in water onto it.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen thread and place over the eye a wick soaked in egg white. After three days, use sulfur and salves until it heals.
Chapter on Cutting the Nail and Excising a Fleshy Growth of the Tear Duct
Chapter 16
Know that the nail has two forms. Either it is nervine: and it resembles a piece of hard, thin horn. Or it is not nervine, resembling frozen white moisture. When touched by iron or when tried to be grasped with a hook, it breaks off and the hook does not stick in it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the larger tear duct, gradually advancing until it covers the sight and blocks light and movement of the eye.
The method of operation for cutting it is that the patient should lay their head on your lap. Then open the patient's eyes and raise the eyelid with your hand. Next, grasp the nail with a hook of moderate size and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse, ox, or cow - let the thread be strong and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail. Then pierce it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread, extending it upwards. Then scrape the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were cutting it with the hair until its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel or small forceps. Ensure not to damage the natural tissue of the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears due to the incision.
And sometimes the nail extends only with a hook alone; or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it gently with a scalpel, which has this shape:
And beware that the scalpel does not touch the corneal tunic and cause a break or perforation of the pupil.
Then after the incision, sprinkle some crushed salt or powdered verdigris into the eye and leave it overnight. Then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
But if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert a needle into it nor can it hold a hook, then this type of nail is cured many times with medications as I have explained in its division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the sick eye and take a fine, gentle scalpel with blunted sharpness in this shape: And carefully shave off the nail from above with finesse. But if you see that it becomes rarefied and broken, and the razor presses upon it, then distill from your hour into the eye a powder made of verdigris or red ocher or ground salt. Then bandage the eye overnight.
Then repeat this procedure until all of it is removed. Unless there is a warm abscess in the eye, then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure on it with care until it is healed.
If the prominence of the lacrimal gland causes great harm to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and a portion of it cut away; but do not make the last cut too deep, lest the flow of tears be obstructed.
Then instill into the tear duct red sulphur or powder made from cinabar until it is healed.
Regarding the incision of the pterygium and flesh born in the eye
Chapter XVII
A red flesh sometimes grows in the eyes of certain people, spreading until it covers the pupil or approaches and presses upon the eyelids, even causing them to turn outward, resembling a cock's-comb.
And the operation for this is that the patient should place their head on your lap. Then open the eye and grasp that flesh entirely with suitable hooks; hold it with one forceps or your hand.
Then cut into the flesh first, until the entire length of it is reached with the scalpel. And be careful not to injure the eye during the operation. The cut should be made either with a scalpel or with the spatula previously mentioned for nail cutting, or with small forceps, according to how convenient it is after this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the entire pterygium has been removed, then fill the eye with powdered salt or instill red sulphur powder into it, along with other corrosive medications. Then place a white-hot cautery on the outside of the eye to prevent inflammation.
But if some part of the pterygium remains and there is a risk of hot inflammation and you fear an abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat it with something that cools the inflammation.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is healed.
And similarly do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you perform surgery on every weak eye with the aid of a knife, both by way of nature and accident; and do not undertake any of these operations until you have seen that that member can endure them.
Chapter On The Extraction Of A Foreign Body From The Eye
Chapter 18
Sebel are red veins that grow over the eye and hinder its vision, and weaken the eye with prolonged duration.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to observe whether the eye with sebel is strong and has no other sickness besides sebel; then extract the sebel from it.
And tell the patient to put their head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your discretion; and let the hook be of fine double curvature, like this shape, or let there be two hooks graduated on one body, like this shape.
Then gently grasp those veins with fine forceps and remove the blood little by little until you see that those veins have been removed from the eye and are resolved; and be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation take place at midday before the sun, and be very steady in your operation so that you do not touch anything but those veins.
And when you have finished, then apply collyrium either green or red to the eye so that its sharpness may corrode any remainingtrace of sebel.
But if you are not able to extract all of it at once, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that soothes the pain; and let him rest for several days until the pain subsides and hot inflammation is secured. Then repeat the procedure in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
 On the reduction of a dislocated nose.
Chapter 19.
The doctors call it "Arissati," which they treat either with a cautery or by burning it with an acrid medicine, depending on what has been told about its condition.
And if it is not cured, then there is no hope for it except to open a window above the abscess at its origin and remove all the moisture and pus that is within it until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness on it, then scrape it with an instrument whose shape is like this:
And it is called "Asperi's head.
Make it from hard iron and let its head be round like a hazelnut, which is pierced with the point of a file or with a fine punch; then place it on the site of the bone corruption.
Then rotate it between your fingers and press your hand lightly until you know that the corruption has been scraped away; do this several times.
Then restore the site with drying astringent medicines.
If the site solidifies and flesh grows there, and the flow of pus is cut off, and it remains for forty days without renewing or forming an abscess, and no complication arises, then know that it has been cured.
And if not, then there is no hope except to reduce the fistula to the nostril according to this shape:
And it is so that you expose the bone from below with iron or an acrid medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take a probe of this shape, its iron tip being triangular, and its wood tapering to a point like this.
Then place it on the bone itself; let it be near the tear duct; and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the probe until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it; by this you will know that air is escaping from it when they place their hand over their nose.
Therefore, then restore the site with drying astringent medicines, as I have taught you.
Thus when flesh grows and the site becomes hardened, then the material that was flowing outward will return to the nose; therefore this is easier for the patient.
Chapter on Reducing Protrusion of the Eye
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes completely and there is no harm to sight or diminution, then it is necessary for you to loosen the patient; afterwards bleed them; then apply cupping glasses to the neck without incision but with suction.
Then place over the eye a plaster made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and tragacanth gum. Then bind the eye above the plaster with many small wicks.
And the method of the wicks is this: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each one over four times; make many of these; then place them one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind them with a hard cloth using strong binding.
And repeat cupping with suction without incision.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night.
But if the binding becomes soft again, then it is necessary to bind it tightly; then remove the binding after a day and night, as we have said.
If you see that the eye has returned to its normal position, then that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster and wicks, and binding, and cupping until it heals.
Chapter on Incising the Upper Eyelid
Quando non est uisus profectus in Oculo ex praecedenti medicina, erit necessarium ut incidas uae tunicam: et hoc facies sic.
When there is a disruption in the upper eyelid, then the protruding swelling will come out beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley and disfigure the face; if you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: insert a needle into the root of the swelling from below towards the top.
Then insert another needle with a doubled thread on the lacrimal side and pass it through; leave the first needle in its original position.
Then cut the location of the doubled thread and tie the eyelid around the needle with it; then pull it tight.
Then remove the needle, place a piece of wool soaked in egg white over the eye; leave him until the thread falls out with the swelling.
Then treat the eye with ointment that will strengthen it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the swelling is tied from all sides with a bandage made of cloth until the eye becomes very protuberant.
Then pierce it with a fine trocar that reaches deep into the eye; let the aqueous humor flow out and allow the eye to sink down immediately; then bind it until it heals.
And concerning the treatment of haemorrhoids:
Chapter 22
This condition called haemorrhoids is nothing but a collection of watery fluid in the eye, and it is not actually blood.
The method for treating this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared or upright chair.
Then take hold of his head with both your hands and move him until you see the fluid reaching below his eyes. Then catch it quickly so that it does not flow down and blur the vision; if the patient can see clearly again, know that it was water.
But if the fluid does not flow down as described above, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine trocar and pierce the conjunctiva slightly above the limbus of the cornea until the fluid comes out.
When the fluid comes out, then instill warm water mixed with honey into the eye: or warm water in which you have already boiled mallow and honey: thereafter treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXII
We have already discussed the types of water and which is suitable for piercing, now take that same one according to its suitability.
Then have the patient sit between your hands facing a square opening towards the light, near the sun: and tie their healthy eye, and bind them tightly: then with your right hand lift the eyelid of their left eye if it is the eye with the water, or with your left hand if it is the right eye.
Then take an eyelid retractor in your right hand if it's the left eye, or in your left hand if it's the right eye.
Then place the end of the eyelid retractor near the limbus towards the thickness of the radius where the smaller lacrimal duct appears: then push the eyelid retractor with force and you rotate your hand with it until it penetrates into the eyeball and you feel that the eyelid retractor has reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the eyelid retractor into the depth be equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness which is the limbus of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil itself through the clearness of the corneal tunic.
Then place the eyelid retractor until it reaches the location where the water is. Then press down on it repeatedly, one after the other.
If water descends immediately, then the patient will see the object upon which they opened their sight immediately, and the eyelid retractor will be in their eye.
Then rest a little. If water descends, then pour it out again, except for the eyelid retractor.
When the fluid is drawn up and does not ascend, then remove the eyelid retractor gently; and you should slowly roll your hand back.
Then dissolve some clear salt of the stone in water and wash the eye with it inside. Then place a wick or wool soaked in rose oil outside the eye, and press gently on the eyelid; then bind it with a healthy eye.
But we, and those of our time, place powdered incense mixed with egg white upon him.
If the eyelid retractor does not obey you when entering the eye due to its hardness, because it is made from human bone and has a very hard eye, then you should take spatumile, also known as Albied, which has this form.
Therefore insert it only into the joint with it, and do not put your hand further into the opening; otherwise you will be unable to reach the delicate eyelid retractor.
Then introduce the eyelid retractor as we have described.
And at the completion of your operation, prepare for the patient a well-made bed where they can sleep on their back in a dark room; prevent them from all movements and coughing, and give them food that soothes their nature. They should not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain in place according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then remove it on the third day in that dark room, and test his sight; make him see objects. Then reapply the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate for him to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after an incision; rather, it should be done by someone else because water ascends rapidly due to intense staring.
If however a hot swelling occurs, then it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day, and correct it with something that subdues the swelling until it is subdued; then without its sight, place on his face an eyepatch which regulates his vision for several days while he remains in that dark house.
Then gradually leave the house and return to one's own home.
And know that during the zealot period, the disciple is not excused from seeing sometimes; then he may dare to perform an operation.
And indeed, one of those from Al-Rayy has come to us who said that a cistern was pierced there through which water flows.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this, nor have I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of creatures that come from the cistern, so that he who does not know may stand upon them.
Let them be made properly out of bronze and their ends be triangularly pointed with the same fineness, and let one end be sharp.
Chapter 24
Prologue: On the Treatment of a Flesh Growth in the Nose.
Sometimes various kinds of flesh are born in the nose from which there is something resembling a many-legged scorpion, and from it there is fleshy, bony, dark-colored flesh; and from it there is also soft flesh that is not dark-colored.
Therefore, in the case of that which is soft and not deceitful or cancerous among these kinds of flesh, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, open his nostrils, insert a hook into those fleshy growths, then pull them outwards, and cut off with a sharp and fine spatula from one side what you have grasped until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
But if there remains something of it which cannot be cut off: then shave that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing remains. But if blood dominates over you, or a hot abscess occurs: then apply to it what is necessary according to what is appropriate. Or if it is one of the malicious kinds of swellings, then hurry to cauterize him until the blood is cut off and all the flesh is removed.
Then after the incision, throw vinegar and water or wine into the nostril. But if the nostril opens up and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then know that he is now healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh born in the upper bones of the nostril which was not reached by the instrument with the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen with some thickness and many knots tied in it, placing between each knot the amount of a finger or less. Then let the patient introduce one end of the thread into his nostril with a probe or whatever he can manage afterwards making it resemble an awl, and draw out his scent until it reaches the throat and emerges above his throat.
And indeed many children do this like thing in schools: and it is easy for him who wishes to do so.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that emerges above the nostril and another that remains inside the nostril. Then bring a cutter for cutting flesh with knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already bound with knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread and insert into the nostril, after wiping away blood, a wick which you have dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more until the ointment has eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of it into the nostril a tube of lead for several days until it heals.
If however treatment that dries is needed, use that one.
For making a head-purge vessel for distilling oils and other medications into the nostril, make it of silver or bronze, resembling a small lantern with an opening like a shell, having a similar passage.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, such as a reed.
And the shell of the vessel for making a head-purge should be full and open at the bottom with a handle at its end with which to hold it when heating oil or other fluids in it.
Chapter 25
The nosebleed often originates at the tip of the nose and grows larger and increases with days until it becomes unsightly.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut off its beginning as soon as it appears and erase all of it entirely. Then apply either a cautery or a burning medicine to the place where it was, so that it stays in its location.
If the cutting of it is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is stony hard, dark in color, and insensitive. Do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess.
For I have often seen that those who cut into such an abscess suffer great harm from it.
But if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be cut into entirely, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear or worry. Treat the place with something that dries and contracts until it heals.
Chapter 26
On the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a break in the continuity of one of these cartilages, it does not benefit much unless in certain people.
Therefore, whenever something happens to someone from that area, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood. Then approximate the edges of the wound with suturing, and then treat it until it heals.
But if the lips of the discontinuity are already separated and each part has healed separately, then it is necessary to excise all the skin that appears until it bleeds. Then approximate the two lips with sutures and tighten them. Powder over the blood some dragon's blood powder and ground frankincense. Place on top a piece of plaster called diafinicon and another consolidated plaster, and leave it bound for two or three days. Then remove the dressing after two or three days, change the medicine, and leave it alone until the stitches fall out by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is as follows: approximate the discontinuity either with needles, as we have described for abdominal closure, or with thread, as I have shown you.
Chapter 27
On the removal of nodules from the lips.
Many people often have hard nodules like grains of wheat on the inside of their lips. Some are smaller and some larger.
Therefore, turn the lip over and make an incision over each node. Suspend it with a hook and cut into it on all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with ground zinc oxide until the bleeding stops.
Then it is bound with vinegar and the wound is treated with it, in which there is astringency, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28
Concerning the incision of flesh born upon the gum.
Flesh often grows on the gum which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore you should suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing blood or pus to flow.
Then apply ground zinc oxide powder or other drying astringent powders to the wound.
But if that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut it again and cauterize it; for it will not return after being cauterized.
Chapter 29
Concerning the extraction of teeth with iron instruments
Sometimes teeth are surrounded by rough and foul layers on their inner and outer surfaces, and between the gums, becoming blackened, yellowish, or greenish, until corruption reaches the gum and the teeth become fetid.
Therefore make the patient sit between your hands and place their head in your lap. Grind away with a file any layer or deposit on the teeth that appears like sand until nothing remains of it, and do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowishness, and other such impurities until the teeth are cleaned.
If what is being removed at the beginning of the extraction is good, that is fine. But if not, then repeat the extraction on another day, second and third times, until finally you achieve your goal.
And know that teeth require files of various shapes and forms according to how they are prepared for your operation. The file used to grind the lower part of a tooth is different from the one used between teeth due to their varied shapes.
And have these forms of files ready at hand for you to see.
Chapter 30
Concerning the Extraction of Toothache.
You should strive to remove a tooth from its pain with all your skill, and be slow in extracting it. For there is nothing that can replace it once it is extracted, since it is a most noble substance. Therefore, until there is no excuse for extracting it, then it becomes necessary to extract the tooth when the patient is compelled to do so, in order that it may be made firm and certain in your hands.
For pain often deceives the patient, making him believe that it is in a sound tooth and causing him to extract it. But then the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is extracted.
We ourselves have seen this in the practice of bloodletting.
Therefore, when you have assured yourself of the painful tooth itself, then it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some virtue, so that the gum may be loosened on all sides. Then move the tooth gently with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until you feel it give way.
Then place large forceps with good position on the tooth and put the patient's head between your knees. When you have held it firmly so that it does not move, then pull out the tooth in a straight line so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it underneath the tooth on all sides with ease and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or decayed, then it is necessary to fill that hole with cloth and tie it with a fine thread so that it may not break during your constriction of it with forceps.
And you should make an incision around the gum on all sides very carefully and thoroughly.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it off, lest a part of it remain and return upon the patient with greater pain than before.
And take care not to do what ignorant bloodletters often do in their haste and rashness when removing it beyond what we have instructed.
For oftentimes they cause great diseases to happen upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and all the roots of it remain, or some of them; or they draw it out with certain bones of the jaw, as we have often witnessed.
Then let it be cauterized after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
But if bleeding occurs from the site (which often happens), then crush some incense and fill the place with it; and if you do not have incense, cauterize the spot.
The forceps used to move a tooth should be fine-pointed with long tips and short handles, thick so that they do not close together when pressed against the tooth. They should resemble thick handles until when you squeeze them together they do not pinch or double over. The tips should be short and made of well-tempered iron or bronze, straight-edged, with teeth on their ends which fit into each other and grip tightly.
And sometimes the tips are shaped like a bird's beak called a stork's beak, and these have a strong gripping power.
Chapter 31.
[About] The Removal of Teeth and the Extraction of Broken Jaw Bones
When a tooth remains to be removed which has broken off, then it is necessary to place cataplasm of butter upon the spot for one or two days until the place becomes softened. Then introduce an elevator or forceps whose tips resemble the shape of a bird's mouth called a stork's beak. This is the shape of the forceps.
Their tips should be made like an awl inside: or like an alkibibis.
If the patient does not yield to you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary for you to make incisions over the root and strip all the flesh, and insert the instrument called "small lever," whose shape is as follows.
Let its extremity be short, thick for a moment: and let it not be hollow, so that it does not break.
If the root emerges through this (instrument), it is good; and if not, help must be given with other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The shape of the first is triangular at its tip, with some thickness.
Shape of the second: triangular tip, thin.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded it in the treatment of teeth.
And also help is given with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this shape, having a twisted triangular tip with some thickness so that it does not break; and let it not be hollow.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth; and similarly the rest of the instruments are not numbered, and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art finds an instrument himself according to what operation and conditions require.
Because there are conditions to which the ancients did not mention an instrument because of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone breaks from the jawbone or other bones of the face, or becomes putrid, then examine it at its place with whatever is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps that I mentioned for extracting roots, and help with splints whose shape is as follows.
Let there be some thickness gradually tapering in it so that it may bind or hold the bone and prevent it from escaping or moving until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medicines for it.
But if there is a small decay in the bone, then scrape off the decay itself and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural course, it causes an unpleasant appearance, especially when this happens in women and young girls, namely those who are sold [i.e., married].
Therefore, one must consider. For if a tooth is born behind another and cannot be placed or its prominence cannot be corrected by trimming it, then extract it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the shape.
It resembles a small beak and is made of iron, very sharp at the tip.
And your cutting should take place over many days, on account of the hardness of the tooth and to avoid disturbing any other teeth.
But if it is prominently exposed to trimming, then trim it with a file made of iron whose shape is like this.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle full of many small points like the file used for making needles. With this file, the tooth is slowly trimmed over many days with ease so that it does not move or fall out. Then polish it gently, and finally scrape it smooth with some razors.
But if there is a tooth from which a piece breaks off and hurts the tongue, then you should file it down until its sharp edge is removed and made smooth, so that it no longer hurts the tongue or interferes with speech.
Chapter 33.
On holding teeth in place with gold threads.
When the front teeth are shaken and moved by blows or accidents and the patient cannot bite firmly without them falling out, even after treating them with medicinal astringents, then it is necessary to hold them in place using gold thread because silver turns green and decays over time.
And the thread should be of medium thickness, neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth it must fit into.
The method of binding is as follows: take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth. Then tie it with both ends between the loose tooth or teeth until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the tying until you reach the side where you began. Tie with care and wisdom so that it does not slip at all; your tying should be around the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps and join them together. Bend them towards each other and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose one so that they do not harm the tongue. Then leave it tied tightly like this until healing occurs.
If it loosens or breaks, tie them again with another thread and they will remain stable like that for the entire duration of treatment.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of binding two healthy teeth with two loose ones, as you can see.
Sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their original places after falling out completely. If they are held in place as we have described and remain there, this is only possible with the skill of a knowledgeable and experienced artisan.
Sometimes a piece of bone from the jawbone is prepared and shaped like a tooth. It is then placed in the gap where the tooth was lost and held in place with thread as described earlier. This will remain and serve as a long-term solution.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament under the tongue is natural, with which man is born, or it is accidental, due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation on it is thus: Open the mouth of the sick person in your lap and lift his tongue. Then cut this nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its restraint.
But if there is something hard and knotty present, and it is due to the healing of a wound, then use a hook to throw into it and find it across its width until you cut the ligament and release the knot.
And beware lest there be a deep cut in the flesh and you cut an artery there, so that bleeding occurs.
Then let it be sewn up at the site of the incision with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a linen bandage which the patient should hold in place every night so that it does not heal again.
But if bleeding occurs, then put on the site of the cut a poultice made of cooked mustard. But if blood overcomes you, then cauterize the site with a slow-burning cautery suitable for that purpose. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes under the tongue there appears a swelling resembling a small frog, which hinders the tongue from its natural movement, and perhaps becomes so large that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is thus: Open the mouth of the sick person towards the sun and observe the swelling.
If you see it is dark colored or black, hard, and without sensation for the patient, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
But if it is inclined towards whiteness with moisture present, then throw a hook into it and cut it with a sharp scalpel and free it from all sides. But if blood overcomes you during your operation, then place upon it ground ginger until the bleeding ceases; then return to your task until you remove it with its entirety.
Then cauterize it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other appropriate treatment until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Abscesses of the Two Mandibles
Chapter 36
Sometimes swellings occur between the throat and the glands, that is, the glands which resemble almonds, which occur externally; these are called the two tonsils. When you treat them with what we have said concerning division, but they do not heal, then consider.
If therefore there is a hard abscess of dark color with little sensation, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and its root is thick, then do not touch it even with iron, fearing bleeding, but leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it or it will burst by itself.
But if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin, then it must be cut open.
And the operation on it is as follows: before beginning your task, consider whether the abscess has become completely quiet and cold or has decreased somewhat. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and have an assistant take hold of his tongue from below with an instrument shaped like this.
It should be made of silver or bronze, thin like a scalpel.
When you press the tongue with it and the abscess is revealed to you, then take a hook and insert it into the tonsil, and draw it out towards the outside as much as possible without tearing any of its membranes.
Then cut it open with an instrument shaped like this which follows: It resembles forceps; however, its ends are curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite the other at an acute angle. Therefore, ensure it is made from polished iron or gold-plated.
But if this instrument is not available, then cut it open with a scalpel shaped like this: Let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after cutting one tonsil, cut the other according to the same manner of incision.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if bleeding occurs, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled, or with myrtle leaves and similar astringent substances, until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes other swellings appear in the throat besides the two tonsils. Therefore cut those likewise according to what I have said regarding the equal cutting of both tonsils.
And indeed I myself once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat and was drawing towards the windpipe, causing difficulty in breathing and making it almost impossible for her to swallow water. She could barely speak and was close to death, so that if left untreated she would have died within one or two days.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had sent forth two branches which had emerged through both nostrils.
Therefore I hastened quickly and inserted a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it out, and a large portion emerged from it.
Then I cut it off where it could be grasped through the nostril.
Then I did to her what had protruded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down. After that, I inserted a hook into the abscess itself, cut off part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Thus the woman's throat was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water and then took some food.
Therefore I did not cease cutting away at that abscess many times over a long period of time. And the abscess kept growing back in place of what was being cut off, until it became extremely prolonged and grew with her.
I then applied an ipecacuanha ointment and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
And so it ceased to grow worse. Then I departed from her, not knowing what God would do with her afterwards.
On the Incision of an Abscess on the Throat.
Chapter 37
When phlegm descends to the throat and an abscess forms, if it is long, then it is called a "perpendicular"; but if it is thick and rounded at its lower part, then it is called a "grape".
When treated with the method described earlier and no improvement is seen, and you observe that the abscess has become hot and thin, then it must be cut.
And if the one that is joined to it is round and has no length, and is bloody or dark colored or black, and has no sensation, then avoid cutting into it. For there is danger in harming the healthy part.
Therefore, when you see it as I described earlier in terms of its whiteness and length, make the patient sit facing the sun. Then press down her tongue with an instrument about which there is mention elsewhere. Insert a hook into the uvula and pull it downward. Cut it open using one of the two instruments mentioned for cutting two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you should not cut anything beyond what exceeds its natural limit without adding to it.
For if you cut more than that, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have described regarding the incision of two tonsils: and treat it until it heals.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, then you must use your ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear and dread.
And the method of cauterization is not otherwise than with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the patient upon your bosom. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take some of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and dip into it an un-extinguished ember, and place it not thickly nor thinly, and fill with it the hollow of this instrument, which has this shape.
Let its end where the medicine is placed be concave like the concavity of a spoon's bowl.
And place the instrument with the medicine upon his throat: and let the patient lie on his side so that the salt water may flow out of his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing may fall down into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you put it on his throat for the first time in the amount of half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the burning sensation of the medicine has subsided.
And if you wish to take cotton and wrap it around the end of the spoon, and pour the medicine over it, and insert the spoon with the cotton into the cannula from above until the cotton adheres to his throat.
Do this repeatedly until you achieve what you desire regarding the cauterization of the throat. Then leave it; for it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
But if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterization, wipe around the throat with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine; and rinse with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargarisms, until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is more salutary after incision and further from fear.
And sometimes the throat is also cured with something that is gentler than cautery and incision; it is cured with fumigation, according to this method. Take rue, and hyssop, and oregano, and sage, and chamomile, and abrotane, and similar herbs; and mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in vinegar, and let them boil; and the pot should be properly luted with clay: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an concave instrument is placed in this manner.
Let it be made of silver or brass; and the extremity with the pomegranate shape should be inserted into the sick person's mouth until the vapor reaches the throat through the tube, until the throat becomes very dark.
Then repeat this many times until it dries out.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess formation. For usually it adds to an abscess; and you should not do this unless it is applied when the abscess is about to burst.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and attach the skin of an egg at its end so that it does not burn the sick person's mouth; because the egg skin prevents the vapor from burning the mouth; and this is also good treatment with safety.
On the Extraction of Thorns and Bones from the Throat
Chapter 38
Many times a bone or fish spine becomes stuck in the throat.
Therefore you must extract what is visible above it by pressing the tongue with an instrument towards the sun, and then it will be clear to you what is in the throat.
And whatever does not appear to you and is concealed in the throat must be done by vomiting before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached matter will come out through vomiting.
Or let the sick person swallow a piece of radish root, or lettuce root, or swallow a dry piece of bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it on a thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spine or bone is, and is extracted, then it will come out.
If however it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a small rod for a moment, and at its end let there be a curvature which he introduces into his throat easily; and it itself should have its head raised upwards.
And let him be careful not to touch his epiglottis so that he does not cough, and with it he should press the bone or spine, or the doctor introduces it by hand.
But it is better for the sick person to introduce it himself because of his knowledge of where the attached matter is located, and he should press downwards or draw his hand upwards with the instrument, all of this according to the amount that is prepared for him until it comes out.
On the Extraction of Bloodsuckers.
Chapter 39
When the leech is treated with what I said regarding its division for treatment with medicines, and it does not attach itself, then examine the throat of the sick person before the sun or after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook or with delicate tweezers skillfully.
But if this is not possible with them, then take a hollow cannula and introduce it into the throat of the sick person up to near his throat; then introduce a red-hot iron with fire into the concave part of the cannula. Do this repeatedly, and let the patient abstain from water all day long.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water and open his mouth in it; and let him hold his mouth in the water without swallowing any of it, and move the water with his hand once every hour. For the leech will fall into the water immediately upon sensing it.
But if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with flies or with frankincense using the instrument which I mentioned for fumigating the throat.
Do this repeatedly, since it will fall by itself.
The method of operation in fumigation is as follows: take a pot in which there are live apples with fire; and let the pot be covered with its cover, in whose middle there is an opening; and place the end of the instrument on that opening.
Then cast the fumigation into it, and let the patient place his mouth at the end of the cannula and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will fall immediately.
But if it still does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the patient endure thirst and eat salt and garlic without drinking water.
Therefore it is necessary that it should come out with this treatment.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which to remove the leech from the throat when it falls on top of itself within sight.
It resembles forceps as you see [here], except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end resembles the beak of a bird called the stork, having the roughness of a file; when it grasps something, it does not let it go entirely.
Concerning the opening of boils and their incision, and their treatment in general.
Chapter 40
There are many kinds of boils [abscesses], diverse in their formation, recalling one by one as they come to mind; namely one kind is mentioned here, and they differ in piercing them and cutting into them in two ways.
One of these kinds [of abscess] is that which is formed within itself due to the accumulation of moistures.
And the second manner is because of places in which it occurs from the body.
For an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to its operation.
And among abscesses there are those that should not be pierced unless after the maturation of pus within them and its completion; and among them there are those which must be pierced while they are still raw and do not mature according to completion.
Such as abscesses which are close to joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and extends to the point that what is around it putsrefies, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore, there is a greater cause for shortening of that limb.
Or if an abscess occurs near a main member; for if you delay its piercing until it matures, it will harm either that one or through that main member.
Or if it is near the anus, then pierce it even while immature; and do not pierce a raw abscess with incomplete digestion unless it is near the anus lest it putrefies deeply, extends to the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula that does not heal.
You should know the right time to pierce an abscess that has matured according to completion; this is when there is cessation of pain, reduction of fever, decrease in redness and throbbing, sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
It is necessary to make the same incision at a lower point on the abscess, at its most prominent swelling. The incision should extend along the length of the body if the abscesses are located on the limbs or joints, sinews, nerves, arteries, and in all other equal places where there is no reflection.
But for those that are reflected, proceed with the incision according to that limb.
When an abscess is located in fatty tissue, it is better to delay the incision until its digestion becomes firm, as we have said according to completion.
For if you pierce it before its digestion is firm, the course of the virus will be prolonged from it, and there will be much foulness and filthiness, and perhaps its lips will harden and its depth increase.
Some abscesses are incised along the length of the body as needed, or according to what the limb requires.
It is necessary to make a small incision for small abscesses and a large one for large ones; or multiple incisions similar in size to the abscess.
There are also abscesses in which it is necessary to excavate the skin and make an incision when it has become as thin as a cloth and reached its termination, so that it is already dead; such as those that occur in many cases of swelling and buboes.
And among these are those which are incised with a three-cornered cut. And among them is one that is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Such as an inguinal abscess.
And among them are those in which a circular and crescent-shaped incision is made; similar incisions are also used for these.
But those without a head, like soft subcutaneous abscesses, should be punctured with a superficial or flat incision.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much matter, it should not be rushed to expel all the pus at once upon puncturing; rather, a portion of it should be drawn out. Then apply a dressing to the abscess until the next day. Then draw out some more of the pus again.
Do this repeatedly in stages, until it is completely drained, especially if the patient is weak or an elderly person, a pregnant woman, or a young child, as the vital spirit is easily depleted along with the discharge of pus. Otherwise, the patient may die and you might not even realize it.
Therefore, be very careful with this chapter.
And after puncturing the abscess as described above, you should cleanse the wound and observe it carefully. If the wound is small or if a flat incision was made, then apply a lint pad or an old cloth compress. And if the abscess is large and there are many punctures, then insert a lint pad into each one until they join together.
And if you have excised a portion of the skin around the abscess or made an indentation in it, then fill it with old cotton, like when dressing a cloth wound or shaving lint without moisture. Then bind it for three days.
Then remove the dressing and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs during your procedure, then apply cold water and vinegar, after they have been soaked into a cloth, to the area of bleeding repeatedly.
But if the bleeding persists, then apply the remedies, treatments, and powders that I have mentioned elsewhere in this book according to their indications.
If it is wintertime and the abscess is near many nerves, then apply hot poultices made of linseed meal with wine and oil.
And if it is summertime and the area is fleshy, then apply poultices moistened with water and oil, or with wine and oil, ensuring that all are cold. Until the third day comes, as we have said, then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever treatment is appropriate until it heals.
This is therefore all that is necessary concerning the general knowledge of treating abscesses.
In accordance with the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every kind of abscess and how to treat each one individually.
Chapter 41
Chapter on the Incision of Abscesses that Occur on the Scalp
Small abscesses occur on the scalp which are like nodules enclosed by their own sacs, resembling swallowed chickens' eggs.
And there are many kinds of them.
Among them are the fleshy ones; and those that contain moisture like mud; and those that contain a fluid like pus or mucus; and those resembling these; and there are also stone-hard ones.
And in the incision of all kinds of these abscesses, and their removal, there is no fear, provided that an artery does not interfere with their incision.
The operation for incising these abscesses is to use the instrument whose shape is described below, called an "Introductor," until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then incise it lengthwise with a superficial incision following this shape: \[ \cdot \]
Begin the incision from point B to point G. When the fluid has been evacuated, then remove the skin K that contains it, and leave none of it behind.
For it often returns if any of it remains.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is available; otherwise, in water and salt. Fill the wound with it and leave it alone until the next day. For what remains of the matter will rot.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on the wound for a second and third time, and continue doing so until you are confident that no more matter remains. Then treat the wound with the ointment until it heals.
But if the swelling contains a fatty tumor: then cut it according to this shape, with an incision having the form of a cross. Then insert hooks between the lips of the incision and excoriate it from every part. And strive with all your strength to extract the tissue that contains it.
But if an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you afterward.
And similarly, do the same for a hard swelling: cut it and treat it in the same manner that we have described.
And the incision over a hard swelling is easier to perform because it contains little blood or moisture. And sometimes there are certain swellings among these which occur on the head of some people, with which there is absolutely no humidity.
That is to say: for I once made an incision on a swelling on the head of an old woman, and found the swelling to be like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, so that if anyone were to strike it with force, they would wound themselves.
But in other swellings that occur on the head, except for those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, let them all be incised superficially.
Or else make a perforation in these swellings always from their lower part, so that the flow of pus may be relieved downward.
Then treat them with what is suitable for them in terms of treatment.
Chapter on the Incision of Swellings in the Neck
Chapter 42
These swellings often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin, and sometimes also in other parts of the body.
And among those that occur in the neck there are both singular and multiple ones; they generate from each other, and every cordlike structure arises within its own sheath, as is the case with knots and swellings of the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these cordlike structures. Among them are those that are hard like stones; and among them are those that contain fluids; and among them are the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, if you see one among them that appears well disposed to the touch, which is close in color to the skin and moves freely in all directions, and is not attached to any nerves of the neck or tendons or arteries, nor deeply seated: it should be removed by making a superficial incision from its upper part downwards along the line b to the line g, and excoriate it completely on all sides; then extend the two edges of the skin with forceps or many forceps if necessary, as we have described for head swellings, and extract it gradually.
And beware not to cut any vein or nerve.
And use a blunt rather than sharp instrument so that your hand does not slip during the incision, nor disturb the patient unnecessarily, and do not cut anything that is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from proceeding with the operation, then place powdered frankincense or some other absorbent powder on the wound, and bind it; let it be until the sharpness of the swelling has subsided and the wound begins to soften or shows signs of suppuration.
For blood absorbs the tunic. Therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
Then examine with your index finger if there are any other small cordlike structures remaining; therefore cut them and cleanse them.
But if there is a large vein at the root of the cordlike structure, then it is necessary not to cut that cordlike structure from its root; rather, tie it with doubled strong thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it yourself.
If the cordlike structure is cut entirely, then you must approximate both lips of the wound and stitch them immediately, after you have seen that there is no excess left.
But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the cordlike structure, then you must intend to cut its root and remove it; and perform the stitching that we have mentioned.
And as for those cordlike structures that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial puncture so that you can see the location of their maturity; and place the puncture below what follows in the body, as we have said.
Then apply a linen strip with ointment after the puncture, and similar things to remove what remains of corruption until you see that the wound is already clean; then treat it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter 43
On the cutting of the epiglottis due to suffocation occurring inside the throat.
The ancients said that this operation is performed on the epiglottis, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is their written account.
But in those who have synanche (suffocation), the section of the epiglottis should be avoided because it will not provide relief; this is because all the veins and lungs are weak.
But in those who have a warm swelling in the mouth or throat or both tonsils when there is no illness in the canal, one should use the section of the epiglottis to escape from impending destruction due to suffocation.
Therefore, when we want it, we must cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, making a small incision through its width in what lies between two circles; this incision should be made on the soft part, not on the cartilage. This place is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are far away from it.
But if the surgeon is afraid, then he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then, after opening the skin until it reaches the canal; avoid any blood vessel if you see one of them.
Then cut the soft tissue we mentioned; it is indicated by the flow of mucus from the canal along with what is cut and the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the danger of suffocation has passed, approximate the two lips of the skin wound and sew it alone without cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote tissue growth until healing is complete.
Thus says Albucasis. The summary of this discourse which we have related is that it is not necessary unless it becomes apparent that one of these swellings has already closed the throat of a patient; and if the patient has difficulty breathing and wishes to cut the epiglottis so that he may breathe through the wound and be saved from death, then they commanded that the wound should be left open until the malady is consumed, which takes three days or more. Then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and cared for until it heals.
And this is what I myself have seen: a woman took a knife and inserted it into her own throat and cut into the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, but found that she was roaring like one about to die.
Therefore, I cleaned the wound and found that only a small amount of blood had flowed from it. Therefore, I was amazed that she had neither cut the vein nor tied it, and yet breath was issuing from the wound.
I then took care of her wound and treated it until it healed. Nothing happened to the slave girl except for hoarseness of voice, and she returned home after a few days in better health.
Therefore I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
On the Incision of a Cyst on the Throat.
Chapter 42
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling that matches the color of the body and is common among women.
And it comes about in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
Certainly, there is no innate tendency in the natural type.
The accidental kind occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fatty tumors. And the other way is similar to swellings caused by the obstruction of an artery. And there is danger with this type; one should not attempt to cut it with a knife unless it is small. First probe and examine it with an introducer. If you find it to be like a fatty tumor and not suspended with any veins, then cut it like other tumors. Remove it along with whatever is inside the cyst, if there is one present; if not, then examine its entirety. Then treat the site as appropriate until it heals.
Chapter 45
On Incising over the Type of Tumors
There are many kinds of tumors, and I have already spoken about all their types in the section on divisions. However, here it is necessary to distinguish between a tumor and an abscess, as there may be doubt between them.
I say that when an abscess is hot and causes fever and severe pain until the eruption of excess fluid occurs and the decay is completed, then the fever and heat will cease.
When there is no heat or fever or pain and the swelling contains them, called a kystis sifachin which is a specific sack having the same color as the body, appearing like a chickpea at first but becoming larger or smaller.
And there are two kinds of swellings: either fatty ones or those that contain fluid. The colors of the fluid vary according to what was said earlier under division.
Therefore, when you come to treat a swelling, it is necessary that you examine it and inquire about it first using an instrument called the introductor, as will be described in the following chapter.
The method of examining abscesses and all swellings is to take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the swelling. Then gradually turn your fingers along with it until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin. Then bring your hand around according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the introductor and observe what emerges from its trail.
If fluid of any color flows out, then cut it with a superficial incision as described for other abscesses.
But if no fluid comes out at the introductor's trail, then know that it is fatty. Therefore cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross as shown earlier. Then suspend it with hooks and remove the skin from all sides easily. Keep the kystis intact if possible so that you can extract it along with the swelling.
But if the kystis ruptures during the operation and it is not possible to extract it intact, which happens often, then remove it in pieces until none remains.
For if some of it remains, whether a little or much, the swelling will likely return again.
But if it defeats you and little remains: then fill the wound at its completion with some caustic and sharp powders; and bind the wound, and place upon it what sits upon an aposteme of heat, and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if there is a large swelling, then draw apart its two lips and treat it along with that which is inflamed.
But if you have an opposing pulsating or non-pulsating vein: then hasten, and fill the place with pulverized myrrh; leave it bound for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the ebullition of blood ceases. Then return to cutting what remains of the swelling.
Chapter 46
Concerning external instruments for incision and perforation.
Among these are shapes of intrusive tools; they are three kinds.
For among them there is a large one, and among them there is a medium-sized one, and among them there is a small one.
They should be made of iron with squared ends neatly, so that they may hasten entry into the swelling.
And these are shapes of trial tools, and no, that is, perforators; and one of them is called beris, that is, the perforator; and they are three kinds.
For among them there is a large one, and a medium-sized one, and a small one.
They are suitable for investigating by means of them swellings, and fistulas, and boils from that which is between them of the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and soft like large needles with which sutures are made, of citrine or of bronze or iron or silver.
And those among them that are made of citrine are the best.
And trial tools are also made of black lead which are suitable for investigating by means of them fistulas whose concavities are reflections so that they may reflect with their smoothness together with those reflections.
There are again three kinds. Because among them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size of the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Shape of Hooks, and they are many kinds.
Because among them there are simple ones, namely those with one curvature; and they are three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And among them there are blind hooks and they are three kinds.
And among them there are hooks having two curvatures and they are three kinds; and among them there are hooks having three curvatures and they are three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of knives with which knots and boils are cut and scraped; and they are three kinds: because among them there is a large one, medium, and small.
Their tips with which cutting is done are sharp, the other ends are not sharp; and they are not placed thus except that with them assistance may be given in scraping knots when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and so that by means of them the sick person may be healed, and may find a little rest from burning which he finds at the scraping of an abscess.
They are made of air and they resemble the ray with which distillation is performed; and at its broad end there are hidden holes like those of a syringe; and through it fluid runs inward and outward as desired.
Shape of syringes which are hidden between the fingers during piercing of boils; and they are not perceived by the sick person; and they are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms of Suction Cups with which the flow of blood is cut off; and they are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of brass or glass, round, rather long, as you see; and let them be somewhat thin.
And it is necessary that these kinds of suction cups are with you, large and small: so that you may cut off blood through them swiftly in case of necessity, and then when medicine is not present.
But do not use them for cutting off blood in every part of the body; and use only in fleshy places: such as thighs, hips, arms, breasts, belly, groin, and similar ones, from moist flesh.
And sometimes other small instruments similar to the bark of fisticus are made from them according to their shape; with which blood is cut off when it flows out from a place of phlebotomy, or at an incision of vein or artery: and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter 47.
Concerning the care of Breasts of men which resemble the breasts of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to grow during sleep) until they resemble women's breasts; and they remain offensive with abscesses.
He therefore who detests this, it is necessary that he cut over the breasts with a crescent-shaped incision according to this shape out of line, b to line, g. Then scrape off all the fat. Then fill the wound with an embellishing medication. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture and care for it until it heals.
But if the breast inclines downward and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that it be cut in two on its upper sides with two incisions similar in shape to a crescent moon, each of which continues with the other at their ends until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision that you ought to make because of the patient's discomfort or because of bleeding: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the remaining fat. Then treat it until it heals.
On the perforation of an abscess that occurs under the inguinal region.
Chapter 48
These abscesses that occur under the inguinal region are of hard species of Struma, which contains a cyst, and among them are those that contain fluids.
Therefore, those that contain fluids must be opened with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, from line b to line g. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated by pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess is of the species of hard Struma nodes, then cut over it as we have said equally in the section on Struma.
If however the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then apply a cautery to it according to what was said beforehand.
Chapter 49
On the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an artery and vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, then it often happens that an abscess forms there. The same happens with veins, so that an abscess and swelling occur there as well.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are these: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and gathered deep within the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the surface of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is an error, especially when it is located under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other places on the body. It is very large indeed. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid treating these abscesses with a knife, and those that are located on the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Thus, for those abscesses due to swelling from an opening of an artery, make a cut in the skin along its length. Then open the incision with hooks, and afterwards expose the artery; free it from its sheaths until it is revealed.
Next, insert a needle under it and cause it to pass through until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the space between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood in it has flowed out and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply treatment that produces pus until the ligatures fall away; afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
But if the abscess is due to a cut vein, then you should hold back as much of the skin along with the abscess as possible in your hand. Then insert a needle under the place you are holding and cause it to pass through until it reaches the other side, with doubled thread attached so that you may pull it out on the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligature as I have shown you for the vein, taking two parts from both sides with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert another needle with a different thread beneath the abscess at the point of incision; press down and secure your threads at four places.
Then cut through the center of the abscess until it opens up; then make an incision for any surplus skin and release what is bound within it.
Then place on it a powder which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply dressings and ointments until the wound heals.
Chapter 1.
About an abscess that occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, similarly it happens in nerves due to blows or excessive exertion, etc., most commonly at joints like elbows or heels, and wherever nerve junctions move. Such abscesses are severe.
It appears similar to the rest of the body and is usually without pain until it becomes quite inflamed when pressure is applied, causing numbness akin to stupor.
This abscess does not form deep within the body but is beneath the skin. It can move in any direction and does not travel forward or backward.
Therefore, those occurring at joints should not be lanced with a blade. For it may cause contraction.
But if one occurs on the head or forehead, use a scalpel to make an incision through the skin. If it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off at its root.
If it is large, then suspend it with a hook and tear it out; remove it and close the wound with sutures. Then dress it until it heals.
Chapter 51
On the Incision of an Abscess that Occurs in the Belly
Some men have many times in their bellies and other parts of their bodies growths called "thelil," resembling fungi in appearance.
Their root is thin, and their head is large, and their lips are turned outward. And there is among them a small one, and also one that greatly enlarges.
I myself have seen a man whose belly contained two such growths, resembling fungi more than anything else: they were alike in whiteness and small root, their lips turned inward, and they were inflamed and discharged moisture constantly.
I cut these growths, and found one to weigh about ten and eight ounces, and the other about six. And their operation is this: if the patient is moist and the color of the growth is white and moist, with a thin root, then incise it with a broad-bladed knife, and have cauteries ready in the fire.
For often much blood flows out at its incision; therefore be prepared to cauterize it if you are overcome by the blood.
But if you see the patient afraid and fearful of being cut with iron, then take a thread made from lead, well-made, and bind it around the growth. Its manner is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the binding of lead. Do not cease binding with lead whenever it presses upon the growth until it is severed and falls off by itself without effort.
But if the growth has a large root, there is cause for fear and caution in its incision, especially those that are in the belly.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut through half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat it until the wound heals.
And do not dare to cut into a swelling that is dark in color, has few symptoms, and appears foul: for it is a cancerous abscess; and I will speak more about cancer later on.
Chapter 52
 On the treatment of hernias of the navel.
A hernia of the navel may occur due to many causes. Or it happens through tears or openings that are above the belly, and either a bubble of wind or an intestinal loop protrudes from it, just as occurs in other ruptures. Or it arises from blood flowing from a vein or artery, according to what was mentioned previously. Or from constricted windiness within it.
But if it is due to a tear or opening at the navel and there is a prolapse of the intestine, then its appearance resembles that of an abscess, with no pain; it is soft to the touch and has a varied position. And if it is due to prolapse of the intestine, then its position varies even more markedly than what we have described. And when you press it with your fingers, it disappears but then returns; often there is a noise associated with its return. It also becomes greatly enlarged at the entrance to the bladder and causes intense pain.
But if it is due to excessive moisture, then it remains soft when you press it with your hand, and there is no constriction or increase in size.
If it is due to blood, then it appears as an abscess that is dark bluish-red in color.
But if it is due to a fatty tumor, then the swelling is hard, coarse, and large; its size depends on the amount of fat present.
If it is due to windiness, then it feels soft to the touch.
And its treatment is as follows: first, determine whether the hernia of the navel has occurred due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. If so, do not attempt to treat it. For there is fear and fright in that matter, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by an artery or vein.
But if the protrusion of the navel is due to an intestine or a hernia, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and remain standing upright. Then make marks with a hot iron around the entire circumference of the navel. Next, instruct them to lie down on their back between your hands. Then circle the navel with a wide bandage around the spot you marked with the cautery. Next, extend the center of the swelling upwards using a large hook. Then bind it firmly around with thread or silk cord, and make sure the knot is tied tightly.
Then open the center of the swelling where you have extended it above the bandage. If you find that it is already captured by the bandage, then extract it carefully and insert your index finger into it. Push the intestine back inside the abdomen, and if you find a hernia, then grasp it with the hook and cut its excess.
But if an artery or vein is contrary to your intent, then bind it very tightly. Then return to the operation. And take two needles and thread two strong threads through them. Insert these needles into the circumference you made around the swelling like a cross, making sure they penetrate.
Then tie the swelling at four points over the needles. If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the extended flesh rots and falls off on its own, or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
But if the navel hernia is from fatty tissue or moisture, then you must hollow out the swelling as we have described. And draw out blood or moisture that you find within it.
Then treat the hernia with something that will hold the place.
Chapter 53
On the treatment of a CANCER.
We have already spoken about the division of species of CANCER and how it can be treated with medications. We have also warned against its treatment with iron lest it should become ulcerated. And we spoke about CANCER generated in the womb and precautions against its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes CANCER occurs in a location where its removal is possible, such as CANCER found in the breasts or thighs and similar parts, from which it can be completely removed. Especially when it is just beginning and small.
But when it has spread and become large, you should not attempt to approach it
For indeed I have been unable to cure anyone from this condition, nor have I seen another before me who succeeded in doing so.
And the operation when it is located as we have described, is to cut around and solve the inflamed area with black bile occasionally. Then perform phlebotomy on it if you find it visibly engorged
Then prepare the patient with a preparation for the operation.
Then insert hooks into the CANCER that fit it Then hollow it out from all sides with skin, according to your examination, until no trace of its roots remains. Let the blood flow freely and do not cut it off hastily, but squeeze the area and wipe away thick blood completely either by hand or with whatever instruments are possible at the time
But if there is difficulty in the flow of thick blood from the incision due to an artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until bleeding stops. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals
On the treatment of Dropsy
Chapter 54 We have now described the division of kinds of dropsy and how water collects; also signs of each kind and their treatment with medications.
And the one that is treated with iron is only a single kind of ascites; it does not approach the kind called tympanites, nor at all that called hygrosarcoma, for the latter is fatal.
But when you have treated this species of dropsy called tympanites with medications and your treatment has not helped, For if weakness has already come upon the sick person or there is another illness besides dropsyfor example, coughing, diarrhea, and similar ailmentsthen beware of treating him with iron, for it carries danger.
But if you see the sick person is robust and there is no other illness besides dropsy alone, neither a child nor an elder: then the way of operation in this case is that you should lift the sick person standing between your hands, and your assistant behind him press his belly with his hand to push the water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed spatula of this shape. It should have two pointed ends and be long, with a sharp point like a spathulum. But let it be somewhat shortened gradually, so that you do not pierce through with it during the operation all the way to the intestine and injure him.
Then consider this: For if the dropsy comes from the intestines, then you should lengthen the incision by three finger widths below the navel directly upwards towards the chest.
But if the dropsy is due to an illness of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if its cause is the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side; and it must not be made on the side where the sick person wishes to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak spot.
Then pierce the whole skin with an instrument. Then insert your hand with a speculum into that incision, and scrape the skin as if you were scraping it off; and the amount scraped should be about the size of a fingernail or somewhat like that.
Then pierce the skin while scraping until the speculum reaches an empty space; and this is the location of water (fluid). Then remove it and insert into the opening an instrument whose shape is as follows. And it resembles a cannula; made of silver, or brass, or bronze, smooth and polished. Its lower part has a small opening, and there are three openings on its sides - two on one side and one on the other. Its end is cut like a reed, as you see, with an eyelet at the upper end.
For when the instrument reaches the water (fluid), it will immediately be drawn up into it; therefore, empty out half of it in an hour.
Because if you remove more than what is necessary from it in an hour, the sick person may perhaps die from the loss of their vital spirit; or a syncope (fainting spell) may occur that approaches death.
But remove from it according to its quantity and according to what the conditions of the sick person indicate to you through the strength of their pulse, and according to their good constitution.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water (fluid).
This is because it is retained immediately due to the skin that retains the opening which is on top of the speculum, about which I have spoken earlier, so that you pierce it in that manner.
Then repeat the procedure on the second day if you see that the sick person tolerates it; and also remove a small quantity of water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error until only a little water remains.
But if you are afraid for the sick person and allow much water to remain, then treat them with burial in hot sand and much sweat in a bath and sunshine, and let them wait until they are thirsty; and treat them with drying medicines until they recover: and cauterize them on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, according to what I have described previously.
On treating infants born with incomplete urine passage.
Chapter 50.
If a child comes out of its mother's womb and the head of its foreskin is not pierced, or is pierced too narrowly or in the wrong place,
It is therefore necessary to immediately assist with its piercing using a very fine spatula, according to this shape.
Then place a fine lead peg in the hole and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When he wants to pass urine, remove the peg and let him void. Then replace it.
But if you do not use lead, then urine flowing over the spot may cause it to close up again.
However, one whose hole is too narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it widens.
Those whose opening is not in the correct place are harmed. This is because in some newborns the opening is at the tip of the foreskin: therefore they cannot void urine properly until they lift the foreskin with their hand. And there is no procreation because semen cannot reach the womb properly: and it causes great distress.
The method of treatment for this condition is to lay the sick child on its back. Then stretch the head of the foreskin with your left hand using great force, and cut the tip of its head with a sharp needle or scalpel like cutting a reed, so that it resembles the head of the foreskin and so that the hole falls in the middle as it should.
And beware during your procedure from blood flow. For this happens very often. So apply to it what stops bleeding and care for the wound until it heals.
On the Elephantiasis which occurs on the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 65.
Often these elephantiasis occur on the penis, which is an elevation of corrupt flesh.
And among them there is one that is malignant, and another that is not malignant.
So you must hang the benign one with a fine hook and cut it off until you cleanse it entirely. Then place over it a cotton wick dipped in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with linseed oil until it heals.
But if the elephantiasis is malignant and of foul color, then you must apply a caustic after cutting it off along with its root.
But if elephantiasis is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive and part of it is inside the foreskin while another part is outside, then you must first remove the elephantiasis that is inside until it solidifies. Then treat the outside; because when you treat both at once, the foreskin will not be torn.
And indeed blackness and corruption also occur on the testicles and foreskin. Therefore you must hollow out all that has already turned black or is about to decay or has already decayed.
Then apply a linen cloth over it afterwards dipped in honey that has been mixed with powdered pomegranate rind and sieved barley groats.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If blood flow occurs, then apply a lunar cautery branding iron according to this shape.
For the cautery is helpful for two conditions at once: for blood flow and when a wound becomes corrupted.
But if the tip of the wand is eaten away and completely destroyed within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a lead cannula into the opening of the penis so that the patient may urinate over it.
But in the case of adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the wand, which indeed does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required upon it: and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess: therefore you should scrape it off with a blunt spatula until the bond is loosened and the head of the wand is freed from all sides.
But if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should scrape off some from the head of the wand and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin, it may be quickly punctured due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the wand with a fine linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Concerning the purification of infants and the treatment of errors that may happen to them.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as other wounds are: nevertheless, since it is our operation by our will and its use is proper for boys, it is necessary that we mark a better operation and an easier path leading to health in it.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
It is because I have found most artisans and bloodletting practitioners using cleansing, circumcising with razors or forceps, and binding with thread and cutting with a nail.
And I have already tested all these methods and found no better cleansing than with forceps and binding with thread.
For in cleansing with a razor, the skin often slips away. For the foreskin has two coats of skin, so perhaps the upper one is cut and the lower one remains intact. Therefore, he must make another incision to cut the other [coat], causing pain. And with cleansing done by cautery, that is, digitally, as surgeons use it, the incision of the end of the male organ is not secure because perhaps it may enter its hole.
But with cleansing done by nail, perhaps the iron may slip and spoil your operation. And indeed, the skin of a boy is naturally short, and many are born such that they do not need cleansing, as I have seen.
However, cleansing with forceps and binding with thread has shown me a good result because the forceps are proportionate to the incision, so that the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. Therefore, when you press your hand [to hold the foreskin], two sharp points are proportionate and they make one incision at once. And compression is made in a similar figure, containing the skin of the penis on all sides, with which there is no possibility of error.
And the way of your own operation is such that you should make him understand, especially a boy who understands somewhat, that you are only tying the thread on his penis and leaving him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every possible way according to his understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and not sit. Hide the scissors in your sleeve or underfoot so that the child sees nothing at all of them nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand towards his buttock and blow on the skin, then pull it upwards until the head of the probe emerges. Then cleanse it with what gathers there from filth.
Then ligature the marked place with doubled thread. Then tie below that a little lower. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb while retaining the lower ligature well, and cut between the two ligatures. Then elevate the skin upwards swiftly, and extract the head of the probe. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and put powder on top. Then place on the powder a cloth in which an egg yolk boiled in rose water mixed with rose oil has been shaken. Then bind it well and leave him on it until the next day. Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
This is the shape of the scissors used for cleansing:
Let the two ends be blunt and the points meet so that no branch of the nail may escape. Let the length of the two sharp parts be equal to the length of the two handles.
The error occurring in cleansing is that perhaps the entire inner skin or a part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore you should stretch it out with your fingernail before the application of the ligature and cut it according to its length.
But if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days pass and the swelling around the probe remains unabsorbed, then leave it until the swelling is hot. Then remove it easily and cut it according to how it prepares itself for you, but beware of cutting off the head of the probe. This will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with the substances that heal wounds from powders, which we have mentioned in the book on powders. And if it is cut deeper than intended and reaches internal organs, it will still not harm him.
So treat it as we said until it heals.
Chapter 58
On the Extraction of a Retained Foreign Body from the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone, coagulated blood, pus, or flesh growth, and similar conditions, as we have discussed among the methods of treatment in division.
And if the urine does not dissolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be positioned on his knees. Then place his feet over his back and have him stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back. The patient should hold his breath as much as possible. So press on the neck of the bladder towards the posterior side for the expulsion of the stone, whereby urine is released.
If this does not work as we said and the condition is urgent for the patient, then you must perform its extraction using an instrument called a 'syringe,' which has the following shape: It should be made of silver, smooth, gentle, hollow like a quill's cannula in thinness, about the length of one and a half palms. Its cannula should be fine at its head.
And the method of extracting urine through it is as follows: Take a doubled thread and tie some wool or cotton at its end with a good ligature. Insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe. If there is any leakage from the wool, cut it off with forceps. Then insert the cannula forcibly like a dart.
Then fill the syringe with oil or butter and egg white. Have the patient sit on a chair and expose their bladder, then insert the tip of the syringe with oily lubricant made from olive oil and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then place the bulb above, on the side towards the navel.
Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder. The patient will feel that it has reached an empty space. This is not done in this order unless the path through which it goes is tortuous.
Then gradually pull out the thread with wool. For urine follows the wool.
Then withdraw the wool and let urine flow through its path. Repeat this procedure until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
On the nature of bladder irrigation with a siphon.
Chapter 59
When an ulcer forms in the bladder or blood congeals in it or pus hardens within it and water and medicines should be poured into it, then use an instrument called a siphon, which is shaped as follows:
It is closed at one end. And it has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
And the concave space where the piston is placed should be exactly its size without any extra space. When it is pulled back with it, some moisture will be drawn from it, and when it is pushed forward with it, it will be expelled far away, just as a siphon expels naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battle.
Therefore, when you wish to project moistures into the bladder, insert the tip of the siphon into the moisture and pull it back while pushing the piston upwards; for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the siphon.
Then insert its tip into the penis, as we have described for a syringe. And then push the moisture with it until it reaches the bladder so that the patient may feel it immediately.
The shape of a fine enema syringe used for enemas into the bladder.
It should be made of silver or gold. Its tip should be slightly shaped like an alkahest and below it there should be a hollow where the ligature falls.
Then take a bladder of a ram and place in it the moisture with which you wish to perform an enema on the bladder. Then tie it between two hollows with a strong ligature and double thread, and warm the moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the enema syringe into the penis and afterwards compress your hand over the bladder with gentle pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a present bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread through those holes as they revolve. Then gather the circle together like an apron, after you have placed within it what you wish from moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument, and do with it as you did with the bladder through compression with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of the Stone.
I have already spoken of the division of kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the symptoms of each; and I have spoken of the stone on which manual operation and section is performed: this stone belongs properly to the bladder, and that which adheres to the ureter. I am now narrating the latter with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that stones generated in the bladder most commonly occur in children.
And among its signs is that urine exits the bladder like water in its fineness; and it appears white sand in it, and the sick person rubs his penis frequently, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then he is raised up, and passes out with it the anus in many cases.
And the cure of children is easy until they reach fourteen years old. And difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is moderate; and in one whose stone is large the cure is easier; but if small, its cure is conversely difficult.
Now when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the sick person with a clyster, which extracts all the excrement that is in his bowels; for sometimes this prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
Then let the sick person be taken with his feet and shaken and moved towards the lower parts so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder or leap down from its high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands under his buttocks so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
Then examine him externally and touch him.
If you feel the stone in space, then hasten immediately with an incision above it.
But if it does not fall with your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe off the index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a full-grown youth. Then insert it into his anus and search for the stone until it stands under your finger. And gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the external place where you wish to make the incision. And instruct an attendant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct another attendant to stretch the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand to remove the skin which is beneath them in the part near the place where the incision will be made.
Then insert the Spatulum incisium, the form of which is as follows. And find it between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but to the left side of the birth, and make the incision upon the stone itself, keeping your finger in the anus. And let the incision be transverse, so that it is wider externally and narrower internally, according to what is possible without making the exit of the stone from it too large.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus will compress the stone at the incision and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that when a stone has corners or edges, its exit is made difficult on account of this.
And when it is smooth like a gland and round, its exit is easy.
Therefore for one that has corners or edges, make an extension in the split.
But if it does not come out thus, then you must hook upon it or use a clamp properly, the end of which is like the crescent moon that holds onto the stone and does not slip off. Or else insert under it an instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot do this, then widen the opening somewhat. If something made of blood binds you, cut it off with a scalpel.
But if the stone is larger than one, then firstly introduce a large one into the mouth of the bladder. Then cut upon it. Afterwards insert a small one afterwards; and do likewise if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, then it is ignorance to attempt it with a large cut. For one of two things happens to the sick person, either he dies or a continuous dripping of urine occurs because the place does not consolidate at all.
But remove it by expelling it until it comes out: or break it with forceps and remove it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood; bind it and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water to cool the hot inflammation.
Then lay the sick person on their back with their head raised, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. But when you untie it, irrigate the place with water and much oil.
Then treat it with diaphoretic ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
But if a hot inflammation with corrosion and similar things occurs in the wound, such as when blood clots in the bladder and prevents urine from flowing out, which is recognized by the exit of blood with urine. Therefore introduce your finger into the wound and remove that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply whatever is appropriate from remedies until it heals.
And during the entire period of treatment, you must bind both thighs and press them together because of the medicinal applications placed on the location.
If a stone is small and situated in the urethra's opening, causing an obstruction to urine flow, treat it according to my previous instructions before proceeding to perform an incision. For many times you will be spared from making an incision through this treatment; I have proven that.
And take aPerforator made of iron, which has the shape of a triangular tip and is sharp, fixed onto wood.
Then take a thread and tie it to the urethra below the stone so that it does not retreat back into the bladder.
Next, gently insert the perforating iron into the urethra until the triangular tip reaches the stone. Then slowly rotate the iron with your hand on the stone and attempt to bore through it until you pierce through its other side.
For urine will be immediately relieved.
Then press your hand over the remaining piece of stone on the outer part of the urethra. For it breaks apart and exits with urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this treatment cannot be prepared due to some obstruction, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then cut into the urethra above the stone between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Afterwards, untie the ligature and cleanse any congealed blood that has formed at the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the stone unless to prevent it from retreating into the bladder. And another ligature above is only necessary so that when the thread is untied after the stone's removal, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Chapter 61.
 On the Extraction of a Stone in Women.
A stone is rarely formed in women.
But if a stone happens to any of them, then treatment is difficult and hindered due to many methods.
One of these [causes] is that the woman may perhaps be a virgin.
And secondly, because you will not find a woman who reveals herself to a physician when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
The third reason is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth reason is the remoteness of the stone's location; therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear involved.
But if necessity compels you to perform this [operation], then it is necessary that you take a woman physician who knows well; and she is rarely found.
But if you lack this [a woman physician], then seek a chaste, skilled physician and present a midwife well-versed in women's matters or a woman who understands part of this art; therefore make her present and especially instruct her to do everything that you prescribe concerning the investigation of the stone.
Firstly, she must look and see if the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary that she inserts her finger into her anus and seeks the stone.
If she finds it [the stone], then let her hold it with her finger and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and inquire about the stone after placing her left hand over the bladder and compressing it well.
If she finds the stone, then it is necessary that she gradually moves it from the opening of the bladder downwards with all her strength until she reaches it at the root of the thigh.
Then cut over it at the opposite side of the middle of the vulva at the root of the thigh from whichever side you prepare her for and feel the stone in that part; do not remove your finger from the stone but hold it under it, and make the incision small initially. Then insert a probe through that incision.
Then insert a probe through that incision. If he feels the stone, then increase the size of the incision according to how much the stone protrudes from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. Among them is a small one and a large one, smooth and rough, long and round with branches.
So know its kind so that it may be made clear to you about that which you desire.
If blood overcomes you, then add powdered myrrh to the wound and hold it there for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your procedure until the stone comes out; and prepare with you the instruments that I mentioned for extracting a stone from the bladder so that they may assist you in your procedure.
But if the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it with a suitable bandage; do not remove it and leave the stone alone, do not take it out. For perhaps the woman may die if she is weak. Then dress the wound.
When the bleeding has subsided after a few days and the wound begins to putrefy, then return to your procedure until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
Section on a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is not merely a gathering of moisture in the white sac which is beneath the skin containing the testicle, and this is called the sac.
And sometimes it is in its own membrane which nature has prepared for it in the part of the testicle until it bursts; this is another testicle and is the skin of the testicle between the white sac which we mentioned, and this happens rarely.
And indeed, the cause of this branch's formation is weakness that affects the testicles; therefore, this matter flows towards them. And sometimes it occurs due to an impact on the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. Or it may be inclined towards yellow, or red and bloody, or black and foul-smelling, or white and watery; but the latter is more frequent.
And these are the signs by which one knows where a water gathering occurs: For if it is in the white sac which we mentioned, then it is a round abscess, slightly elongated like an egg shape; and the testicle does not appear because moisture covers it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then it is a round abscess with an egg-like part; and because of this, one thinks that there is another testicle.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then it falls under sensation.
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess by using a square instrument. Based on what comes out in the trace of the instrument inserted, judge about that which is between it.
When we come to the treatment with an iron instrument, then it is necessary that you order the patient, if possible for him, to undergo bloodletting, and see if his body is full.
Then he should lie on his back over something high, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and order the assistant to sit on his right side, who should stretch out his virga towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part called mirach of the abdomen.
Then take a broad spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length up to near the pectin; make the incision according to the straightness of an equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles until you reach the white siphac that encircles it: and strip off its skin and observe it, or be careful not to cut it off; and let your stripping be on the part that hangs with the egg more: and finely examine it with the stripping according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the full siphac with a wide piercing and drain out all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the siphac upwards, and do not touch the skin that embraces the testicles: and cut the siphac however it is possible for you to cut it, either with its entirety or in pieces, especially its thin side. For if you do not examine carefully, there will be no safety in its incision, lest water return.
But if the egg protrudes outside its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the siphac, replace it. Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then take care of it as you would other wounds until it heals.
But if you find the egg corrupted from another blackness, then it is necessary for you to tie the suspending vessels, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspender and remove the egg: afterwards take care of it according to what we have said.
If however water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did the first.
But if it equals to you that it may be one operation, then do thus: afterward wipe away the blood. And introduce into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil: and place outside wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the navel: and place over them doubled cloths, that is bandages: and bind them over with a bandage that has six folds according to this shape.
Then two cloths are taken and soaked and filled with red wool, according to this likeness: and they should be finished with cotton or wet wool at the ends with which it is pressed: and they shall be gathered together with a bandage around the loins of the thighs: and one end shall take over the anus up to the back, and the second shall take to the part of the chest, and two ends shall lie on both hips below, and two other ends shall lie on both groins, and the whole bandage shall be gathered together at the loins of the thighs.
And when this branch is artificially treated with a cautery instead of cutting with a knife, and it is such that you take a sharp scalpel cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is heated, according to what we have described: until when the white matter containing water appears, then take the cautery, according to this shape.
The Greek letters are similar.
Then pierce that white matter with it and burn it until all the moisture has come out.
Then stretch out that white matter with hooks and scrap it off with a fine burning cautery, and cut into it as much as you can until you have removed all of it.
And be careful not to burn the egg itself.
And know that this operation is safer and further from bleeding, and better than the operation with cutting.
But if you find opposition at the time of cutting or cauterizing, either a hot abscess or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what opposes you with that treatment which suits it, according to what has been prescribed.
If the patient is fearful and does not await this operation because of its horror: then perform the incision according to how I describe it.
When you have confirmed at your place through what we said about significations that the ram is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then cut the abscess in its lower part with a wide spatula and make the incision along the length of the body, and let the opening be ample until all water runs out.
Then put a pad on the wound and tie it, and let him go so that the remaining water runs out: then treat it until the wound heals.
If opposition is to the exit of water at the time when you cut it and there is nothing else but because a white cloth opposes at the wound's opening and hinders the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water is drawn out from hydropic tumors, whose shape has been described before, or add a little to the operation on the wound.
And know that water returns and collects after six months, or approximately that time. When it has collected, then cut it again in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
[On] The treatment of fleshly rams.
You should know that in cutting into this ram, there is danger leading to harm in many dispositions. Therefore, it seems to me that its release would be safer from it.
And I am remembering the operation on it and the appearance of the abscess.
I say therefore that many swellings occur in bodies from which the testicles are composed: and this happens due to many causes, namely.
Either from an acute or harsh fluid that flows towards the testicles. Or from injury.
And the color of the swelling is like the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it; and it is a severe swelling.
And perhaps it is a stone-like swelling, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from a blockage of the arteries and their dilation; as has already been mentioned previously: or from dilation of veins.
That which occurs from them due to dilation of arteries is recognized by the arrangement of the swelling when you press it with your fingers. And do not touch it at all.
But that which occurs from dilation of veins does not disperse at all when pressed with fingers.
And now it is possible that on this appearance, incision and on the remaining flesh is done: and it is, as you separate the skin of the testicles. Then extend the testicle upwards and remove it with a white silk thread, and free the suspensiony ligament from its vessels, and ligate the vessels, and cut the suspensiony ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the testicle.
If however the testicle is adherent to those surrounding tissues, then it is necessary that you draw out the testicle and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between any part of the scrotum or what is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is growth of flesh in the place where adhesion occurs that is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it and remove the testicle as we have said.
When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and then treat it with the usual treatment until it heals.
Chapter XLIV.
Concerning the treatment of a broken limb, which is accompanied by a dislocation.
An abscess has formed, wrapped around with a certain wrapping, similar to a funnel, along with the softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult for the sick person to move and exercise, and to walk.
And in the treatment of this ailment, there is fear, because of the memory of what preceded it.
But it is necessary for us to say the operation performed on it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore that you should make the sick person sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspending ligament of the testicles downward. Then grasp the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the vessels that are close to the penis; and let another assistant hold it and stretch it out forcefully.
Then make a wide, oblique incision with a sharp scalpel across the direct course of the vessels until they are exposed.
Then strip it from all sides, as we have told you regarding the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle into it with a doubled thread and tie it at the first points where the dislocations occur; and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it straight across in the middle section along the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated from corrupted foul humors.
Then treat the wound with the usual treatment for other wounds, so that pus may be generated to allow the vessels that nourish one of the testicles to fall away. For there is no harm in this.
But if all the vessels are dislocated, then it is necessary to remove the testicles along with the vessels; lest on account of the incision, the egg be deprived of nourishment and waste away or shrivel up, and not have any benefit.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of twisted intestine.
The cause of this twisting is from a rupture which occurs when the intestines are extended over the abdomen in the groin region due to intestinal obstruction.
Therefore, the intestines descend through that rupture into one of the scrotal sacs. And this rupture occurs either due to a sudden straining or an extension of it.
And these two types occur for many reasons. Or from a blow. Or from falling. Or from a sudden outcry. Or lifting of heavy objects and similar causes.
And the sign is when it occurs from the extension of the straining. It happens gradually over a long period and does not occur suddenly; it is an equal swelling towards the depth because the straining compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it occurs from a rupture of the straining is that it causes sudden severe pain at the outset; and it is an uneven swelling appearing near the skin; this is due to the exit of the intestine and its course towards the external opening.
And sometimes it comes out with a loop of intestine; this condition is called 'twisted intestine' and 'hernia'; and sometimes it occurs with wind.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and become lodged there; this causes great harm to the patient, especially when it presses down.
And in treating these conditions with iron, caution must be exercised to avoid accidents.
The method of treatment is that you should instruct the patient to gently push the intestine back into its proper place with their hand if it can be reduced. Then, make the patient lie on their back between your hands and raise their legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin upwards and cut all the skin of the testicles along its length. Then fix forceps on both lips of the incision according to your need to open it with them; and let the incision be made as far as possible so that an egg can pass through.
Then strip off the spermatic cord and what is under the skin of the testicles until when the white spermatic cord is completely revealed, hard on all sides. Then insert your index finger behind the testicle, between the white spermatic cord and the skin of the egg, and separate without any adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move the testicle with your right hand towards the interior of its skin and stretch the white spermatic cord upwards with your left hand. Then raise the egg with the spermatic cord towards the part of the incision, and tell your assistant to extend the egg upwards, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it completely.
And search with your fingers that there is nothing there of the intestine involved in the hard white spermatic cord. But if you find something from it, then push it down towards the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads and insert it under the last spermatic cord, that is, the tunic which is under the skin following the incision. Then cut the ends that stick out from the thread until there are four threads remaining. Then arrange some of them over others in the shape of a cross and tie them together with the spermatic cord which we mentioned earlier, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligament, until no vessel that nourishes them can send anything to them so that no hot abscess occurs. And place again another ligature according to the first one, distant from it by two fingers less. And after these two ligatures leave a portion of the spermatic cord equal to the size of your finger under the skin of the testicles and cut the rest around its circumference and remove the egg.
Then make an incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles from which blood and pus flow as we have described earlier.
Then apply a piece of linen soaked in oil to the wound and tie it with the ligature that was mentioned. And sometimes the spermatic cord that we have spoken of is cauterized after its incision is made to prevent bleeding. For this happens very often. Leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if its falling off is delayed, then treat it with warm water and apply what was mentioned earlier until it falls off.
Then dress the wound with the usual dressing of wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66
On the Hollow Needle.
In this needle, I have not seen anyone dare to use iron for its cautery.
And the earliest authors said that it is done like we described for the needle with a vinegar coating. That is, tie the vessels after cutting them below with ease, then cut in the middle and treat with what opens it until the vessels fall off, and dress the wound according to what was said until it heals.
Chapter 67
On Disruption of the Groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin as we have described and a swelling appears but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if something does descend it is small and returns at all times: truly if this condition persists for a long time, a fissure forms in the spermatic cord until the intestines descend into it.
And this occurs due to the stretching of the spermatic cord which is in the groin as we have said. That is, because the spermatic cord stretches, becomes softened and develops an abscess at the site of prominence.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as has been described above.
And sometimes it is treated with iron (i.e., surgery), in this manner: and it should be that the patient lies on their back between your hands. Then cut the location of the rupture, abscesses, and prominence with a section across its width, according to the measure of three fingers.
Then tie the spermatic cord tightly, squeezing what is beneath the skin until the white spermatic cord becomes apparent under the following skin.
Then take a cautery and place it on the prominent area of the spermatic cord, pressing it until it reaches the depth of the abdomen.
Then cauterize two points on either side of the prominence of the spermatic cord and connect them with a suture; then remove the end of the cautery.
And do not cut the spermatic cord entirely, nor stretch it out nor anything else, as I have taught you in treating prolapsed intestines.
Then treat it with wound treatment. Therefore, when cutting the threads, cleanse them and restore the wound until it is healed.
For the spermatic cord contracts and does not regain its prominence after rupture.
And a cautery is better in this location because it is closer to healing.
Chapter 68
On the softening of the skin covering the testes.
The skin covering the testes is often softened in some men, causing the flesh between them to become softened and making their appearance unsightly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it that he makes the patient lie on their back and cuts all the softened skin on top of the natural skin.
Then bring together both lips with a suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess softened skin by three or four sutures, and then make a firm suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with wound treatment until it heals, and remove the stitches.
Chapter 69
Section on Castration
Know that castration is prohibited by our law. Therefore, it would be permissible for me not to mention it in this book of mine, as it is not necessary except for two methods.
One of these is so that the doctor may know about it when questioned concerning it; and also to know how to treat someone who has suffered from it.
And another reason is that we often need castration for certain animals, due to our sustenance through them, such as rams, roosters, cats and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways. Or by friction. Or by cutting and tearing apart.
In the case of castration performed by friction, this is how the operation is carried out: Have the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become lax, and hang down. Then strike them with your hand until they loosen and no longer appear to touch.
In castration by cutting and tearing apart, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its scrotal skin with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and make one cut above both testicles until they protrude. Then cut them both after scraping each off, leaving nothing but a thin membrane over the blood vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that done by friction because friction might leave behind some part of the testicles, which causes the animal to desire mating.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70
Section on Treatment of Hermaphrodites in Two Methods
A hermaphrodite is of two kinds among males. One of them appears as a space between the two testes or on the scrotal skin between them, resembling a small vulva with hairs, from which urine sometimes flows.
In women there is one type, which is the vulva on top of the pubic region like small scrotal sacs, protruding externally; one resembles the penis of a man, and two resemble the testes.
The treatment for all three types  two from men and one from women  is the same: it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh until the indentation disappears. Then treat them with the usual care given to other wounds.
In the second type of men's condition, from which urine emerges, located on the scrotal skin, there is no operation nor any cure for it at all.
Chapter 71
On the Incision of Hemorrhoids and Excess Flesh Protruding from Women's Vulvas
Hemorrhoids may additionally appear externally, causing disfigurement and ugliness until they become prominent like those of men, reaching even to the point of sexual intercourse.
Therefore, hold the excess hemorrhoids with your hand or hook and cut them; do not cut too deeply, especially at the root, to avoid bleeding.
Then treat it as you would any wound until it heals.
The flesh that grows is the flesh that develops at the mouth of the uterus until it fills it, and sometimes it protrudes externally resembling a tail. Some people therefore call this condition "tail-like. Therefore, we should cut it like we do hemorrhoids and treat it until it heals.
On the Treatment of Phimosis, Which is an Uncircumcised Vulva
Chapter 72
Phimosis is when a woman's vulva is not pierced or has a small opening. And it may be either natural or acquired.
An acquired one is from the sickness which preceded it; and indeed it occurs either from flesh born within, or from thin or thick growth, and it may occur either in the depths of the womb, or on its sides, or above or below it; and it hinders copulation and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps it hinders menstruation.
And knowledge of this is gained through the examination by an obstetrician if there is an apparent swelling nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it out with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the swelling is from thin membrane and is near the two lips, then hasten and tear it apart.
And place on the two lips a little cotton wool.
Then place your index fingers of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart. Then stretch the two lips with force until the thin membrane tears and the swelling opens.
Then take some wool, dip it in oil, and place it on the location; and let the woman copulate every day so that the location does not harden again.
But if the growth is thick and dense, then it must be cut away with a broad knife like the leaf of a fig tree.
But if the swelling is from flesh born within, then suspend it with hooks and cut into it; and have with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and boiled incense with egg white.
Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal quickly; hold it in place for several days; and then apply a linen dressing made from dry flax, after which treat the remaining wound until it heals.
And sometimes other flesh is born in the womb; therefore it should be cut according to this method: while there is no cancerous abscess, for a cancerous abscess that is in the womb must not be treated with iron at all.
Chapter 73
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red boils in women's vaginas.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the veins' orifices until blood flows out from them abundantly and continuously.
When hemorrhoids are hardened, piles form; and I have already spoken of their kinds and signs in the division, and here I will say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are at the mouth of the womb and are not visible to the senses then there is no treatment with iron for them.
But those that are at the opening of the womb upon which sensation falls are those that should be treated.
Therefore it is necessary to put the woman into a cold house Then extend the piles with forceps or rough cloth and cut them off from their roots.
Then powder them over at the flow of blood without cauterization, using powders such as acacia, dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar ones.
Then make her press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
But if the bleeding persists then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel, and chicken feathers, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it for her back.
If the blood is cut off with it, that's good; but if not, make ventouses adhere to her back and breasts without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tartar or jujube fruit or hollyhock root, mixed with Pontic wine, and apply it to the place.
When the abscess has quieted down, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
Albart is red in color, resembling the heads of crows, and appears rough to the touch.
Therefore, you should cut off what appears from it, as I said previously about the eyelid equally: and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74
Chapter on Perforation of the Uterus which occurs in Childbirth.
Many kinds of swellings occur in the uterus, such as cancer, stone swelling, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati (herpes), aestimones, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragades, eyelid swellings, and hot abscesses.
And indeed I have already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, symptoms, and treatments in division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot swelling which occurs in the uterus, when it is from abscesses which retain blood, and you wish to know how its opening is made with an iron instrument.
Therefore you should examine If the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with pulsation, and fever, and inflammation: and you see it becoming red: if sensation falls upon it, then do not rush to perform a perforation on it: but treat it with what causes maturation until when the sharpness of the occurrences has quieted.
Then you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two steps and lean back or lie on her back, and bring her feet close to the lower part of her belly: and let her hips be spread out, and let her put her arms under her knees, and tie both sides with a suitable bandage to it.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and assist with the instrument with which the opening of the uterus is made.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument that you should penetrate deep into the uterus of the woman with the speculum, so that what enters from the instrument may not exceed the depth of the uterus and injure the woman.
But if the instrument is longer than the depth of the uterus, then it is necessary that you place pads upon the cover of the depth of the uterus, so that the entrance of the instrument may be prevented from going entirely into the depth of the uterus. And it is necessary that she who turns the wheel should stand on the upper side, and that she should hold the instrument and cause the servant to turn the wheel until the depth of the uterus is opened.
When therefore the issue appears and is touched with the hand, and is soft and slack, then it is necessary that you should cut it off at its head with a wide-bladed knife.
When therefore the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary that you should place upon the wound a linen cloth dipped in rose oil or green oil which has some astringency, and place the linen and draw out the portion into the depth of the uterus.
And place externally upon the uterus, and upon the pubis, clean wool dipped in water wherein mallows have been boiled.
Then let it be cared for on the second day with an ointment that is suitable to it until it heals.
And sometimes the uterus and wound are washed thus that a clyster is given with water and honey; then with water wherein the root of lily or long black cohosh has been boiled. Then it returns to the use of ointment.
But if the wound is hidden internally within the uterus, then it is necessary that you should refrain from treating it with iron, nay rather treat it with what we have said in division.
Chapter 70.
 The Doctrine of Midwifery: How live embryos are treated that do not come forth naturally according to their shape.
An obstetrician must first know the form of a natural delivery.
From these signs, it is that when you see a woman being pressed downward and she desires to smell the air and is relieved of what is upon her regarding childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to its natural form, and its exit is on its head, and the afterbirth with it: either suspended or pendent by the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary to press down on her womb so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends upon its head, the afterbirth comes with it and is cleansed of those superfluities by a good cleansing.
But one that is other than this birth is unnatural and reprehensible.
For sometimes the fetus comes out on its feet and its body comes forth before its head, with one foot or hand first, or both feet: or the head and hands come forth: or it emerges buttocks-first; and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and other such unseemly forms.
Therefore, it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and skilled in all these matters, and let him guard against error and deception. And I shall show every form among them, and how they are managed therein, and what is signified thereby, and what should be done about it.
When the fetus comes forth on its head in a natural emergence and there is great pain upon the woman and her labor becomes difficult, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then have her sit upon a chair or let women hold her up; and apply to her vulva warm water decocted with fenugreek and moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and use it to divide the afterbirth, cutting with her nail until the moisture runs out; then press down on the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to lie on her back after the enema; cause her to sneeze with mustard powder, and hold her mouth and nose shut for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
But if two hands of the fetus emerge first, they should be gently pushed back little by little. But if it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up; then shake the seat on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the shaking.
If, however, the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and remove the remainder of the fetus; bind her hand with a cloth and gently pull it out.
 Exit of the embryo through the feet. When the fetus comes out feet first, then press them upwards; gradually turn the fetus; and then bring it forth.
Then take one of its feet and slowly stretch it out.
When they have emerged up to the hips, then instruct her to lie on her back and cause her to sneeze with mustard powder; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out as mentioned above, then gradually push the fetus back until you have placed it in its natural position. For it will then come out with ease.
But if it is still not coming out with all that has been mentioned, then take some psyllium mucilage and sesame oil and dissolved gum, grind them well together in a mortar; then apply this mixture to the woman's vulva and below her belly. Then have her sit in warm water until she feels embarrassed.
Therefore, when you see that her lower parts are heated up, then make for her a poultice of myrrh and apply it. Then, after holding the poultice for one hour, have her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze; hold her mouth and nose closed; and press gently on the lower part of her belly. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus is on knees and hands. When it comes out according to this method, then gradually insert your hands inside her. Then the woman should lie on her back and let her feet hang down towards the floor; she herself should be lying on a bed, and she should fold her hands together. Then press gently on her belly gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the blankets until she is prepared below. But if the fetus does not come out, then take hold of her feet and move them violently. Then press gently on what is above her buttocks gradually until the fetus rises up. Then insert her hands and guide the fetus out gradually; and tell the woman to press down until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus should hang downwards between the hands. Insert your hand gently inside her. But if she cannot reduce it herself, then lift up the woman and make her walk around.
But if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed; and shake her legs violently.
Then apply the liniment you have prepared from mucilages.
But if she is seized by labor pains, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive for the reduction of the hand and make the fetus follow its natural shape. And cause the woman to sneeze and instruct her to press herself until it emerges.
The exit of the fetus is upon its own neck, with hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of its mother. It is necessary for the midwife to hold the hand of the fetus and then gradually turn it and make it equal with ease.
When it has been made even, then place upon its vulva what we have mentioned earlier from oil and mucilage.
Then instruct her to move gradually. After you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to press herself downwards: and cause her to sneeze with some force.
The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this manner along with the caul, then split the caul with your nail until it is emptied from moisture.
If however it hangs upon the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it may not remain there and cause death.
Then push the fetus inside until you place it properly and instruct the woman to press herself occasionally; for it will emerge easily.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born at once. But this is rare and seldom happens.
But five is against nature and they do not live at all. And although there may be many of them, they are contained within one caul. And they are separated by the umbilical cord, each being distinguished from the other by its separate connection to it.
And sometimes they emerge like a single fetus through the natural and easy exit; but they also emerge in a way that is not praiseworthy, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult at birth and reach the condition we have described with unnatural shapes, then treat them as we have told you: use a fine thread and act gently and slowly, guiding it according to every shape with skill leading towards healing.
Reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more than ten are formed in the womb; and it has been verified by me that a woman miscarried seven of them, and another fifteen, all of which were already formed.
Which was done with the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all of this should be included in the science of obstetrics. For perhaps something similar may happen to her; therefore, she should oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter 76
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you attempt to deliver a dead fetus using the methods I have mentioned in division and medication, but it does not emerge, and you are forced to use manual extraction, then you must consider [the following].
If the woman is of sound health and free from any accidents that threaten her with harm, then she should be laid on her back on the bed, with her head hanging downwards and her legs raised up. A servant should hold her at both sides or she should be tied to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moistened oils containing gum tragacanth and fenugreek seeds, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, and gently insert it into the womb. Then she should seek with her hand the place where hooks may be attached to the fetus, and suitable locations for that purpose.
Therefore, if the fetus is ready to be born feet-first, then attach hooks to its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, beard, collarbone, nearby ribs, or beneath the armpits.
But if it is being born feet-first, then attach hooks to its pubic bone and middle ribs.
And she must hold the hook with her right hand and place its loop between the fingers of her left hand. Then gently insert her hand and attach the hook to one of those places mentioned earlier until she reaches a vacant space.
Then attach another hook opposite it, or even a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal on both sides and does not lean towards one side.
Then traction should be applied evenly and not just in a straight line; rather, it should move in all directions to ease its emergence like the extraction of a tooth.
And the traction should be softened between them. If a part is stuck, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them from that side to twist what is holding it back.
If a part of the fetus comes out, then move the hooks to another higher location and continue this until the entire fetus is born.
If a hand emerges first and cannot be pushed back due to its constriction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it. Then pull it out until the entire hand emerges, cut it at the wrist or elbow joint, and do the same for the other hand and both feet.
If the fetus's head is large or has constriction at its exit or if there is accumulated water on its head, then insert a spiney spatula between its fingers and use it to open the head and drain the water. Alternatively, break it with an instrument called the Almisdac, whose shape will be shown in the next chapter.
Similarly, if the fetus is of a large head by nature, then you should perform a caesarean section or remove it with the Almisdac, as mentioned before. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
But if the head emerges but is obstructed at the fork [of the pelvis], then it should be opened until the fluid in the chest is released.
But if it does not turn and does not obey to emergence, then cut off the head piecemeal as much as you can.
If there is an abscess below the abdomen or hydrops (fluid accumulation), then pierce it until the fluid flows out.
But if the fetus is breech (feet-first), its extraction is easy and its direction towards the mother's outlet is straightforward.
But if it is obstructed at the abdomen or chest, then remove it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and open the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out.
But if the rest of the limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mother's outlet is open, then insert your hand deeply into the uterus and search for the head with it, grasping it with your fingers up to the mother's outlet. Then insert one hook or two hooks and pull it out with them.
But if the mother's outlet is obstructed due to an acute abscess, then do not exert force on it. Instead, administer hot humidifications and ointments and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is lying on its side, it can still be turned upright; then apply what we have said for live births.
But if that is not possible, then make an incision piece by piece and remove it.
And nothing of the afterbirth should be left inside entirely.
After completing your procedure, then apply what we have said for treating hot abscesses that occur in matrices.
If bleeding occurs, then let her sit in astringent waters and apply the rest of the treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb was dead with a fetus; then she became pregnant again upon it, and afterwards another fetus died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred at her navel, which swelled until it broke open and began to discharge pus.
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time; yet the wound did not heal.
So I applied to it certain plasters of strong drawing power, and the bone came out from its place. Then after some days, another bone came out. I wondered at this, for there is no bone in the womb.
So I concluded that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So I examined the wound and extracted many bones while she was in good condition; now she lives well after a long time, and only discharges a little pus from that place.
And I would not have mentioned this here except that it contains knowledge and assistance for that which the skilled physician administers with his hand in treatment.
Chapter 77
On the Shapes of Necessary Instruments for Extracting a Fetus
Shape of the Revolving Part by which the matrix is opened.
Here below is the shape of the Bookholder, with which books are made even, having two revolving parts at both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this Revolving Part ought to be more delicate than the Bookholder itself; and it should be made either from ebony or boxwood.
And let the width of each piece of wood be like two fingers; and the thickness of both shall be like one finger, and their length like a palm and half; and between the two pieces of wood there are two supports of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both sides, whose length is half a palm plus somewhat little; and the width of each is like two fingers, or somewhat more.
And these two supports are inserted into the mouth of the matrix so that it opens with them when you turn both Revolving Parts.
Another shape similar to this one, more delicate and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at its end there should be two supports like you see above; and the length of each support is like a palm; and the width of both is like two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then make the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down, having opened what is between her legs. Then insert these two connected supports into the matrix; and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, evenly according to the amount you wish from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the Midwife does what she wants.
Shape of another Revolving Part which the ancients called the Shape for Pushing, with which the fetus is pushed.
Shape of the Almisdac, used to crush a large head; it resembles forceps and has teeth at its end as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong like forceps according to this shape, with teeth like saw teeth, used for cutting and crushing.
Form of the "Uncinus" having one spine
Form of the "Uncinus" having two spines
Form of the "Spatumalis" having two ends for cutting off the head
Shape of two "Spatumilium" wider apart.
All these instruments should be used and the more numerous their kinds and the better prepared they are by the craftsman, the swifter is their use and the greater their reputation among people.
Therefore do not disregard any of these instruments without having it prepared at hand. For their need is indispensable.
Chapter 78
Chapter on the Extraction of a Retained Placenta
When the placenta is retained at birth, then it is necessary to instruct the woman in labor to hold her breath. Next, make her sneeze with condis and place your hand on her lower abdomen, covering her nostrils. If it comes out this way, that is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its cover. Place in it herbs that open the mouth of the womb such as calamentum, rue, anethum, chamomile, sesame, and cassia wood, centaurium: take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them in water, and place them on a fire.
Then place a hollow reed over the hole of the pot's cover and the other end into the mouth of the womb. Hold it until steam reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze as we have described. For the placenta will come out easily this way.
If, however, after this treatment the placenta remains and does not come out, then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in oil of sesame or dough made from flaxseed. Then she should insert it into the uterus and search for the secundines with it. When she has found it, then let her take hold of it and pull it out gradually.
But if it is attached deeply within the uterus, then she should insert her hand as we have described until she finds the secundines. Then she should pull them out gradually along their length so that the uterus does not collapse due to strong traction; rather, it should be moved gently towards the left and right sides alternately before adding more traction. Indeed, at this point it will yield, be preserved, and come out from its attachment.
But if the mouth of the uterus is contracted as we have already described, then treat it with sneezing and apply a poultice made from herbs in an earthenware pot.
But if it still does not come out despite all that has been described, then be careful not to tire yourself out with repeated attempts at extraction.
However, whatever emerges from the mouth of the uterus should be tied to the woman's thigh. Then perform an enema on her using the ointment known as "tetrapharmakon". For this will cause it to rot after a few days, dissolve, and come out.
But when it begins to putrefy, an unpleasant smell will rise from it to the stomach and head, causing harm to the woman's health. Therefore, suitable fumigations should be administered for this purpose.
Some of the ancients have already experimented with fumigation using watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman during retention of secundines and menstrual flow:
Make a vessel similar to an alembic or jar out of glass or pottery; place the wide end over the fire and put the fumigation on top of burning charcoal. Hold it until the fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Chapter 79
On the treatment of an unperforated anal fistula.
Many boys are born with their anuses not having been pierced, which has caused difficulty for physicians. Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger; if not possible, she should use a sharp spatula and avoid touching the buttock.
Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if you fear that it may not pierce, then place a lead catheter in the hole for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And likewise, an unperforated anus can also occur due to the solidification of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, that solidification should be cut away, and then it should be treated with what was mentioned for treatment using lead.
Chapter 80
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are those with a knot or swelling near the anus externally or in the space of one part; these can be single or multiple.
When that knot becomes inflamed, it opens and a watery white fluid or thin pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by the fact that something comes out during defecation and wind, when the patient uses their bowels; sometimes worms may also come out of them.
And there are fistulas which penetrate into other spaces, reaching as far as the bladder or the urethra. And they can also penetrate as far as the hip joint and even to the coccygeal bone.
However, to recognize if a fistula reaches the anus, even if it is not penetrating, you should insert your index finger into the anus and pass a thin probe made of silver or iron through the fistula, assuming there are no twists or turns.
If the fistula is twisted, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair filament into it until you feel it touch your finger.
If you do not feel the probe at all or notice no discharge from the opening, nor windiness, nor worm-like movements as mentioned earlier, then know that it is a non-penetrating fistula. Proceed with its treatment accordingly.
When a fistula reaches the bladder or urethra, its indication is urinary discharge from it, and its prohibition is to prevent closure of the site with medication.
But if the fistula penetrates to the hip joint or hipbone, its sign is that the probe reaches there without meeting any twists. There will also be pain around the area, constant pus discharge from it, and medication will not work nor can it be closed with an ointment.
In all penetrating fistulas like these, there is no cure at all; attempting to treat them is a futile effort and foolishness on the part of the physician who undertakes it.
However, in the case of a fistula that is not penetrating or very old, healing can be expected with use of a probe. I have tried and tested this myself: Have the patient lie on their back with their legs raised above the hips and the thighs inclined towards their belly. Then insert a probe made of lead or silver into the fistula until you know where it reaches.
If the patient feels the probe around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe has passed through itself and you can detect it between your finger and the tissue or flesh, then know for certain that the fistula is penetrating. Do not attempt to treat it as there is no cure for such cases, as we have already stated.
They claim that in some cases flesh can be cured and that a beneficial medication exists which involves using a fine hot cauterizing iron according to the size of the fistula, as described earlier, and inserting it into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this procedure twice or thrice until you know that all the fatty tissues resembling a bird's feather quill have been burned.
Then wrap it with linen soaked in butter until the burned tissues come out. Then treat it with ointments that promote healing and consolidation of tissue.
If it heals, then it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if the probe emerges but does not reach your finger inserted into the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh or skin between the probe and your finger, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula. Continue cutting with the probe until you reach the point where the probe has reached its end, at which point the probe will be freed and fall out.
Then cleanse those fatty tissues resembling a bird's feather quill so that none remain.
But if bleeding hinders you and prevents you from cutting those tissues, then it is better and quicker to cauterize with fire or an acidic medication.
For a cautery with fire brings together good results: it burns the added flesh and cuts off blood vessels, and dries out moisture.
Then treat it with linen soaked in butter or crushed cabbage leaves until the wound discharges pus and the burned tissues come out in the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that produce hard flesh, which are medicines containing astringency and drying properties.
For once they have been restored, then it is healed; and do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has reached to the depth of the anus and is distant from the outer skin: then insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.
If you feel the wall of the anus and between it and your finger there is a barrier made of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetrating: then there should be no operation on that part except by way of faith and hope.
That is to say, one of three methods should be used on it: either cauterize it as mentioned earlier; or cut it open until you reach its depth, so that you can insert linen and apply treatment from nearby. And do not proceed too far with the cutting so that you do not injure the muscle containing the anus and cause involuntary incontinence. Then treat it as we have said.
Perhaps it will heal; or you may extend that membrane and cleanse it after cutting it close to the anus as mentioned earlier, either with your finger or with another sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse those tissues exposed in the incision until you can examine them closely.
Then endeavor to restore the entire wound with its incision and upper opening where it is consolidated, leaving the fistula open internally at the anus for easier healing of the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is situated thus: when you insert a probe into it and find that it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus. Then take a probe with a pierced end like a needle's eye, which is prepared from the form of leatherworkers' needles. And insert into it a thread wrapped around five filaments, and wind it around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If it penetrates near the inner margin of the anus, then pull out the thread from that opening so that you can insert your finger into the anus and bring out the end of the thread. Then hold both ends together and tie them tightly, leaving it for one or two days. The more the thread cuts into the flesh, the tighter you should bind it until the tissues between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall away. After this, treat the wound until it heals and is solidified.
But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate by whatever means you have available, unless it is very deep. For it is not permitted for you to cause injury on purpose so as not to wound it.
Then proceed with it as we have said until it heals.
The shape of the spiked spatula used to probe the fistula is very sharp at one end and blunt at the other, so as not to wound unnecessarily.
Chapter 81.
Concerning the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows after their incision, and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways. Either they are inside the anus like charcoal embers or plums; or they seem to be grapes themselves. And some of them are small and others large, and blood flows from them constantly, either there is one or many. And they are also found outside the anus at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus have few moistures, from which yellow water runs or little blood flows steadily; and they are of the same color as the body.
And its treatment which is inside the anus is that you should order the patient to sit and press, until it protrudes out of the anus, and then appears before you. Therefore also use hooks to suspend them or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if the hooks do not hold due to their moisture and softness, then grasp them with a coarse cloth or with a wick made from doubled wool, and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle on them after cutting some hot powders, so that they serve the purpose of cautery. Or cauterize them as was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not obey to expulsion, then give the patient a clyster with a little bite [of medicine] so that it may cleanse what is in the anus and quickly obey expulsion when the patient presses.
But if the piles are external to the anus, then their condition is mild and easy; it is necessary to grasp them with your fingernail or hook and cut them. Then treat them with what we have said until they heal.
And whoever recoils from cutting with a knife, then it is necessary to administer stitching according to this method. Take a thread wound around and insert it into the needle. Then draw out the piles upwards and make the needle penetrate its root from the other side; wind both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, so that they are crosswise; then tie the piles tightly with a strong knot. Then tie the knot and remove the needle.
Do this with all of them, leaving one alone; do not sew it up yourself, so that excess blood may flow out from it.
Then place upon the wound a linen cloth dipped in rose oil or carrot juice, and place it on the wound; and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave him until he falls asleep.
When the stitches fall out, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they are healed.
Paragraph. On the treatment of fissures. For often these occur due to dryness of the feces and constriction of nature.
When they are chronic and medicine is ineffective, then you should dilate them with pointed spatulas or your fingernail until they become moist, and remove the overlying skin that prevents their healing. Then treat them until they heal properly.
If they do not heal, then repeat the dilation with greater force than before until they bleed profusely and are then treated until they are healed.
Paragraph. On the treatment of inverted and non-inverted hemorrhoids, as well as dry stitches and ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that a hemorrhoid is nothing but a round swelling resembling the head of a nail in color; it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes, and causes pain during walking.
Therefore, it must be cut around the nail with forceps or a hook, and removed from its root.
Then treat it; if you wish, cauterize it according to what is prescribed in its chapter.
From dry stitches, one has a small, rough, porous, round elevation on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
Its treatment is to stretch out the stitch and cut it, or tie it with silk thread or hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned either with fire or with caustic medicine. And now the inverted stitches will be eradicated, both inverted and not inverted ones using the instrument that I shall mention.
An ant is also an elevated small filtered sieve, thick, on the surface of the body, going deep into it. And when cold encounters it, one feels a sensation similar to an ant bite on it, and this occurs throughout the entire body, especially in the hands.
And its treatment is to take a cannula made from goose feather or strong eagle feather and place it over the ant mound until the circle of the cannula encloses all parts of it. Then revolve your hand with the cannula until it cuts off what is around the ant mound and place it deep into the flesh and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you wish to do this with a bronze or iron cannula, use the same procedure as mentioned before.
Let there be attached above the cannula a deaf-mute wrapping to ease its grasp on the finger and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what has been mentioned in the cautery chapter regarding the cauterization of stitches.
Chapter 83.
On the shapes of instruments used for administering enemas in diseases of the anus, and for relieving the belly and treating colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or of brass, or of cast or hammered bronze.
And sometimes they are made small and large from these instruments according to those used for administering them.
Therefore, the one used in treating young children should be small, and those whose anuses are weak or painful should have similarly sized enema tubes.
Large Enema.
The tube of the enema, that is, its upper end where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner. It should have a distinct division so that the bag can be tied as you see here, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be deaf, that is, not open, smooth, very fine-drawn, and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
The width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the fingers, and somewhat thicker. The bag in which medicines are placed should be made from an animal's bladder or from sheep's gut, shaped like a small sausage, with its root being one span wide.
It should be perforated with many holes as shown, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into these holes a strong thread made from raw flax, which is composed of about ten threads or so, and tie the bag with it like a sausage. When the bag is placed inside, the head of the enema should be tied tightly between the two divisions at its top. Then proceed with the enema using it.
This is the shape of the bag and holes depicted here.
The quality of performing the enema with this is: Fill the bag or bladder with warm medicine according to the tolerance of the sick person. Make sure it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs up high. Place a cushion or cloth under them to lie upon.
Then grease the tip of the enema with oil, egg white, or slippery elm mucilage, or something similar. Then insert it into the anus gently. Then the assistant should take hold of the bag with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until all the contents of the enema have entered the intestine.
Then remove the enema and the patient should raise their legs up against the wall.
But if medicine compels him to an exit, then let him hold on as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night long, it is the most severe in healing.
But if you administer an enema to him in cases of bowel obstruction and his evacuation is hastened thereby, then repeat the enema until he is healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or sores wounding the anus, then let the enema be very fine and gentle, like those used to administer to children.
And this is the form of a fine enema upon which the skin should be tightly stretched.
Chapter 84
I have already spoken in the division regarding the treatment of wounds as befits this book, and I will now speak here about their treatment by hand and with medicines according to what remains.
Therefore, wounds are differentiated according to the thing that causes them and according to the place where the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are caused are many, such as the throwing of a stone, or the cutting with a sword, knife, spear, wood, arrow, and similar other things that are numerous.
And wounds which occur according to the parts of the body are those that fall upon the head, neck, chest, belly, or hip, and similar other members.
And I will now describe the treatments for certain wounds so that I may establish a rationale and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the discussion of compound fractures will come at the beginning of Chapter III.
Therefore, I say. Therefore, when a simple wound occurs on the head without bone fracture, consider if it was caused by a thrown stone or similar object and has only pierced the skin. If the wound is large and you fear that hot inflammation may result, then act quickly and perform phlebotomy at once; do not delay it. Draw out blood according to his strength, unless there is something preventing phlebotomy, especially if little blood flows from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part. The patient should refrain from overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
But if something prevents phlebotomy, then reduce food intake and avoid meat and wines.
And apply over the wound, if it develops a hot inflammation, cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with wine containing styptic properties.
If you are secure from hot inflammation, then apply over the fresh wound with its own blood and not yet exposed to air, the powder I will describe later. But if it has already been exposed to air, then apply over it some ointments until it heals.
If the wound is large or caused by a sword cut or similar, and its lips do not adhere with small strips, then join them together with stitches according to what I will describe regarding abdominal wounds under suturing.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and hangs open without retention except for a small support, then cut into it. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore firm flesh instead of skin. Instruct the patient to consume foods that are easy to digest, such as broths, cooked wheat, and similar items until they can be digested.
But if you find decay in the skin of the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the decayed part and cast it out. Then treat the wound.
If there is an artery or vein from which blood flows copiously and it does not stop with medicines, then ask about the artery. Therefore if you find it uncut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it. But if necessity requires and the aforementioned method does not work, then cauterize it until bleeding stops.
But if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy. Therefore sprinkle this powder upon them before they change in air.
Method of making the Red Powder. Take one part of olibanum (frankincense), two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime. Grind all together well and sift it. Then fill the wound with this powder and apply a good dressing until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it above with bandages and leave it alone without removing it until it is completely healed so that it does not break open again. For the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does the job, when frankincense and dragon's blood are not available. It also performs the same function in many large wounds when it is proper to apply it and bind them, especially for fresh wounds with their own blood that have not been exposed to air.
But if the wound has already been altered by air, especially during summer time, then this powder is not intended for it. Therefore treat it with what we have said and apply some digestive ointments upon it, or apply poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then continue to treat them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with forceps; I will discuss the treatment of skull fractures later.
On wounds of the neck.
But if a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
But if the neck wound has already cut into a nerve or artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no treatment except to apply something that causes rapid coagulation such as zinc oxide and quicklime and similar substances. For they harm nerves and contract them.
And do not apply anything cold at all to the wound because the substance of nerves is cold and their continuity extends to the brain which is the most exalted organ; therefore, let what is used for treatment be made from gentle medicines such as chalk washed with sweet water repeatedly infused with oil or rose oil, and tutia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then perform suturing; otherwise, close its edges with bandages. Then treat it until it heals.
But if the wound has depth or a pocket of pus forms at its lower part, then make an incision in a more depressed area of it.
If an artery has been cut and blood flow is profuse, then separate or cut it and tie it off; otherwise cauterize it if necessary.
But if the thyroid cartilage or part of it has been injured and the cricothyroid membrane is preserved, then approximate the skin edges with sutures over the larynx without touching the larynx itself, and reduce it to its normal position. Then support it with a suitable bandage for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it. If there are any bone fragments in it, remove them all, or as many as you can; but leave what cannot be removed until the wound rots and separates itself from its opening and relieves the discharge.
But if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle upon it the powder that I have described. If however bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat this with what is mentioned in its chapter.
Chapter on Wounds in the Groin
If there is a wound from a spear or knife and you see its depth, then consider this. If breathlessness comes out of the wound when the patient sighs, know that the wound is fatal.
But if it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then do not put powder on it at first, nor bind it tightly so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the patient. Rather, apply an attractive ointment to it and loosen it twice a day.
But if the ointment is not available to you, then put a piece of old cotton at the mouth of the wound so that it may suck out whatever liquid comes from it. And make the patient sleep on the wound so that what collects in it may flow away.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and no convulsions, palpitations of the heart, nor shortness of breath has occurred in the patient, and you see that his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is safe. Therefore treat it with bandages and other appropriate treatment until it heals.
But if its healing is delayed and it continues to open up, know that a fistula has already formed. Thus treat it according to its own chapter.
If the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with suturing if it is large or with dust if it is small.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone and has cut off pieces of it, then examine the wound and make haste to extract those fragments if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them be until the wound putsrefies, for extraction will be easier then.
The judgment concerning the treatment of other wounds that occur in the remaining limbs is the same as what we have said.
On abdominal wounds, prolapse of the intestines, and their replacement.
The disruption that occurs to the abdomen is great, medium, or small.
Therefore, from a large disruption sometimes one intestine or several may protrude.
Hence their reintroduction becomes difficult and the suturing more urgent and challenging.
And even a small disruption can be difficult to handle due to its unique nature. Therefore, their replacement becomes more difficult if you do not promptly reintroduce them to their place immediately after the disruption, because they swell up, open wider, and thicken; hence, reintroduction becomes difficult.
Therefore, a medium-sized disruption is easier to manage because it does not present the same difficulty in reducing the intestines as do large or small ones.
Know that there are four ways of suturing an abdominal wound.
Two types of sutures are common to both abdominal and other bodily wound sutures, while two others are specifically used for other wounds. But these latter two methods are more suitable for abdominal wound suturing, and I will describe each one to you with its explanation and demonstration.
I say therefore that when the wound is small and some intestine protrudes from it, making it difficult to reduce, then this occurs due to one of two methods. Either because of the narrowness of the rupture as we have said, or because there is inflammation in the intestine due to exposure to cold air.
When this is the case, then you must warm it by immersing a sponge or damp cloth into hot water alone. Or boil in water purslane, cypress shoots, and spices together with the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes wine with astringent properties may be used for this purpose; it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
When you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which have been boiled irises or mallows. For through this, its entrance will be eased along with the small object.
But if its return is still prevented after this treatment, then tie off the narrow part of the rupture with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than cutting; it should not be forced to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be sharp and twisted, the other not sharp, and its tip not too fine like a stylus, but somewhat blunt; this resembles a keyhole as you see.
When the wound is enlarged and the intestine enters it, then its reduction should be made according to its natural shape into its proper place if possible; for this is better.
But when the rupture is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then have the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and chest higher than their lower body.
Similarly, if there is a disruption in one of two parts of the abdomen, then place your purpose and attention always on this, that the part in which the wound is situated be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to do so for large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, place it according to what you prepare yourself.
Then have present between your hands a pious assistant who shall hold the entire disruption with his hand and bring together its edges. Next, remove from it for him who follows to suture some after some; and this is the common method of one stitch.
And it is that you should take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound's width. Then let go from the end of the disruption a quantity equal to the width of a finger, that is, of the physician's finger. And insert one needle except where you introduce into it thread at both ends of the skin, with two ends of sinew being under the skin internally, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and now you have brought together two edges of the skin and two ends of sinew: and there are four rows made.
Then draw together with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously until the two edges of the wound are brought together appropriately.
Then let go the thickness of a finger also and insert another needle into them; then draw it straight with thread as you did with the first needle. Do not cease doing this with him until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And let the needles be of medium size between thickness and fineness; for fine needles pierce flesh very quickly, and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin. Therefore they ought to be of medium size in fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle into two edges of skin close together too much; so that flesh may not be cut quickly and the wound open before healing, nor stretched out with the suture, so that healing may not be prevented.
Then cut the point of needles so that they do not harm the patient while asleep; and put on them little pieces of cloth from all sides which hold the ends of needles; and let them be until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this indeed kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it suffices in the suture of them that one needle or two, or about those be used.
But the second suture is common thus: gather with a suture the four ends - two of skin and two of the silk thread in place of one, with a needle on which is wound an equal thread in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced these four ends with the needle, bring back the needle from the side where you began, so that the thread falls on the upper part of the wound: so that it may be a suture like the stitching of clothes, and put between every suture an amount of thickness of a finger's breadth.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I myself sewed up a wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who was wounded with a knife and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm; and there came out from the intestines about two palms of middle intestine, and there was disruption in the middle of the belly.
Therefore I brought it back after his intestine had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
Thus the wound was healed in about fifteen days; and I treated it, and he was cured: and he lived many years afterwards, being active in his occupations.
And physicians judged that it would not be cured.
And it was by miracle that I did not treat it with ointment. Because there was neither ointment nor any medicine available where I was located. Therefore, I applied an old cloth moistened with honey water to the wound twice a day and kept washing it constantly until it was healed.
I will now discuss two kinds of stitching according to my account.
And the first step in using an acute suture is to insert the needle from the outer part towards the inner part.
After the needle has pierced the skin and traveled along the length and breadth of the entire body part, release one end of the thread on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce through from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
Then make it pierce back from the outer part to the inner part at that same end, and release the thread on this side. Then insert the needle into the other end from the inner part to the outer part, and continue piercing until it reaches the other end. Repeat this process until the entire wound is closed.
Then begin again from this same side, and bring out the needle along with its thread from the skin that it pierced.
Then bring the needle back into that skin and its thread on the other side. Pull it out from the skin on this side again, repeating this process once more. Continue alternating sides in this manner until all edges are approximated according to this example.
The final step of this stitch is to tie the thread like butchers do when sewing hides, so that one end of the thread remains on each side of the skin wound, alternating sides once.
The second type of stitching, which Galen called "running stitch.
This method is described as being similar to the stitch used by some physicians, where they bring together all parts of a wound that are naturally fitting and apply one end of the thread to another end, while the other end is applied to the opposite side. And this is done in the manner that I have described for you.
You must insert the needle into the end of mirrah that is near you on the outer part and make it pierce inward until its point emerges inside. Then leave two ends of thread (sifac). Then turn the needle around and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part on both ends of the thread, that is on each side.
Then turn both sides again and make them pierce from the inner to the outer part on the other two ends of mirrah that are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than common simple stitching, and it is the stitch that comes after remembering.
This is therefore also the discourse of Galen.
And some said The abdominal wound should be sewn with two needles. Which means that you should insert one thread into each needle and begin by inserting the needle on your side and make it pierce through to the other side, according to the stitch used by those who repair hides evenly.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its stitching is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
But the judgement concerning the treatment of wounds is the same for all wounds.
Which means that when you find a fresh wound with its own blood before it is exposed to air, and you reduce the intestine, tie it off, and adapt it, then lay over it powder for cauterization.
But if the wound has already been exposed to air, then apply some ointment that you have present until it makes pus appear and the threads fall out and become firm. Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
But if you do not have the medications present, then immediately apply old cotton to it as soon as it begins to discharge pus. Change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For in many cases of simple wounds, no other medication is needed.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate with the main members and cause injury, then you should take some soft wool and soak it in tempered oil or rose oil. Apply it around the areas between the groin and under the armpits.
But if he feels pain or punctures or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens), then apply a warm, black, demulcent wine enema. Especially so if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and is causing a deep exitus.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal, but what comes from the small intestine is more difficult.
But the intestine called the ileum does not receive healing from any wound that occurs in it at all. This is because of its multitude of veins and their size, the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
But if what comes out from the wound is stringy and fresh, then reduce it according to your method of reducing the intestines evenly.
But if some time has passed and it has turned green or black, then you should tie it with a thread above the spot that has been discolored by it to prevent bleeding. For there are veins and arteries in stringy matter.
Then cut what is beyond that tie and leave two ends of thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it. This will relieve you of the attraction and extraction of the stringy matter and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Reminder of a wound that occurred in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it may be possible for it to be restored in some people because I saw someone who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach and had healed: and a fistula formed, from which windy discharge escaped.
Therefore I applied treatment until I was confident of its healing and did not cease to monitor it until it healed and the area solidified.
After I saw that the location had healed solidly, I feared that some other illness might happen to him but it did not. And he remained in better condition than before, eating and drinking, copulating, taking baths, and exercising as usual.
And now some surgeons have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner. And you must take ants with large heads. Then gather together the two edges of the wound and place one ant with its mouth open over them When it grabs onto them and closes its mouth, cut off its head for it adheres and will not let go.
Then place another ant near the first one and continue doing this with ants one after the other according to the length of the entire wound.
Then close it up and stitch the wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine until it eats and heals, without causing any harm to the patient.
And now it is possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread that has been removed from an animal's intestine and attached to it after being inserted into the point.
And you should take one end of this intestinal thread and cut off a lot of it. Then tie a fine linen thread wrapped around the end of it. Then insert this thread into the needle and draw the intestine along with it. Then reduce it back to its place.
And this method of stitching with ants and intestines is only a matter of trust and hope.
Know that wounds which are large or wide, especially if they involve one of the thin intestines, then there is no cure except for delicate stitching.
On the treatment of fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess which becomes old and chronic, turns into an ulcer, does not heal up, discharges pus continually, and is not cut off, is called universally in whatever member it may be a fistula; and we call it zuchemen.
And truly a fistula is a hard, white knot through which fluid flows; there is no pain with it, and its cavity resembles the hollow of a bird's feather; and some people call it 'risati', that is, 'feather'.
And at certain times it is moist and discharges pus. Perhaps the moisture splits open at some times. And sometimes this fluid is much, and sometimes little; sometimes thick, sometimes thin.
And I have already mentioned in my division that any ulcer which does not heal and no flesh grows on it is due to one of nine causes.
One of these causes is either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard flesh between it and around its edges hindering the growth of new flesh; or because of much dirtiness and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because unsuitable medicine was used in treating it; or because a corrupting fever has fallen in that region, as happened in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone too many or too few.
And I have already shown all of these causes and signs of them, as well as their treatments with medicines, divided into sections. Now it is necessary for me to make you aware of the treatment of fistulas and goitres that occur through surgical operation by hand.
Therefore, know that a fistula can occur in all members of the body. For there are fistulas that reach the major veins and arteries, nerves, or tendons; or the intestines, bladder, or some of the ribs; or some of the dorsal vertebrae, or some of the joints composed by articulation; such as those in the hand and foot. And there are also those which approach the main member itself, and similar ones.
Therefore, among these fistulas, those that arise in this manner are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment; dealing with them is hard work and ignorance.
But if there is a fistula whose depth does not reach these places I mentioned and you hope for its healing and trust in its treatment, then take a probe made of bronze or iron (if the fistula runs straight) and explore it with that.
But if there is twisting in the fistula, then examine it with a thin lead probe. For lead, being malleable, yields and curves around the twists.
But if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to locate it by use of a probe. Therefore choose one of its openings and perform a clyster through it.
For the liquid you use for the enema will flow towards the other openings and escape from them.
Then proceed to examine carefully according to what is possible for you to know whether there is a bone or nerve at that spot, and whether the fistula is deep or shallow; or whether it is one fistula with many openings. Stand on top of all this with your utmost strength, questioning the patient, discovering the pain upon compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs and causes occurring after an apostema.
And so having stood on all that with true steadfastness, then proceed to treat according to your confidence. And consider whether the fistula is close and apparent, or in a safe location far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned to you. Then cut the fistula as previously described in my account, and remove what is inside it by filtration, and the rotting flesh that grows at its opening from flesh or gland, and similar things: and treat it until it heals.
But if the fistula is deep and runs straight, then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible. Then cleanse it of all its rotting flesh.
Then apply a linen bandage dipped in sharp medicaments and insert it into the depth of the fistula you have cut with the knife. Do this several times until the medicine burns away all that remains in the depths of the fistula from decay.
Then restore it with ointments that promote healthy flesh growth until it heals.
But if it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of a fistula is bone and you have confirmed this, then examine it and cut it according to what I have told you; if nothing prevents you from doing so regarding any vein, nerve, or main member, as we said.
If bone is discovered and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed. Then dress it with what will cause it to adhere until it heals.
But if it does not heal and continues to emit pus as before, then know that you have not reached the complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore scrape over it again, carefully examine its reason and cleansing with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in a deep and distant part of the body which you have not reached. Therefore, there is no cure for it except to leave it to nature.
But if the bone is small and it is possible for you, grasp it with fine forceps that fit its size.
But if there are many bones, then carefully grasp them all with your strength and do not leave any out.
But if something obstructs you due to humidity and there is no fear or error in cutting them, then cut those humidities and flesh, if they are present, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that moment, then place something over the wound that will cause it to putrefy; and leave it until what is around those bones in flesh and humidity has putrefied.
And keep the wound from healing. And let the incision you made during your operation close up. Indeed, if you fear this, apply over it, soaked in oil mixed with ground sulfur; or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any other ointment of bdellium.
For when those moistures decay and the bones separate from them, the removal of these becomes easier, and their attraction is facilitated.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thighbone or hipbone, and what has decayed in it is a large part, then shave it with the final razor until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is decayed in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it off and cut it all the way up to where the corruption has reached. Then treat it until it solidifies.
And I tell you this story that happened to a man regarding his leg so that you may set it as an example and help for your own operation.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that originated within his body, namely from the internal parts, until it reached the leg and formed an abscess with a large swelling. And there was no external cause.
Therefore, much time passed with errors of physicians until the abscess was opened and many materials accumulated around him. And treatment for it was delayed until the leg became fistulous and many openings formed on it which all emitted pus and bodily moistures.
Therefore many physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise hand in the art until I was called and saw his leg and the materials that were flowing from those openings with great force. And all of the man's body had already wasted away, and his complexion was yellowish.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of those openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they interconnected with each other from all parts of the leg.
I then searched and followed one of those openings until I found a bone part: and I found it rotten, already eaten away, blackened, decayed, and perforated to the marrow.
Therefore, I removed what was exposed and prepared a replacement from the rotten bone.
And I ensured that nothing remained in the bone except the corruption which I cut away and removed. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I applied a dressing to the wound with strengthening medicines over an extended period. And it did not heal.
Then I probed further and discovered another opening above the first one, and found continuous decay with the bone; and I removed what appeared to me from that decay as well.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
So I examined it again and did not cease cutting the bone piece by piece, trying to restore it; but it was not restored until I cut about a palm's length of bone and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines and it was quickly consolidated and healed. And this procedure and incision would not have been necessary if not for the weakness of the patient's constitution, his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him due to the continuous evacuation of malodorous fluid from him at all hours.
Thus he was healed completely and a hard, good bone was formed in place of the missing bone. His body's condition improved and his strength returned to him, allowing him to walk without any hindrance whatsoever.
But if the protruding bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary to cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tie it at the end of the protruding bone; have someone else pull it upwards; and place another ligament made of coarse wool over the first one. Then tie it above the flesh that is on the bone; extend its end so that you pull the flesh downward; and uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to cut, so that the knife does not wound the flesh when cutting.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone appropriately; for when you do this, it prevents the knife from cutting rotted flesh.
And it is necessary that the cut be made over the rotted place briefly, so that there is no concavity of bone corruption; and may not appear in its appearance to the senses, and force another cutting in its place.
But if the bone is rotted and not protruding, indeed continuous with its parts; and corruption is in the middle of it or in one of its parts; then uncover all the flesh from all sides completely. Then place wood underneath.
Afterwards, cut it from the first side where there is corruption until the cut continues to the other side; and let the cut be according to the length of the corruption briefly, as we have said.
But if the corruption is at the joint, cut the corrupted joint itself; and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except scraping off.
But if corruption is in the joint of the hand or foot, then the case is very difficult indeed. However, it is necessary to examine how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it away and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and correct it with whatever means you have at your disposal; provided that the vein or nerve does not interfere.
And know that there are many types of knives and saws for cutting these bones according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, thinness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare a suitable instrument for each type of operation to be performed.
And know that these operations require knowledge about the kind of instruments you will need, as prolonged study is necessary. And knowledge of the methods of this art, and an acquaintance with the various kinds of diseases: then you will be able to find for yourself what is suitable for each case from among the instruments adapted to every ailment.
And I will tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should have as examples to cut by and for testing others.
Shape of Another Saw.
Form of Razor for Joints. Let the head of this razor be shaped like the head of a star-nosed hammer, and let its points be like those of an awl.
And it is not fitting unless when the heads of joints are rubbed with it when they are spoiled or when the bone is broad and large.
Form of Larger Razor.
Form of Broad Razor.
Form of Razor with Concavity.
Form of Another Fine Razor.
Form of Yet Another Razor, Curved at the End.
Form of Small, Fine Razor, Tapered.
This resembles a file and its end is like a saw; it is used in many places due to the reasons of bones.
The shape of the razor which suits the reason for that which is pierced through the bone.
Its end is triangular and its extremities are sharp.
It is made from India. And similarly it is necessary that all which we have said concerning Razors and Scalpels and Saws be made
On the Incision of Extremities and Sawing of Bones.
Extremities putrefy due to either external or internal causes.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicinal care and the treatment does not help, and you see that corruption spreading to the limb without any check, then it is necessary to cut off that limb until you reach the corruption so that the patient may be saved from death or from the worse malady which is a greater loss of the limb.
And the sign of this is that the limb becomes black until it appears rotten; which fire has burned or rotted after becoming black. Unless that corruption is cut out up to that which follows it, and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, hasten with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the bite of certain venomous creatures such as the sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones.
If therefore corruption or bite is on the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space for corruption to spread up to the remaining hand.
And similarly if it happens on the hand, then cut it off from its root at the wrist and do not give space for corruption to spread until it reaches the arm.
And if it invades further, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
But if corruption goes beyond and you see it around the elbow, then death of the patient is imminent there. And to administer anything else besides that [i.e., amputation] as treatment is a waste of effort.
Similarly, if corruption affects the toe, then cut it at one of its joints; but if it has reached the sole of the foot, then amputate the whole foot. But if it reaches the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if corruption has already reached above the knee, there is no remedy for it except to leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or tying it is thus: tie the ligament below where you wish to cut and also tie another above that place. Let one assistant hold one ligament downwards, while another assistant holds another ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a wide spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then cut or tie it off.
And it is necessary to put a linen cloth on all parts and not to touch the healthy place with the saw; otherwise injury may be added and hot inflammation may occur.
But if bleeding occurs inside during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly; or put some powder that stops bleeding on it. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate ligament and treat it until it heals.
And I tell you that what happened to a man's foot is the same as what I am telling you.
That is, because blackness occurred on his foot with burning that resembled fire-burning, and that corruption first began at his toe until it started to affect the whole foot.
So the man took matters into his own hands after he saw that corruption was rapidly spreading on his limb with its intense pain and burning. He cut it at the joint, and he healed.
And after a long time had passed, that same corruption occurred on his left index finger.
Therefore he came to me, and I attempted to draw off that swelling with what I had applied on his hand from among medicines after cleansing his body. But the swelling did not subside, and it began to spread to another finger until corruption reached his hand.
So he called upon me to cut off his hand. But I refused to do so, hoping that the swelling might still subside through my care; and also feared for his life during the operation on his hand. For the man's strength was greater than his misfortune.
And when he had despaired of me, he returned to his own land. And they told me that he hastened and cut off his whole hand, and was cured.
And I have not recorded this narrative except to serve as an aid in cases of this kind of disease, and so that there may be a sign by which it may be recognized, and according to which treatment should be undertaken.
On the Treatment of Hemicranias and the Quality of Enemas with Medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the extent of the abscess continues until it forms a collection of pus, then if it bursts or is incised and the matter within it comes out as pus, and the remaining space appears hollow like a vessel, and the skin over it is thin like a worn-out cloth, and it does not reach its ultimate stage of corruption nor spread to bone, nerve, or ligament, it deserves to be called a sinus; but if its extent continues until corruption spreads to any of these members, then it is called a fistula or zuqn.
And its treatment is to incision that skin entirely as it appears curved, especially when it has become thin and resembles cloth; and you may rely on the fact that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
But if you expect that the skin will adhere and it does not result in that final corruption; and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with a clyster; and it is necessary to consider its sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus emitted from it has a foul odor; then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and niter, mixed together in a vessel and cooked over a fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
Then take from what you need of it; and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize the sinus with it; and close its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
Then remove it with expression: do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ash of grapewood or oak wood and sprinkle it on that water. Then filter it, and clysterize with it until you are confident that the sinus is now cleansed.
But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey to which some powdered niter has been mixed. Or clysterize with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash away impurities; and wine makes the sinus adhere especially when it has excess astringency and dryness.
After doing this repeatedly and being confident that the corruption of the sinus is now removed; then clysterize it with what causes flesh to grow there.
Take from the plaster a piece of diaphoretic (dysaphion): dissolve it with rose oil and set wine, or clysterize it with some medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in my treatise on ointments.
But if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot accommodate a clyster cannula; then dilate it slightly with iron, or place a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it dilates.
And likewise if the orifice is too wide; then join its lips with a suture and let out from it an amount sufficient for the clyster to enter without overflowing.
And similarly if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated towards the superior parts; then cut it in a lower place where it is situated, so that the pus may flow out downward, because when pus becomes stagnant in the depths of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated there.
But if it is not possible for you to cut around the lower part of the sinus as desired; then try to prepare the limb in such a way that the pus flows out easily according to your preparation. Ensure that no pus remains inside at all; and take medicines for consolidation which are applied on the wound, suitable to what you desire. And spread them out on a linen cloth. Let the cloth be of such size that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly at the orifice of the sinus a hole larger than the sinus itself a little bit. Next spread out on another cloth some soft ointments according to the size of the hole, and place it over it at a distance from the orifice of the sinus so that the outflow of pus may be eased; and do not remove the large cloth except once every few days.
That one which is over the sinus' orifice you shall remove at every hour so that what accumulates therein from pus may flow out; and to know whether the discharge flowing from it is much or little, digested or undigested.
Moreover, consider the site of the sinus itself, whether its owner feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess or not.
Therefore, when your dressing is applied thus and you see the matter that flows over the sinus' orifice, know that the sinus is already adhering or approaching adhesion. Then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if thin pus flows from the sinus after a long time, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching; because among men there are some who delay the growth of flesh in their wounds, and others who promote it conversely.
But if undigested pus flows from the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then increase the astringency of the dressings; let them be truly medicinal so that they are humid in substance and dry in power, like the ointment diafinicon when excess of zibet is added to it.
And lastly, when treating, take the ointment diafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine equal in quantity.
Then mix it together and use it.
And similarly, when you do not have the ointment diafinicon present, use honey instead; cook it until it thickens and then use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: grind them all together and powderize them over honey while it is on the fire. Then take a linen cloth and bind it over the wound; then spread on it the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powderize over it spices, and place it on the linen cloth, and bind it in place.
And sometimes aristolochia longa and blue lily roots are administered, which is the lily; and barley flour and centaurea. Use them either separately or combined, grind them up and sift them, then powderize over the honey which I have mentioned, and use it.
But if the wound persists and is not healed by this treatment, know that there is corruption at its base. Either it has formed an ulcer on the bones or hard parts, or ligaments; then treat it according to the method of treating fistulas as previously mentioned.
Chapter: On the treatment of panaritium and nails crushed by injury, and on incising a finger added [i.e., a false growth] and cutting it off.
Panaritium is an abscess that forms under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot, and it may also form on other fingers.
When this condition persists and is neglected until it becomes inflamed and the abscess becomes hot; or it decomposes and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes even decomposes the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption extends to the bone so that there is a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and turns black in color.
When you treat it with what we have said about division, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cut off all the excess that remains from the nail with an iron blade. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. For a cautery is very helpful indeed.
But if the bone is sound and the nail also is sound, and there are empty spaces between the nails which press down upon the flesh inwardly, and begin to prick it and wound it: then you must place a fine probe under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut into the flesh easily, and lay upon that which remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosive ones, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has already affected the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it, for it will never heal while the corrupted bone remains.
But if you see corruption and decay advancing into a finger, then cut it at one of its joints, as has been previously mentioned. Then treat it until it heals.
But if a nail should become worn down or struck, and severe pain occurs in it, then you must first perform bloodletting on the afflicted person. Then cut off the nail with a sharp, pointed knife by making a transverse cut from above to below.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for then you would cause severe pain to the sick person, and it would result in additional growth of flesh in that place.
Then treat the spot with something that alleviates pain.
Now the extra digit that grows on some people's hands may be entirely fleshy; or it may contain bones; or it may have a nail; and sometimes it grows at the root of the joint, or its growth occurs at certain joints of the finger. Therefore, that which grows on certain joints of the finger does not move; but that which grows at the root of the finger may possibly move.
Therefore, the cutting off of one that is entirely fleshy is easy. Which means, cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
But the treatment of that which has its origin at the junction's root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
But if one is born on the finger at the last joint, then it should be cut round first until the bone. Then saw off the bone with an appropriate saw blade. Then treat it until it heals.
Fractures that occur between fingers happen frequently either from birth in humans, or from fractures of wounds, burns, fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, it is necessary to remove that union until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place between them bands or cloths soaked in rose oil to prevent rapid union, and separate them until the site heals as required. Alternatively, place a thin lead plate between them until it solidifies.
And similarly, if union occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that union according to how it is prepared and fits the shape of the member.
On the Incision for a Tumor.
Veins that are twisted, thick, and full of melancholic superfluities occur in many parts of the body, but mostly in the legs, especially those of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Therefore, you should administer strong purging of the body with black bile purgatives several times.
Then perform a bloodletting on the patient using the basilica vein.
But their treatment with iron is according to two methods. One of these methods is to cut them open and extract the black blood. And another method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
But its cutting off is according to this method. First, soak the leg in warm water until the thick, foul blood dissolves. Then bind the sick leg from above the hip to below the knee with a bandage. Next, cut the vein in one or two or three places with a wide incision.
Then draw out the blood from below the leg upwards and have the bloodletter first bleed the sick person. Next, cut the nail downwards until a sufficient amount of blood flows out that the strength of the sick person can tolerate.
Afterwards, bind it and tell them to abstain from foods that cause black bile. Repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins fill up again, if it is harmful to the sick person.
The method of elevation is as follows. Shave the sick leg, especially if there are many hairs on it. Then place the patient in a bath or soak their leg in warm water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; alternatively, have them exercise vigorously if there is no bath available, until the limb warms up.
Then make an incision along the length of the vein, either at its end near the knee or at its lower part near the heel.
Then use hooks to open the skin and strip away the vein from all sides until it becomes visible; it will appear red with a tendency towards blackness. When it comes out of the skin, you will see that it is white like a cord.
Then insert a probe underneath it until it raises up and comes out of the skin; then gently suspend it with a hook.
Next, make another incision about three fingers away from the first incision. Then strip the skin from above the vein until it is visible. Then elevate it with probes as you did before and suspend it with another hook, just as you did initially.
Then make another incision or more incisions if necessary. Next, elevate the heel and make the final incision at the calcaneus.
Then remove it through the incision above it.
Do this until you have removed it completely through the highest incision; then cut it.
If it does not yield to you being pulled out and lifted up, then insert a needle with strong thread doubled, tie it around it, and pull it out. Or insert a probe beneath it and rotate your hand in every direction until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if you cut it, it will be difficult to lift out completely and harm will come to the patient from it.
When you have removed it completely, then apply over the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil or oil, and care for it until it heals.
But if it is contracted and twisted with coils into parts, and not straight as we have said, then you must split open all its twisted parts and places of coiling.
Then suspend it with hooks until you lift it out completely; and be careful not to cut a vein or wound it near your incision, for it will be difficult to lift out or remove. Therefore keep yourself cautious.
The Shape of the Incision by Which the Vein is Healed.
The Shape of the Blind Hook.
It does not have the curvature of other hooks nor is it sharp-pointed so as not to wound the vein. It is thick and rounded, gentle; for if it were thin it would cut into the vein with its thinness. Indeed, let it be thicker than necessary, as we have said.
On the Extraction of a Vein from the Leg
This vein is produced in legs in hot lands such as those of the Aliz Mughrebiyya and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands where grass nor trees grow.
And perhaps it may be found in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation indeed occurs from the corruption that happens under the skin, such as those found within the bodies of snakes and worms, namely, the ascaris worm and other worms generated between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein's occurrence is that a fierce inflammation happens in the leg. Then it becomes hard (tumor). Next, the vein begins to exit from that hardened spot, like the root of a plant or an animal.
Therefore, when its end appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one to two drachms and tie it tightly; let the lead hang down from the leg.
Whenever something comes out from it towards the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it. But if it extends far out, then cut off a portion of it and wrap up the remainder. Do not cut it completely until it has all come out. For if you cut it off entirely before it has finished coming out, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and corruption in that place, as well as a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be handled gently and drawn out slowly until it comes out entirely from its last point, so that nothing remains of it in the body. Indeed, in some people this vein can extend to five palms or ten fingers in length. And it has come to my knowledge that a man had one which was twenty palms long.
But if it is cut during your treatment session, then insert a probe into its opening and bore through it with a long needle, along its body, until all the material inside it has been emptied out. Then apply medicines to the site for several days to promote healing. Then treat it with the cure for boils.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or on the foot itself; and it happens that it has many openings, with a branch issuing from every opening.
Therefore treat it as we have described in division (of the vein), along with what was said previously.
On the incision of swellings caused by worms under the skin, and called "bovine sickness.
This condition is called "bovine sickness" in certain regions among us because it often occurs in cattle and is caused by a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it travels throughout the body, ascending and descending, and its movement can be felt during walking from one limb to another until it bursts forth wherever it finds an opening in the skin.
And its origin is from the corruption of certain humors. Just as worms and serpents, that is, tapeworms and roundworms, occur in the belly.
And it is feared for its harmfulness. For when it moves through the body and rises up to the head, if it happens to burst forth there, it may emerge and destroy an eye. This occurs quite often.
Therefore, when you wish to treat and remove it, this can only be done during its movement and when it is felt through touch.
Hence, you should tie tightly above and below it with a strong binding cord. Then cut over it and extract it.
But if it is buried deep in the flesh and cannot be found, then apply a hot cautery to the spot until it dies.
And what is feared most is its corruption which infects the eye, as we have said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then tie a good ligature beneath it on the eyebrow. Then cut over it and extract it.
And it is necessary for the patient to cleanse his body with purgative medicines that dissolve bad corrupting humors.
And let him abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter on the Incision for Nakir's Disorder
This disorder is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, then it moves from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen this myself, as I am telling you now. I was summoned to a woman who was ill in some villages And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after staying for one hour, I saw one swelling move along with a sort of pulsation, like the movement of a worm, ascending quickly to her shoulder, so that it appeared like living silver moving from place to place.
Therefore the pain withdrew from that spot and became fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran throughout her body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her whole body, as I had seen.
Therefore I was amazed at the speed of its movement from limb to limb. And truly, before this, I had never seen this disorder with my own eyes in such a manner. But nevertheless, I have seen many people who experience pain moving from limb to limb, and I did not see it with my own eyes as clearly as I saw it in this woman.
And I do not think that it is anything but what results from the fact that this woman was among those who are from dry-bodied villages with exposed veins. Therefore, it appears to be a kind of windy inflammation.
And it is necessary that these do not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and the patient feels pain: then if it appears before your eye, as we have said, then tie above and below it quickly; and cut above it until that windy inflammation comes out constrained; and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with rubbing of the body and with that which expels windiness, and scar it with foul-smelling pills and pills of senna and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types and the places on the body where they strike.
The varieties of arrows are those with large points and small ones, concave points and blunt points. And among them are those with three angles. And among them are those with tongues. And among them are those with stars.
But those that fall according to the members where they strike, there are two ways. Either these members are among the main concave members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. When an arrow falls into any of these members and the signs of death appear to you, which I will describe to you later, then you should avoid extracting that arrow from it, for death follows him who has it in many ways. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden deeply within the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and pierces the bone and exits through the fontanelle above are: sudden severe headache, blindness, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of intellect, and vomiting bile. And perhaps blood flows from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And there emerges from the wound site white fluid resembling milk. And it exits from it like watery flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow having fallen into the heart are these: that it is near the left nipple; and one feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not something empty. And perhaps the arrow moves like the pulse; and black blood runs from the wound. And there follows coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, and syncope (fainting). Therefore know that death is certain.
The sign of an arrow having pierced the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound, and the swelling and change in colour of the vessels of the neck. And there is a great, high expiration; and he seeks to draw in cold air.
If the arrow falls upon the pericardium which is in the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there is a great panting with severe pain accompanied by sighing, and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food emerges from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and is fixed there: some feces, or a ringworm, or a disrupted intestine emerges from the wound. Therefore there is no hope for cure nor extraction of the arrow.
But if an arrow falls into the bladder and urine emerges, and something proceeds externally from it, and there is a severe pain upon the sick person: then know that it is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, forearm, back, hip, thigh and similar parts of the body are treated according to various methods when the arrow does not strike an artery or nerve, nor is it poisoned.
And I narrate to you what I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may indicate the same in your treatment.
That is, an arrow fell into the lacrimal duct of a man's eye, at the root of his nose. Therefore I pulled it out from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I pulled out another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could not get hold of it except for a small part of its end with which it clung to its wood; and it was a large arrow among those of the Turkish bows, with a blunt iron tip, in which there were no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no evil befell his eye.
And I pulled out another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, which has ears on it. So I seized upon it between the two glands (thyroidea): and by then it had already submerged itself in his throat. I gently pulled with it until I drew it out: and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I seized upon the arrow, heated it, and drew it out: and he was healed, and no evil befell him.
I saw a man into whose back an arrow had fallen, and the wound around it had become inflamed. After seven years, the arrow emerged from the root of his thigh.
I saw a woman into whose abdomen an arrow had fallen, and the wound around it became inflamed; the arrow remained within her, but there was no change in her condition, and she suffered no harm from any of her natural functions.
I saw another man into whose face an arrow had fallen; the wound became inflamed and remained there, causing him little pain. Similar things happened to many others.
I extracted an arrow from a man among the king's princes, which had struck him in the middle of his nose and inclined slightly to the right side; the entire arrow was concealed.
Therefore I was called upon for his care three days after the accident. I found that the wound made by the arrow was very deep.
I probed it with a thin probe and did not feel the arrow; however, he himself felt a pinching pain beneath his ear on the right side. Therefore I hoped that that pricking sensation was caused by the tip of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the spot where there was power to draw and digest, believing that it would draw the wound out and reveal a mark of the arrow for me to cut upon; but nothing happened to indicate that the arrow had followed the place.
I persisted with the plaster for many days, but nothing happened to indicate that the arrow had come out; meanwhile the wound became inflamed, and the patient remained sick about its removal for some time until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. So I applied a sharp, caustic medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up; then when I probed it, I felt the tip of the arrowhead which was stuck in the wood.
Afterwards I continued applying the sharp medicine to open the wound until we could see the tip of the arrow clearly; and about four months passed during this time with him.
Then after the wound had widened sufficiently that I could insert forceps into it and move it about to try to remove it, but without success; then I did not give up on refining my methods until one day with appropriately made forcepsI shall explain their form at the end of this chapterI managed to extract it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that cartilage of the nose does not regenerate. Therefore I healed it and the wound became solid; the patient was cured with full health, and nothing further harmed him at all.
And I tell you this story of the extraction of some arrows so that you may take it as an example and instruction for what I have not mentioned.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not fully contained within my narrative; nor does this book contain them all. The wise craftsman compares a little with much, and what is present with what is absent, thereby discovering new operations and instruments among those foreign to this art which happen occasionally.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are embedded except by two methods. Either by being drawn out from the place where it entered. Or by being pushed out through the opposite side of the limb.
And that which exits whence it entered is either a splinter projecting from a wound or it gets pulled out and exits.
But if it does not exit on its own after some time has passed since the injury occurred, then you must leave it alone for several days until the surrounding flesh rots and the tension around it is relieved so that it can be pulled out more easily.
And likewise if it is stuck in bone and does not yield to being pulled out, then leave it alone for several days as well, and repeat the attempt every day with gentle traction and movement until it comes out.
But if it still does not yield after several days, then you must bore around the tip of the splinter with a fine trepan on all sides until its passage is widened. Then pull it and remove it.
But if the splinter is hidden within the body and concealed from view and touch, then search for it using probes. If you find it, then pull it out with suitable instruments designed for that purpose.
But if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and its depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then probe for it until the wound is widened enough so that the splinter can be removed.
But if the ears are the ones holding it fast, then free the flesh attached to them from every side with all your skill and care, until the fracture of the ears and their twisting give way.
And when you perform the extraction of a splinter, wherever it may be, then use your hand's rotation with tweezers on all sides until you make it come out; and do so gently and carefully, lest the splinter break and become difficult for you to attract and extract.
But if you cannot remove it at once, then leave it alone for a few days until the flesh around it begins to decay. Then try again; for the tissue will have softened. But if there is profuse bleeding, then apply what we said under its appropriate chapter concerning treatment, and guard against cutting any vein, nerve, or tendon.
And use all possible means to remove the splinter gently and steadily, slowly and firmly, as I have instructed you.
And when you pull out the splinter, it should come out bent according to its original shape at the time of the injury. For that is more beneficial. But if you are unable to do this, then use whatever figures (methods) are possible for you.
But if the splinter comes out on the opposite side, or has already begun to emerge from it, or if you can feel a swelling at its tip beneath the skin near its exit point and see that it is raised, then cut over it, making the cut deep enough for tweezers to grasp it.
Then pull it out; for it will come out easily by itself.
But if it is retained within the bone, then twist your hand around its circumference until the arrowhead imprints itself upon the bone and expands; then pull it out.
And if not, let it be for a few days, then repeat it until it comes out.
But if the shaft of the arrow is inside it, then push it along with it.
But if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer a push, then introduce a hollow instrument into it so that its cavity enters the butt of the arrow; then push it along with it.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it along with an instrument that enters into it. For through this (instrument), the arrow will be alleviated.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove all the flesh around it where there is venom, if this is possible. Then treat it along with what is suitable for that (wound).
If the arrow has fallen into the chest, belly, bladder, or flank, and is near what you are touching with your fingers, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut and take care not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then examine the wound if there is one, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are removed.
Let its ends be similar to a bird's beak, made like iron: when they grasp an arrow, they do not let it go.
And there are many types of them, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, its thinness, the width of the wound, and its tightness.
Form of the hollow pusher.
And form of the blunt pusher.
This is the form of a blunt end like a radius bone, so that its entrance into a hollow arrow may be eased, and it may be pushed along with it.
On Bloodletting from Veins.
There are thirty veins whose locations on the body have been determined for bloodletting.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins behind the ears, called the "two herbs"; and two arteries visible at the temples; and two veins in the two lachrymal glands of the two eyes, called the "watchful ones"; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. And two Gudgeons, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Alghecherich And two veins which are beneath the tongue.
However, there are five veins in each arm that are used for bloodletting.
One of these is the Cephalic vein, and it is on the outer side; common people call it the vein of the head And the Dark one. And there is the Median vein, composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic; common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, which lies on the inner side, is also called the Titillicaris Common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Cord of the arm, which is situated above the elbow; this is the vein that is used for bloodletting and it appears prominently above the thumb.
And Salvatella: it is a vein that lies between the Annular and Minimum veins, and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot. One of these is that which curves under the big toe on the inner side. And the second is the saphenous vein, and its location is at the heel from the domestic side. And the Nessus vein, and its location is at the heel on the outer side.
And there are three similar veins in the other leg.
On bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting of two veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for treating chronic catarrh, headache, epilepsy, and old wounds on the head.
And the method of bloodletting it is as I shall describe. It is necessary to shave the head of the sick person and then rub their occupit where the two veins are located with a rough cloth for a good friction. Then let the patient tie his neck with a bandage until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed places on the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulsation under your finger, there mark it with a cautery.
Then take the scalpel for bloodletting, which is called "Incidens". Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin using an incident cutting motion. And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' breadth or somewhat more, and make as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then bind it with lint and leave it until it heals.
And thus concludes the beginning of the book: the cutting and cauterizing of those veins.
The bloodletting of two arteries that are in two temple regions is beneficial for treating chronic headache, evil humors, and persistent eye inflammation, as well as the acute discharge of excess fluids to the eyes.
And the method of bloodletting these [arteries] is as I shall tell you. Let the patient tightly bind their neck until two veins become visibly apparent to sensation and their pulse is discernible under your finger. Then mark them with a cautery.
Next, elevate the skin above the vein using your index finger, insert the lancet beneath it, and elevate the vein upwards. And cut into it as you would with two other veins, allowing blood to flow according to your required quantity.
Then release the tourniquet from the patient and place your finger over the vein for one hour. Afterwards, apply cotton and lint to it, bind it tightly above with a bandage, and leave it until healed.
And thus ends the discussion of these veins, their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
The benefit of bloodletting the frontal vein after cephalic bloodletting is for treating ancient facial ailments, headache, redness, and foul ulcers.
And the method of bloodletting this [vein] is as I shall tell you. Let the patient bind their neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take an instrument called the "fossor.
Place the raised point at the top of the fossor on the vein and strike it with a pestle or another object in its manner. Then allow blood to flow according to your desired quantity. Then release the tourniquet from the patient and bind it until healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide-bladed lancet. But it is not necessary that the lancet should be sharp-pointed, as other lancets are, but rather broad-pointed. And make the incision lengthwise; because it is near to the bone: and perhaps the lancet will break if it is thin.
But the indication for bloodletting from both veins which are in the two lachrymals of two eyes, is for inflammation and redness of the eye, and discharge from the eye, and diseases of the face.
And the method of bloodletting these veins is that the patient should bind a cloth around their neck. Then make the incisions and you should stand over the head of the patient.
And make the incision lengthwise a little way with a small lancet slightly broad-pointed; for there is no flesh in that place. For if the lancet has a thin point, it may break.
Then let blood flow until you think necessary. And apply cotton to them and bind them up for one night, then loosen them.
But bloodletting from the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and severe headache, and diseases of the face such as migraine and especially when there is redness which has been present for a long time.
And the method of bloodletting these veins is that the patient should bind their neck with a cloth. Then grasp the patient's nose with your left hand and take a sharp-pointed lancet that is long and insert it into the middle of the tip of the nose, between the two parts which divide the nose lengthwise. For there the vein does not appear to sight, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you must hold your hand with the lancet for a little while, until you have let out as much blood as you require. Then bind it that same night. For it recovers quickly.
Indeed, the phlebotomy of the veins of the foot is beneficial for constriction of breath, the onset of leprosy, and melancholic illnesses, and scabies, bad ulcers, and corrosive diseases, that is to say, herpes and hemorrhoids.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that a weakened patient should be bound tightly under both arms with a bandage, and an artisan should stand on the head of the sick person, who should sit upon a seat.
Then cut the vein lengthwise for a large phlebotomy briefly. Then draw out from the blood a measured quantity, or as much as you see is necessary according to the case at hand. Then do likewise with another vein.
Then untie the bandage and tie the two veins tightly in the middle to prevent the patient from fainting. And leave it like that until morning. For the wound will be healed.
On the phlebotomy of the veins of the arm. Indeed, the veins of the arm are beneficial for phlebotomy because they help with sore throat, gum disease, bad ulcers, cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers that occur around the nose.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you should make the patient sit before you and tie a cloth around their neck. Then pull back the patient's lip and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and one on the left. The location of each is indicated by their darkness. And it is true that around them are small, dark veins. Therefore cut both of them with an incising cut.
But if there is doubt and you do not know which one to cut, then aim for the larger ones and make your incision on them.
And likewise do with the two veins that are in the upper lip, for it is most common to cut them together. And also cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
About bloodletting of the vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting. The bloodletting of the two veins under the tongue is beneficial for treating ailments such as those affecting the throat, swelling of the uvula, and disorders of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding these veins is as follows: let the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, stick out their tongue, and look underneath it to find one vein on one side and another vein on the other side. The color of both veins should incline towards blackness.
Therefore, bleed both veins, but be careful not to draw blood too far down your hand when bleeding them. For beneath them are arteries, and perhaps there may occur a flow of blood from those arteries.
The three veins that are bled in the elbow are ones whose bleeding is customary for all people.
And bloodletting of these veins is done according to two methods. Either by pricking with a wide myrtle lancet or cutting with an olive oil-washed blade that has been sharpened to a fine point. Or else by cutting with a scalpel-like bloodletter called Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And among them are wide and fine ones according to the size of veins and their narrowness. The shape of the myrtle lancet is wide, as you can see. And it is suitable for opening hollow veins, full veins, projecting veins, visible veins, thick veins, and those that contain thick and muddy blood.
This bloodletter is of lesser width and more refined in its points.
It is suitable for bloodletting from the small veins that contain thin yellow blood
For bloodletting, one of these three veins at the basilica is helpful. Because it draws out blood from illnesses that are under the neck and throat, below the chest, and the belly. It is convenient for a bloodletter to use with a bloodletter so as to be cautious, especially because an artery lies underneath it. If he errs and cuts too deeply in his puncturing of the bloodletter, he may hit that artery, causing a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary not to use a bloodletter with another bloodletter when puncturing; rather, one should use the Alnesil for cutting.
But if the basilica does not appear clearly, then one should seek out another vein and exchange it for that one, or find a branch of it. Otherwise, use a bloodletter on the arm in its place. This vein is visible, and you should cut it with the bloodletter called Anesil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform a bloodletting on this same vein, then before tying the arm, you should touch the spot until you find the pulse point. Next, mark the spot with a cautery. Then tie the arm and cut the vein using the concave cutting edge of the bloodletter called Anesil, as we have said. And be careful not to strike too far from the artery's location.
When you tie the ligature and see swelling at the spot you marked with the cautery, know that this swelling is the swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rising at the bloodletting like urine from a child, and it is thin, red blood, then know that it is coming from arterial blood. Therefore, quickly place your finger on top of the space at a distance, then remove your finger. If blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm and let it rest: and caution the patient against moving it and keep him in fear.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
But if blood is not cut off and binds you tightly, and there is no medicine available at hand to you at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears visible to you. For its ends contract and the blood is cut off.
Or take half of a fig bark and wrap it: take one part of it and tie it over the place where the vein was tied with bandage and lint until the next day.
Then if blood is cut off, that is good. And if not, then treat it with the same method used for stopping blood flow from other wounds: and the cutting of its blood will be easy in many cases due to the small wound area and the possibility of tying off from the arm.
Indeed, the phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial in drawing blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body because it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to fear its phlebotomy because a nerve lies underneath it. Therefore, if during the bloodletting puncture he finds a nerve, it causes numbness and makes healing difficult, and perhaps it will not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears visibly. But if it is hidden in some people and is thin and not visible, then you should perform the bloodletting where it is usually done, making an incision with a scalpel, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
If the vein lies between two nerves, then trace its length.
On the cephalic vein. The cephalic vein is beneficial for bloodletting because it draws blood from the head and helps alleviate eye disorders.
And it is fitting in this vein, if you wish, to prick it with an olive-oil phlebotome or a myrtle-phlebotome, for it is safer than all other veins because there is no artery nor nerve beneath it.
However, when performing bloodletting, you should avoid the head of the arm and seek a gentler spot. If no suitable location is found with the first strike, do not hesitate to repeat the procedure several times without causing harm.
Nevertheless, sometimes an abscess may form in some people when bloodletting is not performed at the first strike, but it does no harm in that place.
On the Benefits of Bloodletting and Precautions to Observe The quality of bloodletting and its consequences depend on its proper performance. You must consider this when correcting it.
Firstly, you should know that bloodletting is not performed except for the sake of preserving health and preventing diseases through diligence and caution.
And bloodletting should be performed on one of the three veins found in the elbow, namely the cephalic, the dark-colored, and the basilica. And bloodletting should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting, during summer and autumn, and after meals in winter when signs of fullness appear.
Bloodletting should be done on the first or third day after noon has passed by three hours.
But bloodletting performed for illnesses does not have a fixed time; it should be done whenever the situation and necessity require it, day or night, at any hour, and at all times.
And children should not be bled until they reach fourteen years of age. Pregnant women should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month. Old people who have already passed sixty years of age should not be bled.
Therefore, when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw foul, harmful impurities from the intestines during the bloodletting, which could harm the main organs.
The patient should not be bled when they are full or nauseated, nor when they are drunk or recovering from drunkenness until that condition has passed. Nor an invalid with dropsy (edema).
And beware of bloodletting again after a bout of colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, hard work or exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and any other thing that weakens the body's strength.
Then consider the fineness of the humors before doing it; if the blood is thick due to foods and drinks, and medications, proceed with caution if at all possible.
Then take a bath if there's no contraindication, or engage in some exercise to make the blood finer.
And perform the bloodletting on their chest around the third hour of the day, as we have said; and try to remove all harmful animal accidents from their chest that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and similar bodily excesses like hard work, punishment, and excessive sexual activity.
And let them have present the things with which people are accustomed to use for their comfort due to their fragrance, pleasant scent, and joyfulness, to the best of their ability.
Next, the phlebotomist should sit on a stool that is higher than the phlebotomy couch. Then, he should extend his arm and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then tie a ligature with a bandage and wrap it around twice.
And let the ligature be moderate, for an unequal constriction hinders the flow of blood either by being too tight or too loose.
Then after the ligature has been tied, the person undergoing phlebotomy should rub their hands together until the veins swell and become visible.
Then the phlebotomist should cleanse the vein with a little old oil.
Then place his left index finger on the vein itself where he intends to perform the phlebotomy, lightly so as not to cause the vein to retreat and avoid bruising. For there are veins that slip away like a string under the pressure of phlebotomy, and others that are full of wind. When you place the phlebotomy needle on them, they contract underneath it, deceiving the phlebotomist so that he cannot open the vein or if he does, it is too narrow. Therefore, the phlebotomist must be firm and attentive in all these matters.
Then set down the phlebotomy needle. If the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. And if not, then repeat it once or twice more at the same spot or above it with urgency, without damaging the site.
But if the site is damaged or the patient becomes frightened, then let him go for one or two days without tying the ligature. For otherwise a hot abscess may be drawn in. Do not enter a bath.
Then he repeated bloodletting, if he loved [it].
If the opening is small or if blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then repeat bloodletting through the very same incision, following its straightness, and add a little to your procedure.
And do this quickly, before the location is closed up; for many people find that the wound closes during a small operation.
But if you see that it has already closed up, then do not repeat on it at all; for nothing will be gained by this. And place over it some oil and lint; for it relieves the flow of blood. And it is better than oil itself and other oils in this situation.
And similarly, use this mixture of oil in every bloodletting you perform, when blood vessels are let in order to stop the flow of blood; and many people add storax, aloeswood, or saffron to it when applying it on the wound.
For blood becomes thinner and is resolved when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of bloodletting - which happens often, especially with someone who is bled only occasionally or has a small vein opening - then quickly apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the area, binding it tightly for an hour; for this will dissolve it.
And you must do this after blood has stopped flowing from the vein itself, when its flow is complete, or from another vein.
But if some blackness or greenness remains at the site after a few days, this is not harmful; and if you wish, apply to it some aloe, or myrrh dissolved in wine, or juice of mint, that is, pennyroyal or something similar.
Indeed, many swellings and elevations occur at bloodletting sites from the basilica vein.
Therefore, place your hand over it; if you find softness when compressing it, then that swelling is bad. So beware to put upon it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from it from the artery.
But make a plaster for it with that which has astringency, so that the place may harden. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to withdraw from all men as much blood as its strength demands. And that which appears shining above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thickened; then let it flow out until it thins; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once to make the bloodletting vein large and for the bloodletter to be wide; but for one who is weak, it should be done accordingly.
And it is necessary to withdraw it at intervals and for the opening to be narrow; and what is better administered in bloodletting of the vein is that it be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting the nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting through width and length.
And for one who is accustomed to fainting at bloodletting, it is necessary to feed him beforehand with a small piece of bread soaked in pomegranate water or dry ginger if it is warmed; and withdraw from him blood in three or four intervals.
And if he is of a cold temperament, then let him take beforehand bread soaked in pomegranate syrup or in honey-scented syrup with spices, or in scented syrup with fragrant herbs.
But if fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause of it is much blood flowing out, then it is necessary for him to drink water from flesh and thin fragrant syrup; and let him use aromatics with aloe and let his chest be anointed with it; and let him use the rest which we have said in division in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
He who wishes to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for the one whose bloodletting is done on account of much evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he releases his blood gradually by the amount of virtue over continuous days.
But whoever wishes to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do it after seven hours or nine from his first bloodletting.
But whoever wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite part to which it inclines, it is necessary for him to be evacuated on the second day or third.
But if in someone's body there is much blood already heated and corrupted which causes fever to occur, it is necessary for blood to flow out from him at once and a great quantity to be drawn out; and let the opening be enlarged until fainting occurs: afterwards, you being careful about all conditions of bloodletting, place your hand upon his pulse in the course of blood-flow so that death does not happen instead of fainting. For indeed it often happens thus when the bloodletter is ignorant and carelessness occurs.
And it is not necessary when you wish to release the arm and let blood a second time that if the vein's opening has already closed and exiting blood becomes difficult, then pressure should be applied forcefully upon it, and quickly straighten the curved [vein]. For indeed that is very harmful; nay, leave him alone until he can be bled a second time.
Or remove with care the coagulation which has formed from blood at the opening of the vein, and place upon it some salt dissolved in water. And put upon it some of theriac of Alfaruch or saffron, and apply gentle pressure until blood flows out.
But if the vein is already inflamed, then let it be, and do not cover it until the inflammation subsides.
But if there is necessity to let blood a second time and no excuse, then either do the phlebotomy on that same spot or on another vein of the other arm.
But if the veins called Fusca and Basilic cannot be found, they are hidden because they are composed of these two.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the skin reddens and the vein becomes visible.
Then tie a band around it with moderate tension using a cord. Then make the incision gradually across the width, not lengthwise, and make a large opening. Make your phlebotomy above the junction of the hand briefly.
But if the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse your hand again in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you have satisfied your need.
However, during the days of summer, you may excuse yourself from immersing your hand in warm water again. And indeed, it is most frequently done during the cold season.
And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all others, as there is no pulsating vein nor nerve beneath it.
But the phlebotomy of the little saviour vein on the right hand is beneficial for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you should tie the wrist with a cord or your hand after immersing it in warm water until the vein swells and becomes very apparent to the touch. Then perform the bloodletting transversely. And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm her in any way.
Keep your hand away from the phlebotomy instrument (i.e., do not put your fingers where the blade is). Beneath it are the bare nerves of the fingers, exposed from the flesh.
Then place your hand back into warm water and allow the blood to flow freely. For if you do not immerse it again in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and obstruct its course.
Therefore, once you have withdrawn the desired amount of blood, then apply oil and salt over the vein so that it does not clot too quickly.
And similarly, you must do this with every branch (vein) that is severed.
The indication for this bloodletting is from the left hand, because it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen. And similarly, you should perform it equally as you did with the second one.
The indication for saphena bloodletting is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine disorders, menstrual retention, kidney weakness, and old ulcers on the hips and thighs, and similar conditions.
And the technique of this bloodletting is for the patient to immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins become prominent. Then tie above the junction of the foot with a strap. Indeed, the vein is located at the heel and appears towards the thumb side, and many branches extend from it onto the surface of the foot.
Therefore perform the bloodletting either on one of its larger branches or at the heel where it converges, because this is better and safer.
But if you perform bloodletting on the surface of the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bloodletting device where you will perform the bloodletting diagonally, as if you wish to cut it: and let the bloodletter be sharp.
But if the exit of blood is blocked, then repeat the foot-washing in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it until it is emptied.
But if the bloodletting vein errs on the first attempt, then repeat with bloodletting higher up for a short time, because that location is safe and you need not fear harm from it when you are careful about the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly, perform phlebotomy on the great saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
Moreover, as we have said, the location of the sciatic veins is at the heel on the inner side.
And a benefit of bloodletting this vein is to alleviate pain in the ankle when it arises from hot blood.
And the quality of bloodletting this vein is that the patient enters the bath and hurries; then bind the leg from the side of the ankle up to above the heel with a long, thin bandage. This is not done for any other purpose.
When it appears, then perform bloodletting on it according to whatever method is possible for you, either diagonally or by cutting it with an incision or separating it by dissection. For its location is safe and indeed, the vein itself is often hidden in many people.
For its location is safe and indeed, the vein itself is often hidden in many people. But if you do not find it and it does not appear at all, then perform bloodletting on one of its branches. This is the one that appears on the back of the foot and turns towards the ear. Be careful about the nerves, and allow as much blood to flow out as you wish.
Then release the binding, and place skin over the site of bloodletting, and bind it. For it heals quickly.
On Windpipe Surgery and Its Uses
Windpipes are made from horns, reeds, and glass.
And tracheotomy is performed in two ways. One way with scarification and bloodletting; the other way without scarification.
And this tracheotomy which is performed without scarification is done in two ways either with fire or without fire
And there are fourteen places on the body where tracheotomy is performed with scarification and bloodletting. Among these, one is called the "Ventosatio Alnocrati," located at the back of the head; another is called the "Alkehel," situated in the middle of the neck; two more are known as the "ventosae Alhagdahim," located on either side of the neck simultaneously; the "uentosae menti" is found beneath the jawline near the lower lip; the "uentosae duarum spatularum" affects both shoulders; the "uentosae Alachosos" is situated at the end of the tail; and finally, there are "uentosae duorum focilium," located in the middle of both arms, as well as the "uentosae duorum crurium" for both legs, and lastly, the "uentosae duarum cauillarum.
For tracheotomy does not draw blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh; therefore, its strength is not lost from them, as happens with phlebotomy. Nor should tracheotomy be performed with or without fire on any disease caused bypletion until the entire body has been emptied.
But if there is a need for tracheotomy due to illness or custom, it should be performed at any hour on the first day of the month, on the last day, and on the middle day, as well as whenever else may be necessary.
This is because there are some people whose blood multiplies within them to the point where they require its extraction through tracheotomy; upon such individuals, headache and shortness of breath occur.
And among these are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who experience itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dimness of the eyes.
And among them are those who scratch the spot where the tracheotomy was performed. And among them is one whose laughter is multiplied (i.e., uncontrollable). And among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth; either the tongue becomes infected and spews forth blood. And among them is one whose sleep is multiplied (i.e., excessive). And among them are those who see blood and redness, slain men, wounds, and similar sights in their dreams.
Therefore, when we observe any of these symptoms, especially if it occurs on the third day of the month, we then command that a tracheotomy be performed after two or three days have passed.
The disadvantage of neck tracheotomy is this: because it causes heaviness in the head and the blood flows towards the eyes. But rather, it should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this indeed is a tracheotomy instead of a cephalic phlebotomy.
It is not permitted to use it on those with cold constitutions or catarrh. For it brings great harm upon him.
And therefore, the elderly and those with cold head complaints should not use it.
But if one becomes accustomed to it, forgetfulness will ensue upon him.
Therefore, you must instruct the one performing the tracheotomy to temporarily withdraw his hand with the tube slightly towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Tracheotomy or Alkehel is a substitute for dark-colored phlebotomy and church phlebotomy; therefore, it causes coughing, narrowing of breath, splitting of the breathing tool, coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary that the Ventosa Alkehel be applied briefly, for if it is placed lower down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
However, tracheotomy called Al-Hadzadin relieves pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, hemicrania, perforation, and toothache; it is a substitute for church phlebotomy.
And it is necessary that you instruct the performer of tracheotomy not to press their hand with the incision, lest they strike an artery and cause bleeding.
Tracheotomy under the chin relieves bad breath in the mouth and gum disease, as well as similar conditions that affect the mouth; it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy at the two lips.
Tracheotomy with spatulas relieves alkahest (i.e., a mixture of herbs and minerals used medicinally), which is caused by congestion and heat.
Tracheotomy of the interior parts of both cheeks provides relief equivalent to phlebotomy of three main veins, basilica, fusca, and cephalica; for it attracts blood from all those tiny veins in the flesh, which then attract from other thicker veins until attraction reaches the three main veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the performer of tracheotomy not to make the incision too deep, for the place is bare of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
A suction cup applied over haemorrhoids relieves piles (hemorrhoids) and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the performer to use a large glass suction cup and to make the incision large, because the location requires strong suction and delicate cups may break.
Large cupping glasses on the legs reduce pain markedly because they draw blood from the whole body and relieve ancient pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder. They induce menstruation, expel bothersome humors, and serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of the saphenous veins and other vessels.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause fainting in many people.
And cupping on the sides is akin to cupping on both legs.
The quality of cupping is that you should place the glass cup first and suck gently; do not prolong the duration of cupping, but apply them quickly and remove them quickly so that humors may come to their destination evenly. Repeat and continue this process until you see the area become reddened and swollen, and the blood begins to appear at the incision site. Then scarify and continue suction gradually. Then consider the dispositions of bodies.
For those who are of delicate flesh and sparse pores, it is necessary to scarify them only once, no more than that, so as not to cause an ulceration at the site.
And instruct the performer to make the incision wide and penetrate it slightly; let them control the suction gently, quickly, and smoothly.
If there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify twice. The first incision opens a path for the refinement of blood and its purging, while the second enables careful examination and thorough extraction of thick blood.
If however the blood is very impure, then a third incision should be made to reach the final extraction.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or in small amounts, one incision will suffice us. If we wish to draw out much blood, we make many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make an incision deep; and the equal end of the incision is the depth of the skin.
And what should be administered from oils at the placing of Ventosae, and what it prevents when applied.
In that case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are closed, it is necessary to anoint the places of Ventosa with oils that are open, soothing, and dissolvent: if it is in the season of summer, such as oil of alkanet, or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or turpentine: and similar things.
But if there is an abundance of thick, cold matter, then let the oil be myrrh, or balsam, or white oil, or castor oil: and similar things.
But if the one to be cupped has large pores and tender flesh, then it is necessary to forbid oil, and it is necessary that they wash the places of Ventosa with rose water, or cold water, or solatium water, or cucumber water, or purslane water: and similar things.
But he whose blood is of great moisture should wash the cups with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac: and similar things.
But he whose excesses are thick should wash his cups with old wine, or sampsuch water, or decoction of castor oil, or chamomile: and similar things.
And it is necessary to avoid cupping in a bath, or on the trace of a bath; indeed, it is necessary that it be administered after exiting from the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And one should not sleep after cupping.
What is it that must be regulated before cupping: the ventosus (person subject to winds), or the phlebotomatus (bloodlet)?
And afterwards, one should first consider this: if the ventosus or phlebotomated person is choleric, and sharpness and inflammation prevail over their blood, then it is necessary for them to take cooling remedies, such as pomegranate juice; and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and cumin, and iuleb, and similar things.
And let their food be young, and they should avoid eating lamb and cooked foods, and let them eat unseasoned foods with greens; and similar things.
And if their complexion is cold, it is necessary for them to take in drink syrup of honey, or almonds, or cumin made from seeds; and let them drink moderately scented wine that is between old and new; and they should be prescribed to use sparingly food. And let their food be young chickens, and hares; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and they should avoid eating young pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and bloodletting there be more drink than food. And it is necessary to give in drink to certain people in the hours of theriaca alfaroch, or medicine of musk, that is, muscat, or alesselithe before cupping, or after; so that the principal members may be strengthened, and the blood may be subtilized. And they should not take it in heated drink.
On Ventosus without scarification. But ventosas that are placed without scarification are those which are put over the liver, and spleen, and on gouty parts, and on the belly, navel, and locations of the kidneys, and on the hypochondria; because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And they are sought only to draw out blood from one member to another; thus we place a ventosa on the breasts in the illness of bloody flux from the nose. And we use them to loosen from a member the cold windiness that has entered into it; thus we place a ventosa on the belly and navel. For it indeed rarefies the member, warms it, and removes pain thereby because it resolves that windiness.
And it is placed on the kidneys when there occurs in them retention of urine or a stone. For by its power of attraction perhaps it opens the retention, or rooting out the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen to draw off windiness from both of them.
And these ventosas are administered empty with only a small cut. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full with warm water in cases of pleurisy; and this is so that the ventosa may be filled with only hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been decocted.
Method of applying a ventosa with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingers' breadth open, as we have fashioned it; and let its depth be half a palm; and let there be a small hole in its side about midway, sufficient for a needle to enter; let it be made of thin, smooth, equal, and polished bronze or glass; so that it may not harm the member upon which it is placed; and let there be a transverse rod of iron or brass in its midst, where the candle with fire is placed.
And now make this ventosa large, larger than we have described, and somewhat smaller than that one, according to the illness and age of the person who uses it.
For the ventosas for children and those who are thin are different from those for men and those with large bodies.
But the quality of applying this ventosa with fire on a limb is to light a wick with fire made of clean linen or a small candle made of wax: and place it on top of the crossbar which is in the middle of the ventosa: so that the fire is burning around the lower part of the ventosa, so that the body of the sick person does not burn.
Then place it on the limb and keep your finger over the hole I mentioned until you feel the ventosa holding: when you need to release it, remove your finger and let the vapor come out through that hole, and the ventosa will be released immediately.
Then relight the wick according to its custom, and repeat this procedure if necessary.
But the ventosa used for the illness of pleurisy with water does not have a crossbar nor a hole and is only applied when it is filled with water and placed on the limb.
And this is its shape.
The larger this ventosa is, so that it can hold much water, the better it is.
On the Suspension of Bloodletters.
Bloodletting is performed on many parts where the application of ventosas is not possible due to their narrowness, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas. Or on a member denuded of flesh, such as fingers, nose, and similar parts.
And the quality of using them is to take the veins from bloodletters which are found in fresh waters, clean from corruption.
Then they should be kept for a day and night in fresh water until they are hungry and there is nothing left in their bellies. Then the body is first evacuated with bloodletting and ventosas. Then cleanse the limb of the sick until it reddens. Then place them upon it.
When they are filled and fall, if suction of the place with ventosas is possible, then it is more ultimate in healing. If not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and squeeze out.
But if the flow of blood continues after removing the bloodsucker, and it is oozing: then dip a linen cloth in cold water and place it upon it until the oozing ceases.
But if blood multiplies, then sprinkle upon it powder of ground zedoary or gall nuts and similar things from astringents until the bleeding stops.
Or place upon the location halves of peeled broad beans and let them remain until the beans adhere to the location, for blood will stop.
And it is necessary if repetition of bloodsuckers is necessary when possible to change them.
But if bloodsuckers are prohibited by suspension then cleanse the location with fresh blood. Or stick needles into locations until something comes out from the blood. Then place them, for they themselves when they sense anything coming out from the blood adhere immediately.
When therefore you wish that they fall, sprinkle upon them some ground aloes or salt or ashes and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also very necessary many times in the art of Medicine, and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones that occur accidentally.
Know this, O sons, that many foolish doctors and commoners boast about this chapter, but they have never looked at the book of the ancients nor read a single letter from it.
And therefore, this method is private among our sciences. I have never found anything good in it at all, and I did not obtain from it what I have obtained except through the prolonged reading of ancient books and study on their understanding until I extracted this knowledge from them.
Then I clung to experimentation and study for the length of my life.
And now I have written down for you all that this chapter contains of my knowledge: and beyond what has been proven by experiment, after abbreviating it for you, and relieving it from the burden of lengthening, and abbreviating it to an end of abbreviation, and demonstrating it to an end of demonstration, I have formed many shapes out of the forms of instruments that are used therein, with a surplus of demonstration, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter 2
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter the summary of speech and chapters, understanding of which the artisan is compelled above all to stand on their truth: namely so that you and those who are eager may know or learn this noble art from you.
I say therefore that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall happens to someone, then it is necessary first of all to hurry to bleed him and resolve him, or both at the same time: if nothing prohibits it, such as weakness of power; or if he who has suffered something from them is a child or an elderly decrepit person; or if it is the time of extreme heat or extreme cold.
Then he should be satisfied with his food, eating cold vegetables and poultry and fish; and forbid wine, and coarse meats, and filling oneself with foods and all meals that fill the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from hot apostema (abscess) and do not fear the discharge of material to the member; then the sick person should return to his first diet with which he was accustomed.
Therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the sick person to eat foods that are highly nutritious and substantial, coarse, and heavy, in which there is viscosity; such as dishes made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and intestines of sheep, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. For by this regimen the fracture is quickly and better coagulated.
And know that broken bones, when they are in the first stage of old age and decrepitude, it is not possible for them to be continuously united and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the dryness of their members. But those which are at the end of infancy are softened and united, like the bones of young children.
But nevertheless nature connects something similar to glue around the broken bone on all sides, which is thick and adheres to it and binds it until they are glued together and bound together until they come to the end of strength and firmness, as they were at first, unless something prevents them from operating in this way. And for this reason it is necessary that you provide nutritious food for the sick person, which has weight and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone, and similarly all other limbs exist diversely among themselves. And I come with a remembrance of every type of fracture explained in its own chapter, distinct from another. And even within itself, the species of bone fracture are differentiated.
For a fracture occurs curved in it, besides the fact that stars [i.e., splinters] occur in it. And sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone: and there are fractures of it which are jagged, that is, splinters, and additions proceeding like those in a reed when it is prepared for writing with a penknife. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with wounding and dislocation at the head, and there is a fracture which is a small split.
And for every type of fracture there is an art or proper instrument for its restoration, according to the manner which will be remembered, distinguished in their respective places.
And from that by which a bone fracture is recognized, there is its torsion and its prominence, and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when it is squeezed in your hand.
Therefore, when there is no apparent torsion in its place, nor sound at your touch when you grasp the bone with movement, and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture there, indeed it is possible that there may be a slight bend or small split. Therefore, it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compression altogether, but rather apply medicines over it, of which the memory will come, after the time suitable for the place: thereafter let it be bound with a fine bandage.
And know that when a place is bent and split into two beyond its usual state, nevertheless all parts will be removed from their comparison. Then it is necessary for you to begin immediately to straighten it, leveling it before an abscess forms.
But if an inflamed abscess should occur, then leave it alone for a few days until the inflammation subsides. Then level it according to whichever way is possible with gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that its restoration and leveling are easier than for bones where sprains occur.
Then bind it according to what you remember of its manner.
But if there are sprains in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both sides, whether it be a hand or foot: or with your own hand, if it is a small member: or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb on an even surface according to its natural shape until the broken parts extend. Then try with all ingenuity and whichever way you can to bring back those additions to their proper places: and beware according to your strength, lest pain or injury occur upon the patient through your operation. And try with all your strength to apply one of the two bones together with its fellow, according to the better forms.
And at that moment, it is necessary for you to test and touch it with your hand. Therefore if you see something different there, correct it, and make it equal by the amount of your strength.
And beware excessive stretching and strong compressing, as many foolish ones do. For often they cause by their operation an inflamed abscess or a contraction in the limb; as we have already seen happen many times on account of their operations.
Then, after equalizing and performing the operation properly, and binding that limb tightly, ensure rest and calmness for the patient. And instruct him to avoid moving it during his wakeful hours, sleep turns, and movements of any kind, using all his strength. And that he should beware of placing the limb in a position that causes pain. Which means that whenever he feels pain or injury due to the position of the limb, then it is necessary to change its position to one which does not cause pain.
And beware that his position remains equal and straight, so that no twisting occurs in the limb during recovery.
And the binding of a broken limb is as I have described.
Know that broken limbs differ in their fragility and size, and also in shape.
Therefore those which are small, such as the arm, finger, toe, and similar parts, should be wrapped with soft, fine cloth. But those which are large, such as the thigh and leg, require a wide, firm wrapping.
For a wide band connects the large limb and evenly squeezes it from all sides, so that no bruising occurs.
Then, after evacuating the limb and bringing it back into alignment, begin by applying an appropriate ointment on soft lint over the fracture site. Then begin wrapping the bandage around the fracture site three or four times, according to what is appropriate for the limb, and hold your hand lightly with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part of the fracture site, and bind it tighter than you bound the broken place itself. Then extend yourself with the wrapping from the fracture site a little bit, and gradually loosen the binding until you grasp something large from a healthy place.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the fractured area several times. Afterwards, go with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in tightening and loosening of the wrapping, according to what we said concerning the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings soft wool or cloth, equal to the unevenness of the fracture if it is uneven; but if not, do not place anything in it.
Then wrap another bandage over it. Afterwards apply splints immediately if there is no swelling or hot inflammation at the site.
But if there is inflammation or abscess at the site: then place over it something that sits on it and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days. Then bind splints over it.
And let the splints be made from the midsections of broad, smooth reeds, or from wood used to make winnowing fans, which are made from pine or gerid (date palm branches), or calingi. The width of each splint should be according to this shape and figure.
However, the splint placed directly over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others; its length should be according to the size and thinness of the limb.
Then bind another bandage over the splints in the same manner as the first binding. Then bind with bands from above in the same manner as binding; and it should be that your binding over the fracture site is greater, and the further away from the fracture, the less binding there should be.
And it's necessary that the threads are of medium thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen done by foolish practitioners who use twisted linen cords, this is a great mistake; for the binding will slip out of place with them.
And fine threads are also not suitable: for you will not achieve your desired result through binding with them.
And it's not necessary that the space between each lace be less than a finger's width.
But if the patient is injured by the edges of the laces after binding in healthy places, then place soft cotton or dyed wool underneath them until no further injury occurs.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption of the skin occurs, I will deal with this separately in Chapter Two according to its specific nature.
And know that not every broken limb needs to be bound with laces from the very first day. That is, because when the limb is large, you should not apply laces to it until five days have passed, or seven, or more, according to your assurance that there will be no hot swelling.
And this is the method of poultices which the ancients used to apply over fractures and dislocations.
This is the general method of the poultice for healing fractures, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children; because it does not cause excessive heat or cold.
And take some fine flour from the millstone's grindings; that is, the dough stuck to the walls of the mill near the moving stone. And prepare it thus, except sieve it with egg white; and make its consistency neither too thick nor too thin. Then use it.
Another method of plastering, for setting fractures, reducing dislocations, and treating sprains. Take of almonds, and laudanum, and acacia, and mallow, and mugwort: and juice of all of them equally, and myrrh 5 grains, and both kinds of aloes each 5 grains, and gum arabic 20 grains. Grind all these together and sift them, and mix them with the water of gum arabic or with the white of an egg if the patient is hot-tempered. Then apply this plaster. For it is a good mixture that quickly sets broken bones and benefits many people.
Another method of plastering which also benefits fractures and sprains. Take of mugwort, and pounded barley, and white mallow, of each 10 grains; myrrh 5 grains, and both kinds of aloes each 5 grains, acacia 6 grains, and bolus armeniacum 20 grains. Grind all these well and sift them, and make them into a plaster with water or egg white: and apply.
A method of plastering for unions and bones separated from their places; it also quiets the pain resulting from them, and prevents splitting of bone and fracture. Take fine wool and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and decocted oil: then place it on the affected area.
And indeed this plaster has no power to set bones, but is good for alleviating hot swellings and expelling pains specifically.
A method of plastering that sets broken bone. Take leaves of fig and leaves of wild poppy: grind them together and make a plaster of both.
A method of plastering for accelerating the setting of a fractured bone and when you wish to resolve remaining inflammation. Take of greater celandine root, chamomile flowers, violets flowers, and herb flour, of each an equal portion. Grind all together and mix with wine, unless the member is hot.
But if it is hot, then prepare it with water of fresh coriander or simply with water, and use it thus.
Here is another method for a stronger plaster to resolve hardness when an abscess occurs during the healing of a member. Take of greater celandine root, linseed, tragacanth gum, melilot seed, sampsoc (incense), violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, all in equal portion. Grind all together and mix with willow water or sweet water or wine. All of this according to the warmth of the member and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates himself did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a broken member during its healing except for a cataplasm made of wax and oil. He said nothing else, and he reported that it should be of medium consistency between thickness and thinness.
But Galen thought that things which dry heat should be placed on a broken member during its healing, such as myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, and similar substances from those we have mentioned.
Here is the method of a plaster that relieves wounding and pain. Take equal portions of tragacanth gum, chickpea flour, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, greater celandine root, and salt. Grind and sift them together and make a plaster from it.
The amount that should be used is such that the plaster remains on as a dressing, then is dissolved. Then consider whether any pain or itching has occurred, nor whether the broken bone moves from its place. If not, do not dissolve it for many days. But if severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling occurs in that place, then act quickly and dissolve the plaster in an hour, and remove it from him. Then take a soft cloth or soft marine sponge, wet it in warm water, and wipe the area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
But if severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling occurs in that place, then act quickly and dissolve the plaster in an hour, and remove it from him. Then take a soft cloth or soft marine sponge, wet it in warm water, and wipe the area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then allow the limb to rest for one hour. Then place on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it there overnight until you are secure from the risk of hot discharge, and the swelling of the limb has subsided and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat the procedure for a tight binding and a small plaster; but do not tie too tightly at first, using fine bindings with it until it heals.
But if you see that the abscess and redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms are completely gone, and there is need for a plaster and binding, then repeat the procedure as you did initially, equally.
But if nothing happens to the limb from what we have said, then do not dissolve it unless after three, four, five, or seven days. And when it is removed after twenty days, according to what appears to you from the dissolution of the limb, as we have said, until when the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh comes close over it: then add also at that time more binding than your first binding throughout, and also increase the thickness of the sick person's food, according to what has been remembered.
But if you see the place of fracture already dried out and thinned more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore moisten it with warm water wherever you dissolve it, and let it remain for three days to somewhat alleviate the binding.
Through this operation, nourishment runs to the limb and it is healed quickly.
But what foolish restorers do instead of another when a limb fracture is not first restored as it should be, and is restored crookedly, that is an error from their operation and great fear. And if it were right, the ancients would have said it in their books and worked with it.
And I did not see any trace of theirs at all in that, and it is better that it should not be done.
On the treatment of accidents to the head.
There are various kinds of fractures, and many shapes. Their causes are distinguished from one another.
For there is the fracture which occurs from being struck by a sword; and the blow removes bone completely until it reaches the sieve (siphac), which is under the bone, just as an axe does to wood: and on account of this, this kind of fracture is called axial.
Or a sword strikes something of the bone and cuts its surface but does not cut through to the end of it: and this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, a simple cut.
And there are wounds of two kinds of fractures, either large or small.
And there is fracture which is bruising or grinding: and its cause is being struck by a stone, or falling onto one, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which nearly reaches the periosteum under the bone, or is on the surface of the bone. It is a wound of these two kinds of fractures, whether small or large.
And there is fracture which is hidden in the bone like a hair's breadth: it is a small crack, and therefore this kind of fracture is called capillary.
And among these is the fracture which occurs from falling or being struck by a stone or similar things, which causes the bone's surface to enter inward and creates a hollow space, like when bronze kettles are struck and part of them enters inward.
Indeed this happens most often in the heads of moist bones, such as those of children.
And for all these kinds of fractures, splints are made separate from one another, and I shall describe the entire process in its proper place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures through inspection upon them and examination with threads, and the removal of decayed flesh which is above them.
The capillary type is recognized by this: it is detected on the bone and cleaned and polished with cauterization; for the fracture appears black.
But in treating a fracture, first consider the condition of the patient. Then if you see from these conditions signs indicating manifest fear, such as vomiting of bile, trembling, loss of consciousness, loss of speech, shortness of breath, acute fever, protrusion of eyes, redness of them, and similar things in many dispositions, by no means attempt to treat it. But if you see non-terrifying conditions and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Which means: if a wounded person comes to you first when they are wounded, and this happens especially during the cold season, then it is necessary that you strive for the removal of bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is during the hot season, then it is necessary that you hastily remove the bone before the seventh day, before decay sets in under the bone due to inflammation and those accidents which we have mentioned occur.
But if the fracture of a bone has reached the brain-pan and is accompanied by small fragments and attraction (i.e., tension), then it is necessary that you cut away the broken and crushed portion according to what I shall tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person and clear away from the bone as much as possible according to the shape of the wound and what is lightest for the patient.
But if during the exposure of the bone there occurs a flow of blood or a hot swelling, then apply to it what is appropriate. And it is necessary that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the swelling subsides, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then begin the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is as follows: Incise the bone with an incising knife of sharp point: and this is its shape.
Then use another incising knife, wider but not too much so, in this manner: and this is its form.
Then also use another incising knife even wider than the second one.
And the second method is this: Have with you a number of incising knives of various widths, some wider than others and some shorter than others. They should be sharp-pointed at their extremities and made of steel or iron. Use them skillfully in percussion so that they do not strike the bone and harm it.
If the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to perforate around it with trepanes called "non-profounding trepanes," before using the incising knives. These are not named so-called because they do not penetrate beyond the thickness of the bone's flesh. This is due to the fact that the end of the trepan is round, similar to a margin or circle, which prevents it from sinking too deep and penetrating the bone's thickness.
And it is fitting that you take many of these trepanes, each suitable to the thickness of the bone, until you have enough for the entire skull. The sharp end of each trepan should be as long and short according to the thickness of the skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of trepans or borers.
The quality of boring through the circumference of a broken bone is such that you place the trepan on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move the trepan to another location and place what is between every hole with the thickness of a thread or approximately that.
Then cut with scalpel what is between every hole from the bone, and make it finer than possible on top of its thinness, as we have said, until you remove the bone either by hand or with some other instrument prepared for that purpose such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And it is necessary to take every care that the trepan or scalpel does not touch anything of the patient's flesh.
Therefore, when you have circumcised the bone by boring and it has been separated from the flesh, if it is continuous with it and you have removed it, then shave and level its remaining end on the bone with another instrument similar to the scalpel. However, it should be thinner and finer than other scalpels.
But if there remain some small bones and splinters, then take them out with ease using the instruments you have at hand. Then take care of the wound afterwards with linen cloths and ointments which we have mentioned.
And there is another method of operation that is easy and entirely free from fear, which Galen has spoken about and praised highly, saying thus. It is necessary for you first to begin uncovering the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more severe and obvious until when you have uncovered that part, you place under it the end of this lenticular scalpel whose shape is like this.
And the lenticular part is not sharp enough to cut anything, but its pointed part on both sides extends lengthwise like this so that the lenticular part rests on the flesh with its cutting edge pointing towards the bone.
Then strike with the cutting tool on one side using a small hammer until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it rolls around; and you should be confident that nothing will happen that you might fear.
And if the physician were not foolish among men, more ignorant of this [knowledge], and asleep, then if there remained anything attached to the bone from the flesh in certain places, he would cut it off with the pointed end of the lenticular part of the cutting tool and free it easily. For it is freed from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the flesh, and that which is cut off from the bone is its outer surface, and there remain on it roughnesses and fine spurs: then it is necessary to shave off that roughness with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those which are most suitable and straight according to what the operation requires, and the fractured bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that you use your judgment in this first shaving of the bone with the razors. Then afterwards use a finer one.
And it is necessary that you use your judgment in this first shaving of the bone with the razors. Then afterwards use a finer one. And do not cease doing this continuously until you reach the point of using the thinnest and finest ones of them all.
But in each small capillary crack or fine fracture that remains, you must give care according to what leads to its correction.
And this is something that cannot be concealed from anyone who has any interest in this art and who has stood on what we have written and demonstrated concerning great fractures.
But if the flesh is detected and remains when you cut the bone, then it is necessary to take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and dip it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first one. Do this as easily as possible so that it does not burden the patient.
Then apply a wide bandage on top of it. Do not bind it too tightly, but only enough to hold the wound. Leave it on for one day or two days until you are sure there is no risk of inflammation. Then remove it and apply powders afterwards to draw out excess moisture from the wound, such as lily roots, fern powder, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar substances. Make a powder from these medicines to sprinkle on the dry wound.
And generally apply any medicine that has the property of cleansing without biting. Also be careful, according to your skill, that the wound remains clean during its healing, without any dirt or filth from ointment.
Also be careful, according to your skill, that the wound remains clean during its healing, without any dirt or filth from ointment. And do not allow pus to gather there at all. For when pus collects on the brain membrane, it corrupts it and causes it to putrefy, leading to great harm to the patient afterwards. This is especially true for head wounds when the bone has been cleaned, particularly if its care is neglected.
Therefore, consider this: if the accidents we have mentioned occur to the patient, know that it is undoubtedly harmful.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine applied to it, and that medicine has the power to cause such blackness, then take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and mix them with linen cloth. Then place it on the siphac [a type of snake]; afterwards treat it with appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter On the Restoration of the Nose When It Is Broken
Know that the nose is not broken except in its upper two parts simultaneously or one of them; this is because it has two bones: since the lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break, and only friction, twisting, and bending occur to it.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you should insert a little finger into the nostril and gently press that fracture with your index finger from inside and thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done skillfully with ease. And be careful lest by your operation you cause pain to the patient.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then you should use the tip of a probe with a small thickness to align it.
But if there is a fracture in both parts, then make something similar [to the probe] and hasten to its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then on the seventh or tenth day when the swelling from the heat has subsided.
Then insert a linen wick into the tip of the nose if there is a fracture in one part, or two wicks if there are fractures in both parts. And let the thickness of the wick(s) be such that it fills the nostril.
And some ancient restorers said to imbue the wicks with butter and change them every day. But it seems better to me that the wick should be dipped in the white of an egg mixed with fine flour. Then let the splint sit until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a swan's feather is inserted into the nose instead of a splint, wrapped in soft cloth, to hold the fracture of the nose more firmly and allow the patient to breathe without hindrance.
This is not necessary. If you wish, do this; if you wish, do splints.
But if the nose is broken again while treating a hot boil, apply poultices made with wax, or cot (cotton) soaked in rose oil, or with a little dill.
But if there is no hot boil, then it is necessary to apply poultices made with sesame flour and powdered frankincense mixed with egg white. Then place over it soft wadding, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to cut over them and remove them using appropriate instruments. Then close the wound, and treat it with flesh-forming poultices or ointments that suit it to promote healing.
But if a wound occurs between the nostrils, then you should treat it with splints and apply a lead tube until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jawbone when it is broken
If the lower jawbone is broken without a wound, and the fracture extends only to its outer surface without being completely split into two pieces, then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient and push it inward to meet the convexity of the fracture from outside with your other hand placed correctly inside the bone until it is aligned. Do similarly if the fracture is on the left side using your right index finger.
If the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you should apply traction from both sides according to its alignment until it can be realigned.
But if the teeth have already been displaced or shattered, then secure those that you hope will remain with gold wire, silver wire, or sinew. Then place on the fractured jawbone a hot compress. Next, place over it a doubled cloth, and on the cloth place either a well-made large plaster, or an equal piece of sole leather cut to the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it from above according to the preparation of its bandaging and the suitability of its application until it is healed. Instruct the patient to remain quiet and at rest, and provide them with soft foods for sustenance.
But if you judge that there is some alteration of its shape on the third day, then act quickly and remove it. Then correct what has been altered and apply a poultice made from ground grain dust with egg white or sesame flour after removing the hot compress. Place over it soft wool.
While that poultice remains applied to it and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone without removing it until it heals or else secure the fracture. For often this fracture becomes fixed in three weeks.
But if a hot swelling occurs meanwhile, then apply the remedies mentioned earlier to alleviate it until it subsides.
And if there is also a wound with the fracture, consider this: If a fragment of bone or splinter has already separated from the bone, then be careful to remove those splinters with appropriate instruments without causing further harm.
But if the wound opening is narrow, then dilate it using a dilator according to your need for bloodletting.
Then, after removing the splinters, if any remain, apply an appropriate plaster to widen the wound opening if it is narrow. If not, then apply a plaster that suits and adheres to it until it heals.
Chapter: On the repair of the furcula when broken.
The furcula is most often broken at its anterior part near the humerus, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Either it breaks and separates into two pieces without any splinters, which makes restoration easier.
Or it happens that there are splinters in the bone, making restoration more difficult.
Or it occurs with a wound accompanying the fracture.
And when the furcula is fractured without a wound, perform as follows: Have two assistants present, one to hold the broken furcula in place and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
Then align the fracture with your fingers until it is properly shaped without any protrusion or concavity.
If you need further extension, then place a spherical pad made of cloth or wool under the patient's chin according to your needs. Then extend and elevate the furcula while compressing the sphere with your hand until the fracture is properly aligned.
If you cannot draw the end of the furcula outward because it has reached too deep, then have the patient lie on their back and place a folded cloth under their shoulder. Have an assistant press down on the patient's shoulder towards the lower part until the buried bone of the furcula is elevated upwards. Then align and straighten the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the furcula that moves, then search for it and remove it gently.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then use one of the prepared knives to make an incision over it. After placing the retractor below the furcula, which can be made of wood or iron, carefully extract the splinter with forceps. And this is its shape.
It resembles an un-hollowed snail shell.
Let its width be according to the size of the bone you need it for, and let it be thin enough not to cause harm. As for its length, make it as long as possible for the operation.
It should have two ends, one wide and one narrow, as you can see.
But if the wound you made while removing the bone splinter is large and there is risk of bleeding, then join the edges of the wound with stitches.
But if the disruption is small or there is no risk of bleeding, then fill the wound with linen and cotton according to its size.
If a hot inflammation occurs, then dip a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and apply it to the affected area.
When setting a bone fracture without cutting or wounding, apply a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white over the bone. And place a soft cotton pad on top of it. Then place a splint under the affected limb if necessary. Next, take a roller, which is a long round tool used by the Saracens, with a width of about one palm. Then place doubled gauze over linen and the poultice. Next, take a star shape from thin wood, three fingers wide and similarly long. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the star over the location of the splint that falls upon the fracture and the affected area. Then place the splint over the fracture as I have described, and wrap it around its neck, under its healthy nostril, and under its sick nostril; bring it back over all parts, ensuring that the bandage holds the fracture securely in place without the star being visible or movable from above the broken bone. And therefore, you must examine the patient every day. Whenever the bandage becomes softened and you see that the star has shifted, then correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's pillow on their back and put a small bolster under their nostril at night so that their helper can assist them from their side. Therefore, raise the broken collarbone by raising the arm.
Or bind the patient's arm to their neck; and do not remove the bandage unless something happens due to itching or gangrene up to the twelfth day.
Then renew the poultice if you see that its appearance has changed. And add to the bandage, and leave him until he is restored and healed.
And indeed, a broken collarbone is bound and strengthened most effectively within about twenty-eight days; but sometimes it happens more quickly.
On the restoration of fractures of the scapula.
The scapula is rarely broken, and only its edges are fractured.
When a fracture occurs in the middle of the scapula and cannot be seen except by touch, then prepare for its reduction according to the shape of the fracture. Reduce it back into its natural shape using all means at your disposal.
Then place over the site powder of millstone with egg white, and soft gum, and place over it a wadding made from doubled cloth. Then place on top a broad star-shaped piece of thin wood, either the size of the spatula or slightly larger.
But if there is a depression under the star-shaped piece of wood in any part of the spatula, then make it even with soft gum until the star-shaped piece sinks to an equal level.
Then bind it tightly from above with linen strips of appropriate length and strength so that the star-shaped piece does not move from its place.
And examine the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again and make the star-shaped piece even if it has moved from its place: and have the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the scapula will be restored in twenty days or twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then remove the bandage: and you shall be safe. For it (the scapula) belongs to those bones whose fracture is not feared nor their union.
But if a splinter of bone protrudes and punctures under the skin, then cut over it and remove it. And do as we have said for fractures of the fork (scapula) concerning the evacuation of a hot abscess if any should occur.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of the chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle and rarely occurs. Its extremities indeed are most often broken and crushed by its accidents.
When the middle of it is broken and slopes downward, causing severe pain, difficulty breathing, coughing, perhaps vomiting blood, and the concavity in the broken bone is evident to touch, the restoration is as follows: have the patient lie on his back and place a pillow between his shoulders.
Then press on his shoulders and bring together the ribs from both sides with your hands, gently adjusting him until the bone returns to its proper shape as much as possible.
Then place over him a plaster and wadding, and place on top of it a thin plate made of willow or limewood, or similar lightweight material, having wrapped it first in cloth. Then bind the splint firmly over the broken bone so that it does not move, and wrap it around to the back several times with bandages, securing it with a suitable tie.
Then check the bandage at every hour and tighten it whenever it becomes loose. If necessary, remove it for any pruritus, corrosion, pain or abscess that may occur at the site, then quickly replace the plaster and proceed with treatment accordingly.
Then reapply the plaster if necessary, and continue binding it until healing is complete.
Section on the Reduction of Broken Ribs
Know that rib fractures occur only at the thick ends adjacent to the spine and at the front tips of the ribs. And they do not break except because they are made of cartilage. And the fracture is evident to touch when examined with fingers.
The reduction of a rib fracture is performed by gently manipulating the broken ends with fingers until they align properly in their natural position. Then apply plaster and splint the broken bone with a plate if necessary.
And if the rib fracture slopes inward, severe pain and sharp chest pain occurs, similar to that experienced by a person with pleurisy. This is because the bone pierces the pleura, causing difficulty breathing, coughing, vomiting blood, and making treatment difficult.
But the ancients have devised many methods for this, among which some suggest placing food that causes inflammation and wind in the patient's belly to make it swell up, thus pushing the broken bone outward.
We, however, reject this method, as it could quickly cause a hot abscess to form if not done correctly. But if it has already occurred, then you proceed accordingly.
And some of them said: place a cupping glass on the site and apply strong suction; this is similar to reasoning. Yet, it is feared that the cupping glass may draw superfluous humors onto the location due to the weakness of the patient's constitution.
And some of them said: the place should be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil, and powdered incense should be placed between the ribs until it fills up, so that when it is wrapped around evenly according to its roundness.
Then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
But if the patient is severely constrained by the pain that they cannot bear it, and the bone pierces the pleura with a harmful puncture, we then fear for the patient. Therefore, we must cut over the location and expose the broken rib. Then place upon it the instrument called the "siphon," as mentioned earlier; cut the bone easily with it, and also cut into it.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large enough to suture; treat it with dressings until it heals.
But if a hot abscess occurs during this time, then promptly take powdered incense mixed with rose oil and apply it to the location. Then treat the patient accordingly for an abscess.
Meanwhile he should also lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter: On the reduction of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Indeed, fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the neck, and rarely do they become worn down. The same applies to the vertebrae of the back. Therefore, when this happens to someone and you wish to know whether it will heal or not, then consider carefully. For if you see that his hands are already softened, paralyzed, and lifeless, and he cannot move them, extend them, or flex them; and when you compress them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it and there is no pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in most cases it is fatal.
But if he can move them and feels the pressure with your fingers and the prick of the needle, then know that the cervical spine is intact, and that the patient will recover with proper treatment.
But if it happens similarly to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know whether it will heal or not, then consider his feet. If they are softened and the same thing has happened to them as to the hands, then when he lies on his back wind passes out involuntarily and waste matter is discharged without his will; and when he lies on his belly waste matter is discharged without his will; and when he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Therefore, do not trouble yourself with treating him.
But if none of these things have happened to him, the case is less serious.
And its treatment consists in sedating the hot abscess that has occurred. Thus you should apply rose oil alone or with beaten egg whites to the worn-down vertebra.
Place this upon it several times a day until the hot abscess is sedated. Then place one of the strengthening and drying poultices on the spot and bind it with bandage: And instruct the patient to use rest and quiet. And do not let him lie upon that part which is painful until it is healed.
But if the bone has worn away or something has separated from it, then you should make an incision through the skin and remove that. Then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches, if it is large. Then treat it with some flesh-colored substance from among ointments until it heals.
But if the coccyx bone breaks off last and the end of the tail is finished: Then you should insert your left hand's thumb into the anus and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, with the second alignment.
Then place upon it and remove it: And treat the wound with the preceding treatment until it heals.
On the restoration of the ankle.
Chapter 11
The bones of the ankles are rarely broken. If they are broken, then the fracture is not complete unless it is comminuted at their ends. They split lengthwise and incline inward, and the patient feels pain and tenderness in that place. The leg becomes paralyzed where it is broken.
And its restoration is as follows: You should lay your hand upon it until you feel the fracture and know its shape.
If the fracture is only at its ends, then align it according to your preparation for alignment until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is lengthwise or already inclined inward, then make the patient lie on his back until you have prepared the restoration of that fracture. Therefore, when you have aligned it, place upon it an emplaster; then place upon it a splint of wood or leather; and bind it with bandages so that you may not fear the displacement of the fracture nor the removal of the splint.
And equalize the cavity of them with that which fills it until it accepts the binding according to its equality; and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his sound side.
But if a hot abscess occurs to him, then cease from extending it and its restoration until the hot abscess subsides; and place upon it what sits upon it according to what preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
But if there is a crack or fragmentation of the bone, remove it.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
The hand is that which is between the elbow and the head of the ulna.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One method is: take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness in this shape which follows.
And two ligaments shall be attached at both ends.
Then it shall be suspended from a raised place, and the patient shall sit on a chair. Then let him throw his broken arm onto the wood until it reaches his elbow, where there is attached a curved piece of wood.
Then hang something heavy from above so that the attendant may extend it towards the lower part. Then let the physician align the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And another method is: let the patient lie on his back and hang his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two attendants to hold one of them above the fracture with his hands and for the other to hold it below and extend each towards their respective parts.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tie beneath the fracture with one bandage and above it with another; and let each of the two attendants extend them towards their respective two parts.
Therefore if the fracture is near the end of the arm bone, then one bandage must be placed beneath the armpit and another beneath the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to place a bandage above that spot and above the elbow itself.
Then bring together the fracture easily without effort until when it becomes equal according to what is appropriate and adheres with a good setting. Then bind it if there is no hot inflammation.
But if there is a hot inflammation, then leave the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it cut wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until when the inflammation quiets down: then bind it; and the way to bind it is by placing a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a bandage made of new cloth over the plaster. Then bring the arm onto its support and place his open hand upon his shoulder.
And place cloth over the arm support and bind it so that the arm remains in its proper position if nothing prevents you from doing so or if no bone fragment is displaced.
But if you fear that something may be displaced from the broken bone, then use splints; and it is necessary to place over the fracture itself the splint which is broader and stronger than the others. And let each splint be as wide as a finger's breadth; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an extra three fingers' width on either side.
Then bind over the splints with the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it should be such that your binding is tighter over the site of the fracture. And the more elongated the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
Therefore, if you see that the splints and binding are in place as we have said, when you reset the limb immediately, then do this: and if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the binding and splints for seven days, as we have said.
Then examine the ligature on all three days to ensure that there is no itching, swelling or restriction of food reaching the limb due to the binding. Therefore correct this entire process according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back with their hands on their stomach, and place beneath them a pillow filled evenly with wool for support.
And observe at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb does not become dislodged nor the ligature loosened. Therefore correct this entire process with your utmost effort.
And feed the patient according to the order that we have previously mentioned, so that their food is thin initially until the bone begins to unite, then you should make their food thicker.
For it is customary for the splint and leg to be bound for forty days. Therefore at that time you should loosen it, apply a warm bath, and treat it with ointments that will straighten it.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed, then do not loosen the ligature and splints from it until fifty days have passed, or even two months.
Chapter on the Reduction of a Fracture of the Arm
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two elbow bones (radius and ulna).
Of these two one is short, it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which lies below the short one from beneath.
Therefore perhaps only the larger funnel breaks, or the smaller one; and perhaps both break together.
When therefore the small funnel breaks above, then its restoration is easy, and healing of it is easier.
And when the lower funnel breaks, its fracture is bad, and healing of it is difficult.
And worse still is the case when both bones break at once.
Therefore if the bone which breaks is the small funnel above, then it becomes necessary for the physician to apply a slight extension at its restoration with ease until it matches.
But if the large funnel is that which is broken then it becomes necessary for him to apply a strong strapping very firmly.
And it becomes necessary for him to place the figure of a hand at its restoration and to extend its extension over the pulvinar. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers above, and let its lower joint be below all the fingers or others, and let the invalid sit squarely upon himself, and let the pulvinar be before him, or in his direct line, at a height such that he does not strain himself.
Then let the assistant extend the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage. And another assistant extend it likewise from above.
Then let the physician match the bone until he reduces it into the best figure that he can.
But if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try with all your strength to reduce each piece into its proper place.
But if there appears to be a separated splinter which pricks the skin and there is no hope of restoring it, then cut above it and remove it according to the method which we have mentioned previously.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made provision for that in a separate chapter, therefore take its treatment from there.
But if by chance a hot swelling appears at the beginning of your restoration, then make a poultice with wax made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be of medium thickness. And bind the cloth over it with a thin strap until when the swelling subsides. Then remove the poultice and apply a plaster made from flour dust with egg-white. Then place bandages, and let the one placed over the actual fracture be wider for a little while, and stronger.
And know that the number of bandages for the arm is six in most cases: whether it be a fracture in one joint or in two joints at once.
Then place your bandage over the location of the fracture more tightly and vigorously, and somewhat more with a bandage above the fracture or below it: or place a softer bandage on its bandage for a short time, according to what was previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft, moistened ones; and not hard or rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, properly medium between thin and thick, as we have described.
And observe the limb and its bandage after some days. That if something should happen which requires correction, such as itching that happens to the limb: then it is necessary to embrocate the limb with warm water until that itching stops, and leave the limb unbound until it stops, then repeat the bandaging.
That if the bandage has already softened and the bone is now removed, and similar things have happened: then correct that whole thing with your strength again, and observe it once more.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess binding, then it is necessary to soften it for a short time and leave it unbound for some days until nourishment reaches it again, then bind it.
But if none of the things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage unless after twenty days or roughly that amount of time.
Then, the sick person's hand should be suspended at their neck. And let their neck be level and protected by its own strength from sudden movements. Make him lie on his back to sleep.
Know that this fracture is restored within thirty days or at most forty-two days; it may also be restored within sixty days. All of this depends on the dispositions of temperaments and the dispositions of strength.
Chapter: On the restoration of fractures of the hand
Know that fractures of the wrist and joints of the fingers rarely occur. Nor does it happen except after repeated rubbing.
When a fracture or rubbing occurs at the wrist joint: then it is necessary for the patient to sit on a square seat; and in front of him there should be a seat of equal height. Then place his hand on it, extended outwards.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones and the physician should align them until they join together in good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton if no warm swelling occurs. Then place a bandage over the top according to the size of the area; and you should already have wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is near the lower part towards the palm of the hand, then make a similar sphere out of cloth; and instruct the patient to press it against the broken palm with their foot; then bind it with a long piece of cloth.
And let the bandage be made of leather that is soft so that it may be applied to the body of the palm; and bind it as is necessary.
If the fracture is on the outer side, then you should place one bandage over it and another below it on the palm; and let the hand be held straight out. Then apply a splint around the hand in this way: and extend it between the fingers with a bandage.
But if any of the joints of the fingers are broken, then if it is the thumb, it should be aligned as necessary. Then secure it with a splint; and if it is dislocated, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not moved.
But if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the middle finger or the index finger, or the ring finger and little finger, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows it; or they may all be bound together in continuity: which is preferable. Or place on it a small splint as mentioned for the thumb.
And consider also in your treatment, and after this arrangement, apply a warm poultice; and oppose to it whatever is necessary when something happens from it, according to what is repeated in its description.
On the Treatment of a Fracture of the Hip.
The hip bone is often broken and its fracture is recognized because it turns towards the inner and back parts.
And its treatment is done in this way: a bandage is applied above the fracture and another below the fracture. And the patient should lie on their face.
Then stretch all the ligaments of the affected side according to equality: and this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then a bandage should be applied to the chest side so that the extension falls upwards; and another bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then a bandage should be applied near the knee so that the extension falls downwards.
Then the physician should align the bone with both hands until it is reduced according to its natural shape; and the bone should be united with a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a poultice and a splint if there is no inflammation in the limb. But if there is an inflammation in it, then leave it for a few days until the hot inflammation subsides, then return to your treatment.
Moreover, let its stricture be like this. You must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, that is, a linen cloth, and fold it twice or thrice, leaving some excess. Then wrap the leg until you reach the heel at the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the bottom, so that the ends of the thread come out from above on both sides. Then wind around the leg and hip what remains of the bandage.
Next, place splints on the hip at the location of the fracture itself, and place one splint over the leg bone.
Then fill in the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths so that the structure is even.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the location of the fracture, making three or four turns. And the further you extend the bandage away from the location of the fracture, let your binding be looser and softer.
Then take up the two ends of the thread which you inserted between the hip and leg. Therefore bind with each end three of the splints that are on top. Then go down with both ends of the thread until you reach the ankle bone. And tie both ends together along with the other ends of the splints so that the binding does not move from its place.
Then leave the bandage on for as long as necessary so that no injury, inflammation, or other such condition occurs to the limb. But if anything should happen from it. Therefore, promptly attend to its treatment and correct whatever has occurred accordingly, as we have said many times.
But if there is a splinter of bone that is sticking out and causing pain, then it is necessary to remove it, if possible. And if you cannot do so, find the splinter and remove it, treating according to its nature until healing occurs.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound with splints as we have described in our treatment and support.
However, after its restoration, the injured person does not become lame. And if it is restored alone, without the application of the other leg, then it is necessary that he who has it will always limp.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little more or a little less, all of this depending on different constitutions and other dispositions.
 On the restoration of the fractured patella of the knee
Know that fracture of the patella of the knee is rare, but it often happens to it.
But if a fracture does occur, it will be either a crack or a hole in its parts. And this happens with a wound and also without a wound. And place the whole thing back together with sensation.
And its restoration is as follows: bring together the parts that have been disrupted with your fingers until they join and connect according to what is possible with ease and skill.
Then apply a plaster made from sesame flour or finely ground grains mixed with egg white; place a round splint on it if necessary, and bind it with an appropriate bandage.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have described for other fractures, such as a warm swelling and similar conditions, so that you may oppose any accident with what is appropriate to it until healing occurs.
 On the restoration of a fracture of the leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one thick called the tibia and the other thin called the fibula.
And both can sustain fractures like those that occur in the two bones of the arm; therefore, their restoration is done similarly and with the same operation.
If both bones break simultaneously, the leg turns towards all directions.
And if the thinner bone breaks, the leg turns towards the front.
And if the larger bone breaks, you will find it below; and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then apply extension, alignment, and star-shaped bandaging equally to both.
But if the fracture of the leg is a bad one with many displacements, then the extension should be less and more gentle in alleviating it.
And in the case of the leg, there is something special about its operation compared to that of the arm. Thus, when you have aligned the stars and completed all your operations, then take two splints of pinewood used for making roof beams, which are placed under boards; choose ones with a moderate thickness, not too thin or too thick, and their length should be equal to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap each splint twice with a bandage according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other part on the other side, from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two splints at three points: both ends and the middle. For when restrained, the leg inclines to the right and left, and remains in a good position.
And now a cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be applied, and the leg placed in it to keep it from moving.
But especially important is that you do this in cases where there is a wound accompanying the fracture.
Then observe the leg every day, and pay particular attention to it regarding any swelling, inflammation, or other signs of complications. If anything like this occurs, then apply the appropriate treatment until healing takes place, God willing.
On fractures of the foot and toes.
Indeed, the calcaneus does not break completely.
However, fractures do happen to the bones of the foot and toes, though they are rare; it is more common for them to be dislocated.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see that the bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the ground as if walking.
Then stand up and place your foot on the part that is elevated among those bones; afterwards press or step on it until it returns to its proper position.
Then apply a poultice and bandage it with linen strips; afterwards place a small board under the sole of the foot, which has two flat heads.
Then bind it firmly with the foot using an appropriate bandage, after having wrapped it with cloths and other necessary materials.
When three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage. For you will find that the bones are set in place, whether they were broken or dislocated. Therefore, the operation for them is as follows:
But if some toes are broken, then restore them and set them in place according to what I have told you regarding the restoration of fingers. Then place your finger on top of the toe in line with its length, and somewhat broader than it; next, place this board that I have told you about under the foot, and bind it firmly with an appropriate bandage.
But if two or more bones are broken, then place a splint of appropriate size on each toe, wrapped in linen cloth; bind the board under the sole of the foot and let it stand on one head of the board outside the sole of the foot to provide good support.
And remember that you should consider all the things I have told you regarding other fractures and apply appropriate treatment for each case.
Regarding the fracture of a woman's pubic bone, sternum, and male penis.
When the pubic bone of a woman is broken, then make her sit on a square cushion. Then tilt her slightly towards her back and hold her from behind.
Then let the midwife fill the woman's vagina with cotton until it is full, so that it forms a spherical shape within the vagina.
Then strike the woman gently and gradually lift her back upwards. For then the cotton will come out until it forms a spherical shape before the vaginal opening, and the broken bone will return to its proper place.
Then place a pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently, then let her urinate. Afterwards, replace it according to how you inserted it initially, and then return to her original pillow.
She should do this for about seven days, as the bone itself regains its former shape.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and tie over the opening a reed tube, then insert the entire bladder into her vagina. Then blow air through the reed tube with force until the bladder inflates within her vagina, for this will heal the fracture.
Then fill it with cotton and let it stay for several days as we have described, until she is healed.
And when the sternum of a man or woman is broken, then treat it for restoration and alignment using the method we described for healing the bone at the ankle.
And it should not be forgotten that in these nearby fractures which occur rarely, the rectum is particularly affected, especially if there is some swelling or infection present.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many ways the correct path towards its restoration and healing. So understand it well.
When the virga (a stalk of a plant) of a man is broken, take the gullet of a goose and insert it into him. Then place over it a wrapping made of cloth, wrap it around, and let it remain for three days or thereabouts. It will be healed if God wills it.
On the restoration of bone fractures when accompanied by a wound
It is fitting for one who has suffered a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thighbone or the arm bone, to act promptly and perform phlebotomy on him immediately: if you find the conditions suitable for bloodletting, as we have previously discussed.
But if the wound is flowing with blood, then you should act promptly to cauterize it, using powdered myrrh mixed with oil if nothing else is available.
Then begin to set the fracture on the same day itself; and do not delay it unless an abscess forms.
But if a hot abscess forms, then defer setting the fracture until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, for you would thereby cause him harm.
But if the broken bone is protruding through the skin and exposed, then you should attempt to reduce it manually with gentleness and slight extension.
If it cannot be prepared for reduction or made even by your hands, then use this instrument to reduce it. The instrument is made of iron and should be seven or eight digits in length, and its width should match the size of the wound. And it is necessary for the physician to take three or four pieces of this instrument according to the size needed for treating any kind of fracture.
And let it be round; and let its thickness be small so that it does not double over itself during compression at the time of operation; and let it have a sharp edge with a margin at both ends. And let its upper part gradually decrease in thickness towards its lower end.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp curved end of this instrument be placed on the prominent end of the bone and push it with it continuously until the bone returns to its proper place and becomes aligned.
Therefore strive to align the ends of the fracture together.
But if the ends of the fracture are too thin and do not fit properly into the instrument, then it is necessary to cut off the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it.
But if you cannot reduce them with the instrument we have described at all, then cut it with one of the knives that we mentioned or saw it off with any suitable saw.
Then shave what remains on the bone from its roughness and small scales.
Therefore, if after reducing the bone the patient feels severe pain afterwards, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this. For you shall give a large splint to the patient when the restoration of the bone that you are performing is complete.
Then soak a cloth in black stypitic wine. And especially if it is summer time. Do not apply hot poultices or anything containing oil to the wound lest it cause putrefaction and decay therein.
Then administer bandages at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound open; thus, cut through the stitches with forceps according to the size of the wound.
And beware of all precautions not to close the wound in case of a fracture. For many times foolish physicians have done this and caused either death or gangrene (corrosion) or pus (zuchem), that is, corrupted blood. And let your suture be soft, gentle, diverse from the sutures of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some harmful accidents that have been mentioned, and if there is pain in the area, then do not apply cauterization (astellas). And make them compressions with hard cloths at the site of cauterization and tie it with them.
But when after one or two days you see that the wound is beginning to produce pus, then remove the cloth you placed on it with wine. Then apply linen bandages and ointments according to our custom for treating wounds, such as the ointment called Tetrapharmacon, and similar ones.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the suture. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it heals.
It is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus flows easily downwards towards the lower parts.
But if many days pass and the wound does not heal nor is the pus discharged from it, then know that there are fragments of bone stuck in it. Therefore, you must explore the wound with probes to find out. Remove those fragments that are loose and extract them. And those which are not loose but stick into the limb and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in any way you can.
But if gangrene or inflammation (ekileten), that is, fistulas or other signs of corruption and putrefaction appear on the wound, then apply to each of them what is suitable according to its treatment, whose explanation has preceded in its chapter.
And concerning that which it is necessary for my speech to dwell upon and to which you should give your full attention when a bone breaks and protrudes above the limb, such as the thighbone or elbow bone and similar bones of the major limbs, it is not advisable to attempt to reduce (attractionem eius) it too often, for many deaths have resulted from this. Rather, leave it alone until it becomes putrefied.
For perhaps it will fall back into place on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, if the wound appears inflamed to you, treat it; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter on the treatment of nonunion at the site of a bone fracture.
Nonunion often occurs at the site of a healed bone fracture. Especially those that occur near joints and cause deformity of the limb. And perhaps prevents the limb from functioning properly in its natural way.
Therefore, if the nonunion is recent, apply medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense (olibanum), myrrh (myrrha), tragacanth (sarcocolla), and acacia, and similar substances.
So that you take some or all of these and mix them with astrigent wine, egg white, or vinegar, and apply them on a wick to the nonunion, binding it securely.
And leave the dressing in place for several days without changing it. Then remove it and repeat with another dressing until the nonunion is resolved.
Or apply a lead plate appropriately shaped to fit over it. For lead has the property of drawing out all that is harmful from the limbs.
But if the nonunion has already become ossified and hardened, and urgent necessity demands its removal, then make an incision over it from above to expose the prominent bone. Then shave it off with suitable razors until it is removed, and treat the wound until it heals.
On Treatment: When it restores, but the limb remains afterwards thin, not according to its natural state.
When a fracture of the bone restores, but the limb remains afterwards thin and weak, this does not occur except on account of many causes. One cause of this is the excessive slackening and tightening of ligaments not according to what is proper; or because of an excess of binding of ligaments so that nourishment cannot reach the limb; or because of an excess of applications at a time when they are not appropriate; or because of a deficiency of blood in the body of the sick person, and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the sick person and make their body soft until there is an increase of blood in them. And administer a bath. And bring joy and pleasantness upon him.
Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment towards itself. And persist with applications of warm water on it until nourishment flows and it returns to its natural shape.
On the Treatment of Fractures When They Heal Crookedly
When a limb has healed crookedly after the fracture, with prominence of the bone or with nonunion, although this disfigures the form of the limb, yet if it does not hinder its natural movement, then do not listen to anyone who advises that the limb should be broken again.
And many foolish physicians and bone-setters have done this in our land.
This operation is indeed very blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, so that the patient may die.
But if the limp and nonunion are recent, then it is necessary to apply warm water containing softening herbs such as hollyhock leaves and root, mallow, and others of that kind. And a poultice should be made for him with a softening plaster, like well-made tragacanth.
Or the mucilage of hollyhock root may be taken and beaten with chicken fat or sesame oil, and applied as a poultice.
Or figs may be taken and ground with pigeon dung and other substances that are known to reduce union.
And sometimes nonunion is dissolved by repeated gentle friction with moist hands. Movement of the affected limb should be encouraged towards all directions at all times.
But if the deformity has already occurred and become strong, and has turned into bone, and the need for surgical intervention with iron has arisen: then it is necessary to cut above it, dissolve the bony union, and cut away what is superfluous from the nonunion or bone using fine cutters, and ensure ease of movement therewith careful attention.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some articulation from its proper place. Therefore it is prevented from movement and the figure of the limb is deformed. And it causes severe pain and serious injuries to fall upon the weak.
When therefore dislocation occurs in someone, then it is necessary to hasten its restoration without delay.
For if delayed, the place becomes inflamed and perhaps the reduction of the dislocation will become difficult.
Therefore it is not necessary to move or stretch it during the hour of inflammation. For often it causes spasm and painful injuries.
But when this happens, then you must hurry to perform bloodletting on the patient. Then let him be left alone until the inflammation subsides.
Then apply warm water and oil to the limb. Then reduce it gently.
And treat all members with that for which there will be a reminder in its proper place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, also according to what preceded in fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Chapter: On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated except seldom.
And dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Either they are moved slightly from their usual positions and kept there for a short time; Or they are completely dislocated until they become limp towards the chest area, so that the sick person cannot hold them and cannot close their mouth, and their tongue is involved with speech.
But when the dislocation is slight, it returns spontaneously in many cases with few complications.
But if the dislocation is complete and entire, then reduction must be administered quickly and not delayed at all. And it is necessary for an assistant to hold the patient's head while the physician inserts the thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jawbone between its teeth on one side; Or inserts both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides. And let the other fingers of his hands be outside where they may be helpful;
And instruct the patient to clean their teeth and open their mouth wide on all sides. Then the physician should gently push the jaw until it returns to its proper place;
But if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously, then apply a warm vapor with water and oil until reduction becomes easy. Do not delay reducing them at all, as we have said.
When they return and are positioned correctly, and the patient's mouth is closed without limpness, then place over them small pads of linen with cerate made from wax and rose oil.
Then bind it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient lie on their back with their head supported between two pillows so that they do not move it to the right or left and neither attempt nor are forced to chew anything; rather, they should be given a soft diet until the pain subsides and the jaw is bound again. Then they may eat what they wish, administered gently.
They should not exert themselves in eating, drinking, and yawning until the jaw is bound and healed.
But if the reduction of the two mandibles proves difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their proper places, then frequent feverish attacks may occur, along with continuous thirst, and perhaps the patient's abdomen will loosen and they may vomit bile.
Therefore, if you observe this [situation], then know that it is a sign of certain death, and often the person to whom it happens dies within ten days.
[On the Reduction of Dislocations of the Shoulder Joint and Arm Bone]
The shoulder blade does not become dislocated from its inner side due to its continuity with the chest. It may sometimes become dislocated outward and this is clearly apparent by sensation.
Its reduction can be achieved by having the patient lie on their back with arms extended. Then press firmly on the spot with your palm; it will return to its proper place.
Then apply a plaster and dressings, and bind it tightly.
The parts of the arm that follow after the elbow, namely the wrist and hand, rarely become dislocated unless there is some special cause for this. If it becomes dislocated on any given day, then it should be reduced and set right according to what has been said, with the necessary preparations made by you.
Then place upon it a plaster, bandages, and a dressing. And instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the head of the humerus is reduced when it becomes dislocated from its place as well.
Paragraph: On the reduction of dislocation of the arm.
Know that the humerus does not dislocate except in three ways.
One of which is for it to dislocate towards the armpit and downwards. The second is for it to dislocate towards the chest. And perhaps it may also dislocate at the upper part of the humerus, which happens rarely.
It does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder blade. And it does not dislocate forwards due to the nerves.
Most commonly, however, it dislocates and exits downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it goes out quickly and enters quickly in them.
In those whose flesh is abundant, however, it is the opposite: it goes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to certain people that they are struck or fall, and the humerus becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it is already dislocated.
Therefore, you should examine it until you are certain of its condition, and then proceed with its treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it occurs downwards towards the armpit; distinguish between a dislocated arm and one that is sound. For you will find a distinct difference between them: on the head of the humerus there is a depression, and beneath the armpit upon touch the head of the humerus feels as if it were an egg. The patient cannot reduce their hand to their ear nor move it in all ways.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you will find a distinct touch, and it is not concealed.
Indeed, reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent or if the patient is a child.
And its reduction is such that the assistant raises their hand upwards. Then place your thumbs beneath the armpit of the patient and elevate the joint with force upwards to its proper place. And the assistant raises their hand and extends it upwards. Then let him place it below; for he returns quickly.
But if it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred at first: then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation which softens and soothes be administered, such as if the roots of althea, and fennel, and melilot are cooked in water, and are administered.
Then the patient is made to lie on their back: and beneath the armpit of the patient there is placed a sphere and wool which is equal between softness and tension.
Then let the physician place his heel upon the sphere and elevate the head of the humerus with force, and draw the hand of the patient downwards.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and do so by making the man who is present longer than the patient, and let him stand on the side of the patient's ribs and insert his humerus beneath the armpit of the patient; then elevate the armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in air. And another assistant should pull the patient's hand towards their lower abdomen. But if the patient is light in weight, then it is necessary to suspend with him something else to weigh him down, because dislocation occurs immediately.
And it is also reduced in another manner: and thus a long piece of wood should be placed on the ground, the head of which is round in shape like the eye of a millstone, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place it beneath the patient after placing soft cloths on top of the rounded head of the wood; and let the patient stand along the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand towards the ground on the other side and stretch out his body with force, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
But if the reduction of this is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: and thus take a piece of wood whose length is two cubits (about 3 feet), and its width four fingers, and its thickness two fingers; and let its head be round in shape so as to ease entry into the depth of the armpit, according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be bound over the rounded head of the wood so that it does not harm the patient.
Then place it beneath the armpit of the patient so that his hand or arm is extended over the wood towards the ground; and let the wood be bound to the support, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm over the step of a ladder in width and extend the hand towards the ground, letting the rest of the body hang suspended on the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore its entry is completed in whatever way possible, then you should place beneath the armpit a sphere of equal size made of wool. Next, apply an ointment prepared from flour dust with frankincense and egg white over the entire shoulder as it curves upwards.
Then tie beneath the armpit with a suitable binding; wrap the bandage over the ointment and attach his hand to his neck, allowing it to remain undisturbed for seven days.
And food should be given sparingly until the member is strengthened, as this will facilitate quicker healing.
Then after seven days or five, a larger amount of food should be given and exercise begun with movement. If it then becomes firm and not soft, he is now healed.
But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to moisture that has occurred or another cause, then a cautery with three holes should be applied there according to what was described earlier in the chapter on cauteries.
But if all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, and the joint remains unhealed and cannot be raised upwards, then know that his nerves leading to the head of the shoulder have either been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never again return to its proper place.
For dislocation towards the chest and nipple or reduction to the back, this occurs with force and extension using hands until it returns, and then the remaining binding and care should be applied until healing is complete.
But if heaviness and slowness of movement occur in the limb after healing, then the patient should frequently use warm baths until that heaviness is eased and it returns to its original nature.
On the Treatment of Elbow Dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns to its position with difficulty. It can be dislocated in all directions but most often towards the front or back.
And its dislocation will not escape your notice because it is evident both to sight and touch, regardless of what shape the dislocation takes. And when you reduce a dislocated elbow joint, it becomes plainly apparent. For the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own humerus.
And you should hurry to reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot inflammation occurs.
For if a hot inflammation occurs, its reduction becomes difficult and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when the dislocation is towards the back. It is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, causing intense pain and often leading to death.
And its reduction, when possible, is done by extending the patient's hand with both hands of the surgeon, keeping the arm expanded. The surgeon's hands should be placed above and below the elbow joint, and they should push the joint back into place using their palms or fingers until it returns to its proper position.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front, then reduction is achieved by bending the hand towards the palm until it strikes the dislocated elbow with the root of the surgeon's palm.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong and forceful traction. Two assistants should extend the arm while two others hold it steady during traction.
Then rotate the arm in all directions after wrapping a long doubled cloth or broad bandage around the hand to prevent injury.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil to make the reduction smoother and easier. Then push the joint forcefully until it returns to its place.
After reducing it, apply a plaster with absorbent properties containing egg white and tighten it with an appropriate bandage. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sick person; and leave it thus for some days.
Then, untie it. If however the joint remains firm in its place, then remove the bandage from it and leave it alone.
But if you see that the joint is not tightly bound, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is properly bound. Then remove it.
But if heaviness occurs after the reduction of the joint and there is inflammation with movement: then apply moistening in bathing, gentle rubbing, and compression until it becomes straight, or apply over the hip joint, that is, fresh sheep's fat. Then bind it, and leave it thus day and night. Then remove it, and immerse the patient in a bath. When he begins to sweat, then rub the joint with a gentle rubbing motion. Then repeat over it an application of warm water once, twice, and thrice with each entry into the bath until it becomes softened.
And if you wish, apply over it the feces of a vaccuum that has been moistened and warmed with butter, and bind it tightly.
Do this several times. Thus it will become softened, and return to its natural state.
Prologue: On the treatment of dislocation at Al-Mahassen
Al-Mahassen hand is frequently dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And its reduction is easy. Unlike other joints. However, speed is necessary in reducing the dislocation of this joint at the time it occurs, before the site becomes inflamed, otherwise a hot inflammation may occur there.
And the reduction of this dislocation is accomplished by placing the hand of the injured person on a board and extending its fingers by an assistant. The physician then places his palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its normal position.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has already moved towards the belly of the hand. If so, the patient should place the back of their hand on the board during extension and reduction. And if the dislocation proceeds towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed internally on the board, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on it, so that the doctor's hand falls upon the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, then all is well; but if not, then bind it with a poultice to reduce the swelling and leave it alone without repeating the procedure.
For if it does not tolerate the reduction and you cannot effect it even after a number of days have passed, and yet the joint remains in its twisted state without causing harm to the patient except that the hand becomes softened and unable to grasp anything, then know that the nerves have either been cut or frayed.
Therefore, it is not advisable to do anything further but to burn it close to its site with a cautery. And perhaps this will be of no benefit.
But if Al-Mahassen does not return to its proper place, then apply over it the poultice that has been mentioned above. Then bind it and leave it for five days; afterwards untie it and allow free movement of the hand for exercise.
But if it lacks movement and becomes stiff, then soften it with warm water and rubbing until it becomes supple.
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
When any of the fingers is dislocated towards any direction, either towards the back or palm of the hand, then extend the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its normal position.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it towards the part where it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend him and extend him until he is equal to the straight one on that same day.
Therefore, when it is night, bind him according to the description itself; and do not cease to loosen him during the day; and exercise him with movement; and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until he becomes strong.
And do likewise with him if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; and bind him to that part, and perform your first operation on him until he heals.
And do likewise with him when it is dislocated onto other parts.
On the treatment of dislocations of the vertebrae of the spine.
When it happens to someone that the vertebrae of the spine or neck are completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no treatment for it, since death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the discharge of the sick person goes out without his will and he cannot hold it in. And sometimes some of his limbs become soft, either both legs or both arms, or one of them, or a vertebra is displaced from its place.
For indeed, displacement often occurs because there are four parts involved in such dislocations.
Therefore, that which is displaced towards the back is called Kyphosis (Gibbositas).
But its treatment is that if kyphosis occurs from childhood, then there is no cure for it, nor is there any hope of recovery.
But in that which occurs from an accident or blow or similar causes, the ancients have already described the methods of treatment at length. Mostly it does not return without damage.
But I have abbreviated it from that which is lengthy because of its proximity to me and in accordance with my intent and explanation, and I have formed an instrument for it in a different way from what they showed and explained.
I say therefore that in the hump which occurs on the anterior part, there is no cure nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides.
And only those which occur on the back are cured by that which I tell: and it is thus, that the sick person should lie face down on a flat surface near the wall, with a wet cloth underneath to prevent harm to their chest.
Then a straight piece of wood should be placed in a trough on the ground at the head end of the bed and another at the foot end, but not fixed into the trough. And an assistant should hold one of the pieces of wood. And another assistant should hold the other.
Then wrap around the head of the sick person and under their armpits a soft, strong rope. Extend one end of the rope to the piece of wood at their head and tie it there.
Then tighten another rope above their ankles, above their knees, and around their calves. Then gather all the ropes together and tie them to the piece of wood at their feet.
Then all assistants should pull on the ropes towards their respective pieces of wood. The two pieces of wood should not be moved from their places but also should not be fixed as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the sacrum with force until it returns to its proper position or he should place a board on it. Then he should press his feet against the board until it returns.
But if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three cubits. And hollow out in the wall which we said is near the sick person a place into which the end of the board can fit. Then place the middle of the board upon the "Spondyle. And let the physician place his feet on the other end. And tie it firmly until the "Spondyle" tightens, and then return to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with the lathe which is wrapped around your hand. And it is like this: fix two pieces of wood into the ground at the head of the patient's foot, each one being a forearm in length; and likewise at his head.
And let the distance between each piece of wood be a palm's length: and now all holes have been made, through which the lathe runs; and let every piece of wood be firmly fixed into the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert the round wood, and let the lathe upon which the bandage is rolled be placed into the two holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole into which the wooden stick with the length of a palm plus what is rolled upon it is fixed; and likewise on two other pieces of wood.
Then tie the bandages which you have tied on the chest of the patient with the lathe that is at his head; and tie the bandages which you have tied on his legs with the lathe that is at his feet.
Then let there be a helper at each lathe who turns his hand with the linen bandage around which the lathe revolves; and let the physician adjust the "Spondyle" according to what has been said.
This is the form of the lathe which follows.
Then after the "Spondyle" returns and the location is adjusted, then it is necessary to place an astringent plaster with egg white. Then pitch. Afterwards place on top of the plaster a star from a board, whose width is three fingers or about that length. And its length should be equal to the size that covers the swelling and also over the healthy part of the "Spondyle.
Then it shall be tied with the ligament we mentioned. And the patient should use a soft diet until they are healed.
But if there remains some prominence at the site even after healing, then one must apply softening and soothing medicines along with the application of the board we mentioned for a prolonged period. And now lead sheet is applied to that area.
Sometimes there appears a prominence at the last "Spondyle" of the back, and it is believed to be due to dislocation; this is the bone that is now prominent. Therefore, one should not attempt this treatment without careful consideration, for it may result in death.
On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Ankle.
Know that dislocations of the ankle and elbow do not occur except in cases of complete dislocation; they are not affected by slight displacement or concavity as other joints are.
And indeed the ankle joint is dislocated according to four parts. That is, because it can be dislocated either forwards or backwards.
Most often it is dislocated inwards; less commonly it is dislocated outwards or backwards.
And the treatment for inward dislocation of the ankle is as follows: when you align the healthy leg with the injured one, the injured leg will be longer; the knee will be higher than that of the healthy leg, and the injured person will not be able to bend their foot at the hip; there will be a swelling below the groin due to the head of the femur having reached that area.
The sign of outward dislocation of the ankle is that it has symptoms opposite to those mentioned above.
And the sign of forward dislocation of the ankle is that the healthy leg is extended but not bent without pain at the knee; if the person attempts to walk, they cannot do so with their foot protruding forwards; urine retention occurs, and there is swelling at the groin; during walking, they tend to land on their heel.
And the sign of backward dislocation of the hip is that the knee cannot be extended until the groin is bent; the affected leg appears shorter than the other; the groin feels soft and the head of the femur is located at the buttock area.
But the reduction of this dislocation may be achieved by considering whether it is an old dislocation that has already become fixed. Then if you attempt to reduce it and it remains dislocated, there is no cure for it at all. Therefore, do not attempt this procedure rashly.
However, in cases where the dislocation is recent and one of four possible types, then quickly attempt to achieve reduction by moving it both internally and externally, and left and right; perhaps it will reduce without needing further treatment.
But if this does not succeed, then prepare a strong assistant to extend the patient's leg from below, either with their hands or using a bandage tied above the knee; meanwhile another assistant should extend their hand from above so as to insert their hands beneath the buttocks. Then bind with a gentle bandage at the root of the hip and hold both ends tightly.
And let the extension be either from the front of the groin to the fork region or from behind to the dorsal side.
All this should happen simultaneously until the patient is lifted bodily off the ground and remains suspended.
This method of traction is common to all four types of dislocation.
If the dislocation reduces with this method, then that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to apply specific treatment for each type.
When reducing it specifically, if the dislocation is towards the inside, it is necessary that the patient be laid on their healthy side. Then place a bandage over the root of the hip, where the head of the hip bone is and the area under the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the groin towards the higher part of the body, to the fork of the rib cage.
Then another assistant takes both arms of the patient and pushes the prominence of the hip outward with great force. For it has now returned to its proper place.
And this method is easier than other methods of treatment for reducing this member.
But if the patient resists you and refuses to cooperate with this method of treatment completely, then it is necessary to bind both feet together with a strong, soft bandage over the two heels and both knees, so that each foot is four fingers' length apart, and the injured leg should be extended one finger's breadth longer than the other.
Then hang the patient over the top of a beam that is in the house, with their feet off the ground by two arm lengths.
Then order a strong young man to protect the head of the hip and another youth to hang from it with the patient. Another youth should push the hip joint back into place with force, for it will quickly return to its proper position.
But when the dislocation is towards the outside, it is necessary that the patient lie on a platform as described for those with humpbacks. And bind the bandage tightly around their injured leg and across their chest.
Then place one beam at his feet and another at his head. Then place another beam securely in the middle of the platform, over which wet cloths are wrapped to avoid hurting the patient. Place the beam between their thighs so that it does not pull them downwards during extension.
Then each assistant should extend towards their respective parts, and the physician should evenly reduce with his hand.
If they obey to the return, it will be good.
And if not, place on top of it another board and press it evenly as we said over the convexity. Nevertheless, the patient should lie on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then the patient's leg should be extended quickly: this is done on the platform and the physician places the palm of their right hand over the patient's groin. Then grasp it with the other hand and with that grasp extend it downwards towards the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is towards the back: then it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, rather they should be raised up from the ground. Instead, place them on a hard surface like when dislocating their ankle outwards, according to what we said about placing them between two chairs and facing upwards with extended ligaments.
And compression should be administered with a board over the place where the joint exits when reduction is completed as it should be.
The sign of the joint's return is not hidden from you: when you extend both of the patient's legs and see them equal, and the patient relaxes their leg and extends it without resistance, then know that the limb has been reduced properly. Then join the two thighs together and apply a plaster, securing it with a bandage made of cloth or a roller so that the ankle does not move to any part. Let the patient rest quietly for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and plaster and compare the leg with the other. If you find them equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation is now fixed. Let the patient walk without assistance.
And if you observe any softening: then return and apply a plaster to it, and bind it according to your first binding. Leave it like that for three days.
Then loosen it and make him walk slowly on both feet for several more days until he is well strengthened.
Chapter on Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It can be dislocated to the outside, inside, and downwards, that is, backwards.
And it does not dislocate forwards.
The sign of its dislocation is that when you tell the patient to apply their leg to their hip If it does not adhere to the hip, then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the reduction of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright so that they can already extend their leg if possible on top of it. Place your back against the patient's face and put their foot between yours.
Then press your knees with your palms and stretch them straight between your fingers on the knee of the patient Then press both sides of the knee with force using your palm And another assistant should extend the foot until the knee returns to its place
The sign of reduction is when the leg adheres to the hip gently, not with difficulty.
Then apply a plaster and make sure the leg adheres to the hip. Then bind it together with bandages for three or four days. Then loosen it.
And the patient should not walk for several days until they are healed.
If reduction is difficult for you, then perform strong traction with bandages, as previously described in the treatment of dislocations of the ankle, until it returns to its place.
Chapter on Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel.
The heel is sometimes moved by a slight displacement, and sometimes dislocated according to its completion. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen and protruding towards the part to which it has been dislocated.
However, the treatment of its displacement is easy reduction: and it is that with ease you stretch it out with your hands, and make it even until it returns.
But in its treatment when it is dislocated according to completion, you should make the sick person sit upright: and have a strong servant hold him firmly from behind, in the middle of his back.
Then, take hold with your right hand of his foot from above it, and with your left hand below the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left [hand] using both fingers.
Then extend it with your left [hand], and press the front of the foot with your right towards the thigh without effort.
Do this twice as we have described.
Then press the front of the foot against the thigh for a third time, and you pull the heel.
If however it returns on the first or second attempt according to this method, and you see the foot even, that is good. But if not, then repeat the procedure upon it: for indeed it will return.
But if its reduction is prevented by what we have described, then make the sick person lie on his back upon the ground, and fix a peg firmly in the ground so that it falls between his thighs. And you wrap around him a cloth, so that it does not harm the sick.
Then let one servant take his thigh: afterwards another servant stretches out the other foot, either with his hands or with a bandage that he ties around the ankle. Then all servants stretch out against each other's stretching: and the peg stands between both thighs of the sick, holding him so that his body is not drawn downwards during the stretching.
Then let the physician reduce the dislocated [joint] with his hands, and another servant hold the healthy leg downward. For reduction occurs with speed.
When therefore the dislocation has been reduced, and you know that its reduction is sound: then apply a plaster and wick, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg.
And you must be careful not to cause injury or harm to the nerves which are above the back of the heel, lest a bandage be pressed upon them and wound them.
Then leave him for two days, or three. But if the bandage becomes too tight, loosen it: then remove it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the sick person from walking for forty days. But if he attempts to walk before that period, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not dissolve again, and be ruined, so that it will not recover afterwards.
But if an inflamed abscess should occur to him: then you must apply for its suppression that which preceded this account in another place concerning treatment, and poultices until it is removed.
On Dislocation of the Toes of the Foot, and Its Treatment.
It is necessary to reduce what has been dislocated among them with little effort through extension: and indeed this is not difficult, rather it is easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain joints of the back of the foot: then let the sick person sit with his foot on the ground, or on a board, and stand as if walking.
Then you stand and place your foot upon that which projects from those joints. And then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it is reduced, and no prominence appears in its place.
Then place under the sole of its foot a board which receives the whole foot, having two heads. Then bind it with a proper bandage for three days. Then release it and cause him to rest from walking many days until it is bound up and secured against reduction.
On kinds of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it and you attempt its cure and restoration, many times death follows; therefore, it is not appropriate for anyone to presume upon its care unless one who is experienced in the art with long use, merciful, pious, slow, neither rash nor presumptuous: and let him use at the beginning medicines that calm hot apostemes only: and let him leave the sick to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with gentleness of sickness, and where there appears some hope. Therefore, strive to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter before a hot aposteme occurs.
If therefore the member returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that calms the aposteme: and cure the wound with what is suitable for it among drying ointments.
But if dislocation is with fracture, and splintered pieces occur in the bone, then strive for their removal, and do in it what we have said in simple sicknesses about that which preceded in the places of those.
And beware according to your power, and keep yourself from entering into the path of fear: according to what has preceded my preaching to you.
For that is better for you before your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and safer for your body among them in your time.
