O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine assembled from its applications and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I have seen that I must complete this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely surgery.</start_of_turn>
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because surgery is rare in our region and is strange to all, if it is not learned and practiced, and if there is no master in it, there remains only the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have forgotten.</start_of_turn
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and are closed the understanding and is aligned the science.</start_of_turn>
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I can bring it to life in its entirety, the ordination of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will join together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who interferes with this work to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he has judged the limbs, and the forms and the joints and the separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and arteries and their course.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates teaches us that the body is not the same without the soul as with it; and in the art of medicine also.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We are told in the beginning of this book that whoever does not know the things that are to be said, if he practices carelessly and does not respect the people, will often make more mistakes in this science than he will correct.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who, having copped.i. excised the scrofula or the head of a woman, has coped the arteries at the collar; so that so much blood has flowed out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another madman who treated a stone of a sick man, and the stone was great; so that he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and he died of it two days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I must say that I have often been called to treat such cases, and I see the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one should attempt to cut it out, he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I see another case here in our land where the limb was broken, and with the bone shattered; and the physicians of our land are straining their minds to cure it, but they leave the wound open without dressing it, and leave it thus; and they command that it be left alone; and it remains so until the limb is completely healed and the bone is whole again.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come and see him, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is calm and does not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way corruption has already confirmed or member, and does not cease until corruption goes away from the member while the member is whole.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another symptom which signifies corruption is swelling of the abscess, which is caused by the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the cancer, when it is full of black bile, does not cease except by the touch of fire, so long as it remains in the limb where it can remove everything that is corrupted
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, very often, fingers are split, for there are various dispositions in which danger is found; and I will show in each chapter where there is danger and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must keep your arms close to your body, so that the fools may not speak evil of you. If you take up your arms in custody and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the better way, God willing, you will come out well; and leave the diseases of grief in peace. Stay away from those things which make you doubt, and have confidence in yourself that you can pass from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The fools speak abusively of your cures: “Do not take on too many patients, for you are not remembered as a fool.”
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with cauteries of fire and of medicine by water, and this chapter orders from the head down to the feet; and forms of instruments, and instruments of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with amputation and piercing, and boils, wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter orders and the forms of instruments.</start_of_turn>
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and fractures, and similar things; and is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.</start_of_turn>
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So be it that our memories remind us of the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the danger of this complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and the danger, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the most profound response; and from this many speak, and they agree with this; and I find that their words are burdensome, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally in every complexion or where there is matter, for there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion hot and dry, and a complexion dry and cold.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexion and a dry and cold complexion together there is matter, they disagree and say that the cautery is a great aid; and the other party says that the cautery is of no use for disease except when there is heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never seen it happen by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	In no way does anyone know for certain by experiment. And indeed, I have seen many people suffer from this ailment, who by long experience have learned the chapter of cautery, the diversity of people's complexions, the causes and dispositions of their illnesses, and the outcomes and extent of their troubles; for other complexions we have no certain knowledge, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn>
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And you must all agree and be reconciled to the cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, friends, that the fire of cautery is more effective for secret and soothing cures than the burning medicine of cautery.</start_of_turn
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medical treatments that burn come from one member to another, causing diseases in other members through grief and sanitation; and by chance, when the patient is sick, the fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not make me do that, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And thus I have learned through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, and I bear witness to the truth of the matter; for this reason I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to withhold the secret which is returned or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it dispels ailments of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates in demonstrating; or you may hold it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know then, son, that it is necessary to determine at what tension the cauteries should be made, and that they should be performed with great care.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is useful in all tensions, for the harmful effects arising from it are overcome by the help of the cautery; and indeed even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until a greater harm has arisen to the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, that because it is done by fools, fire cautery has no return; and he says so; but it is not so, for it is not other medicine than that which moves the complexion and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its hastiness of value and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Indeed, it is known that disease does not arise at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and in him are assembled the superfluous things by the acquisition of meats and similar things, except when cautery is administered in place of them or when there is little superfluousness and moisture, for in such a case the pain does not return; but this often happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that because it is called the last of medicine, fire cautery; but behold; they do not believe that fire cautery is worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false; for it is the last of medicine because whenever we administer other remedies in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth more.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Certainly! Here is the translation:
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Indeed, here is the translation:
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	In any case, when you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is scorched by the color of the gold itself, and when it is too cold; and if you burn it too much; it makes a fire; and there is enough hindrance in this.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery as we have observed to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from the head down to the feet, for this reason that it should be easier to find
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cautery methods are useful for moisture and cold, and are used in cases of a disease called "soda", and in cases of many humors that descend from the head as boils, and ears, and for many dreams and head and neck pain, and even for many diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by means of a medicinal solution modifying the head, either two or three times, according to what is useful and agreeable to the patient's habit; and then make the patient drink the head of the patient again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands under his feet; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two nails; and there or will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the nail then cover the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put out the sign of ink, and make descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then keep your hand still, and rejoin the limb if you see the bone even a little; and if you do not see it, if you repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; then take one sip of wine, and put in awe and soak cotton inside, and take out the limb, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage around it; and leave it on until the swelling has gone down. Then cure the wound of the bleeding which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old men say, the more time passes over the wound, the more it purges; and for this reason they aid the muscle.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must leave the cautery on for so long as part of the bone is not burnt, and then one must rejoin what is left of the bone and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that one must leave the cautery on for so long as part of the bone is not burnt, and one must press so hard that the bone is as wide as a woman’s hair; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that one must cure and bandage it.</start_of_turn>
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these methods of cautery do not seem to me to be of much use for bones in general, unless in some cases or where there is doubt; and I believe that I must leave it; for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and mild for me, and for this reason I will use it in such cases.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times, pain in the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the whole head there comes chronic pain, and lasting a long time, the patient must use remedies of herbs and pills which are called «cochie», and expectoration of head and oil and plasters; and if we do for him the cautery which we have said before, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient’s pain is of great nature, and that it is not too great; then the cautery should be performed as we have said previously.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After having performed the cautery on the limb of the head as far as the bone, as we have said, perform the cautery of the vein which is called “vasselz”; and this is where you put the sponges.  Keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until you reach the bone: the patient feels more severe pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to cauter the corners than the middle of the head, for this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Dou cautere dou chief,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When sudden pain in the head arises, and the disease extends up to the head, and the limb is expelled by medicines, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this has brought no benefit: then one must make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with water medicine and with fire.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of warming, when he is sane; and if you see that he makes no progress with the medicines I have written or if you wish to dose the treatment with additional medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is as it is said in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is like this:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called “closed” because its head is made in the shape of a nail or it has a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; put out the painful limb, and hold your hand steady and lightly touch the fire until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and hold your hand away from the artery, which should not be burned, and there should be plenty of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After having put on cotton wool around the limb for two days, take it out; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and cure the limb until it is healed. And if you are going to cauterize this embolism with the cautery called "cultellare," at the very tip, keep the artery in this embolism that is not ancient.
de emigraine	After having put on cotton wool around the limb for two days, take it out; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and cure the limb until it is healed. And if you are going to cauterize this embolism with the cautery called "cultellare," at the very tip, keep the artery in this embolism that is not ancient.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cauterize an embolism as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cautery must precede medical treatment and that it does not suffice, then you must avoid the cautery called "cultellare" as long as it is blunt; and sign out the limb by drawing a line a half inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and do not move anything until the bone; and be careful of the jaw that it does not move when you move, and that it does not cause you pain, and be careful of the displacement of blood from the artery when it is cauterized, or when it has been cauterized for a long time; and that you do not do anything rash or beyond your knowledge, and that you are not a student or an experienced physician; and leave the work in progress; but I will tell you how to retain blood when the artery is cauterized, and I will show you where it is in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area nearby as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area nearby as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and we have applied various soothing medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, then burn this cautery which is called the "point", for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you have moved a finger close to the root of the ear since you signed the pledge; and there are ten points around the ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you have moved a finger close to the root of the ear since you signed the pledge; and there are ten points around the ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those which move with phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make any cautery which appears to come from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture which is made of fumes of hydras and vomiting of head and gargling, and this is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient with two cauters: one at the root of the ear, and the other at the temple, and the third at the junction of the two upper eyelids; and put the cautery on the part which is open safely, and make the cautery in the place of the head of the ear below a little below the corner of the eye, and another in the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery on for as long as half of the current is burned. This is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you cure the like of a cat o’ nine tails which we have put before you, but it is a more subtle and effective remedy that the knife should be a larger one; after curing thus as I have said above, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said above, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one at the root of the tongue if there is one, and the last behind the teeth; and be cured as we have said above.
de litargie	De litargie.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	From litargie.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane, it is good; and if not, do two cauteries on the head, descending juice until it reaches the collar, and leave an inch of space between each cautery; and cure as with the others. If you see that he requires more, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if the master wishes, do two others on the two horns, and cure until he is sane; or be the cautery which is called the olive, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	From the coldness of the head, it is necessary that the head of the sufferer be relaxed of its hair and of what has been said before; afterwards raise the head of the patient, and then apply the cautery to the head and on the chest, that is to say behind and before the shoulder blade; and if you must do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the disease is strong, do three cauteries on the shoulder blade; and leave it as long as the hair is dark, and keep your hand still; afterwards cure as long as it is safe, and the cautery which is called "olive" that has been said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The physicians should only use fire cautery for those who are feverish; and first modify the temperament of the head and the other cures that we have mentioned in the preceding chapter when the patient is large and subject to violent medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a young person who cannot endure suffering, make him gargle and chew, modifying the temperaments often with bones of meat; then break his head in the middle and do the cautery as we have said before, on the vessel and on the abscess; and if the patient is strong and suffering, do the cautery as we have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or do the cautery olive as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, do the cautery superficially as we have said in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, superfluous humors or corrupted moisture and thick smoke arise, whereupon we must utilize certain cauteries as we have mentioned in relation to paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And when melancholy is the cause, if the superfluous humor declines into melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, we must give him something to drink which will moisten the brain, as is done in division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then after that we must take hold of the patient’s head; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it under the head; and the patient should be crossed and held firmly from all sides; then present the lintment, and give him a draught of old wormwood; and we must apply heat moderately, so that it should not be too painful; after that we must drain the circle from the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with another good diet, until he is healed
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it cauterized in making holes more often to the whole cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery diminishes the pain immediately; then put on wet cotton in butter and lard of gelline.
de l’awe des eulz	Or if you see a burn cauterized in making multiple pricks throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately; then put on a moist bandage of wool and grease with gelline.</start_of_turn>
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes, as signs that I have said in the division, then order the patient to drink cold water, give him something nourishing to eat, and keep him away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once a day.</start_of_turn>
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command him to rest his head, and make a cautery on the head, and make thirteen cauteries upon the two temples when he descends from the awe until his eyes are closed together, or if he descends slowly he is in one; and hold tight all the veins and arteries that are below the chin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood spurting, if it is a part that you have cauterized, stop immediately like you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you will stabilize it; and never make a cautery or incision below the two backbones
dou cors des larmes	except for the tears of the eyes.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are upon the veins, or if you see that the arteries are swollen due to excessive heat; and it is seen that these are cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then you must perform the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: namely, cauterize the head and the two temples and two cauteries or haicate the lower eyelids. And if more is required, make a small cautery beneath the eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the tears of the eyes are secreted from within the eyes...
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have treated the patient as we have said in the previous section, and if it has not helped, then give the patient two fingers of vinegar; then raise the head and make a cautery or a moderate cautery using olive oil; and make two cauteries of the cautery called the "clavilis" upon the two corners of the eyes, one between the eyebrows; and be careful not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the fat of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called “olivare”.
de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is like this
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have cauterized twice on the same part as long as the hairs are; do not leave the hand there until a third of the fat has burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	like those that prick the oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never have I seen that hair oils are converted into beard oil, prick the oil, and it makes cautery in three ways: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in a comfortable position; after that mark on the skin the area where the hair has been plucked out with a figure that is as large as the fuel of a mouse, or as the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put a damp cloth over the oil and a little powder of bruise on the surface, and then cauterize with this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing at the mark you have shown, and a few times more, that the hair should be as it is; and the sign of the work’s completion is that you see the master withdraw, and the hair raised to the point of the oil; then you must hold your hand, and leave it thus for two days, and put a moist cloth in the wound until the swelling has gone down; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hair comes out, and the master is softened, then you must repeat the cautery on that very place as you did before; and if the hair is plucked out, if the cautery is done until the master returns to his natural position, and is even, and does not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hair grow long and even, then make a parchment of the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live chalk, each a third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, if it does not cool down, and put on the shape that you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put on the master’s eggs; and if the patient suffers only from oil, if you must operate in oil, and if there are two of them, put on the cotton wool soaked in oil; and the patient’s head should be in its natural position and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once or twice every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the bite as well as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have performed this for a long time, if the bones are stiff with medicine, you must have it.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite will be passed, if you lift the limb of the shoulder, and you see the fat rise as high as it was before by the contraction of the fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you return to medicine later on the limb or the medicine has not been done, as long as your works are even and your eyes are fixed; then put on a wet cloth in the pit until the hairs are gone, afterwards cure the limb of the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take great care of your work to avoid any need for medicine, as there is no pain, then keep your eyes fixed and do not prick at the base of the hairs.</start_of_turn>
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the patient becomes pale after the hair has been plucked in oil, if you must repeat the medicine on that limb which has become softened by the oil, as you did before; afterwards cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the poultice of mustard.</start_of_turn
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size, and according to that be their constraints; and do not respond to him the right way to him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size, and according to that be their constraints; and do not respond to him the right way to him who is the student of this art.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	And know that when you cure fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases, and your cure does you no good, then you must burn it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in order; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, do not lower his head; afterwards put a piece of cotton soaked in oil of vitriol or in vinegar on the wound; then burn the cautery which is part: and touch it to the wound as if it were a feather of goosefoot, gather it up so that it is worth the work.  If you see that the wound is pointed from one side to the other, or if you see that it is as if a thread were torn; but in any case, that which is touched is more worth than your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells out, and in its course it becomes soft and dry; when it is closed, if the swelling, and in its course it drives out the hair; after that, put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand over the cautery at the part where there is no feeling in the neighbourhood of the oil, so that your hand does not tremble; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and compress it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you begin the cautery treatment right up to the bone, that would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not happen, if you begin the cautery once more, and this time you succeed, and leave it for three days; after that put on moist cotton wool around the wound and let the drying dressing cure until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and leave it as it comes in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cautery for fistula of which no ancient author has spoken
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fistula, and open the cavity; after that put into the opening one camel’s eye of gut which is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I do it in the amount of a third of a palm; and hold your hand or forearm firmly, and the patient does not move a finger, until the melted wax drains down to its oil; and it is fitting to put on the oil to the patient a soft cotton swab in the palm of the hand or on the forearm. The wax if it is too hard makes a fistula, and the same for mere curiosity without any benefit.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if that does not suffice, if you must administer a pierce to the bone, and bring the fistula back to the bone as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of bone cracks in the limbs
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are fractures in bones that are called "hair" and sometimes in limbs of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fractures as we have said in dislocations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off [the bone] with a small burn cautery as in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the limb firmly in these fractures until it is healed; after the cure is finished, the limb must be made whole once more
de l’aposteme de la goule	to the apex of the shoulder
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the swelling comes up to the root of the gullet or the eye, or the palate, or the root of the teeth, after that it must be perforated and drained and becomes filled and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not be of any benefit: therefore it must be that you cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; after that drain or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or back; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you would do in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	When the swelling comes up to the root of the gullet or the eye, or the palate, or the root of the teeth, after that it must be perforated and drained and becomes filled and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not be of any benefit: therefore it must be that you cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; after that drain or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or back; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you would do in its chapter.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you must cure it with medicine and that will be of no use, therefore put the patient’s head in your hand; after that wash the cautery which will form later on in part as if you were putting on a pin; and put some cautery inside the tooth immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that let go of your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; after that fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse vigorously.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part for this reason, when it is confirmed that the limb was moving, the soft tissue softens and contracts, and the moisture becomes dry.
de la dolor des dens	And in part for this reason, when it is confirmed that the limb was moving, the soft tissue softens and contracts, and the moisture becomes dry.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures are of no avail, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two methods: cautery of the burn and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	If the burn is such that you take a burr of beech, and put the end in a spoon of iron or steel; then take cotton and wrap over the point of a needle, and moisten with oil, and put over the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cool; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth.  And if you see that there is too much moisture and cotton on the burr, take off the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery is applied with fire if it is like a burnt cane of iron or flax, and let it be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient’s mouth; after that, burn the cautery, so that it forms like this afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be great as much on one side as on the other
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you must make the patient swallow well with good soft food in the heat of this cautery, and then draw out the tongue forcefully; that is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Do as you please with the cautery, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	And the size of the wound on the penis and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these wounds or chieftains and there is no moisture, or if these are old wounds which I have cauterized or chieftains from an old woman; and find the wound just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if no blood appears, we must make just as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, because these which come from the groin and from the roots of the ears, the opening must be made if it is at all possible every day, in order to prevent the swelling; and the treatment must be made as it is fitting.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the lymph nodes are filled with phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery from this place afterwards; and make two incisions for the smoke to escape from the other side; and place the cautery hot upon the abscess once, or if it is mixed, until it reaches the head of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days; and place upon it a moist compress until the swelling is bony. Then cure the wound of abscesses and sutures until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The formation of the cancer.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines; after that, perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go down further than the throat, and do not prick more than is necessary.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I do another cautery at the neck joint at the head of the scapula, and the cautery which is called the "clevis" because of its shape; and cure the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture prevails over the veins due to a cold complexion, then it is recommended that the patient be first treated with soothing medicines; after that, perform the cautery at the root of the jaw, and keep it from reaching the throat, and do not be afraid of causing pain only in this place. After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the neck and the head of the scapula, and this cautery is called the "clavile" because it has the shape mentioned before; cure the wound as mentioned above until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and maladies of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dry sweat, and is an ancient disease, then make three cauteries on the forcele bones in the veins; and another cautery between two nipples; or make the cautery which is called the "claw" according to the shape which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do a cautery by pricking at the whole of the cautery which is called the "points" because of its shape in the disease of the ears; and be the points until XXX, or until they are bent.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that, cure the limb as we have said above, and be the cautery three times according to this shape:</start_of_turn
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these cauteries are lighter, because you make two at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, lie the patient on his back and on his chest; then take hold of the thumb which is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, if you see the cautery which has about nine inches of length, do not hesitate:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the thumb until it reaches the chest, and the limb would be freed from the cautery altogether. Three cauteries are made in this way; and because it is done with the cautery which has two nicks, because the figures of cauterization are situated one over the other, and the nerves are in accordance with the subtlety of an attempt and this is the form of the cautery which has two nicks.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture adjusted upon this nerve because there are seven cauteries there.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then put on the cautery over the broiled flesh with silk; then rest the patient, and do not keep the limb tense for a long time until it is well comforted.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if there is displacement below, whatever the cause, do a cautery above the edge of the "clevis" cautery, or several pricks.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When the stomach brings cold fevers and moisture to the surface, while it expels it, there is an increased discharge at the same time, and these are customary methods of treatment, but it does not help; therefore it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Afterwards, there are three cauteries of the first degree to be made on the inside of the navel towards the outside, with the quantity of a hazelnut; at every cautery there should be a claw, and two cauteries of the second degree to be made on the two costae as long as the figures of the cauteries are at a right angle, and there should be space between one and the other so that they do not join together when they swell; and let the cauteries be so strong that they cause the two parts of the kidney to swell, and let the figure of the cauteries resemble this form in its entirety.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if thou seest cauterize with a great cautery in the belly following this form; and that one who hath fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and sign upon the belly thereby; as much as thou seest of the hair; then cauterize to the end of the cautery which is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the cure which we have had before, as long as it is well.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of fruit and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion by the superabundances; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, if he is not left quiet on his habit; and sign of hair three cauteries following this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, driving away the spleen, the liver or the guts of the man comes; and let between each cautery the thickness of a hazelnut; and let the cautery be long as the horn of a beetle, and do not press too hard with your hand over all the cautery; and let only half of the burn be visible, and let the patient lie on his side; and if he cannot, if let him be still, and extend his legs, and keep his arms crossed; and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you are hasty, if you cauterize these sensitive cauteries, if you are prudent and skilled in the art, and you take care that you do not burn all the hair, because you are afraid of drying out the body; and that it does not swell up, because the hair is too subtle in that place, and the wounds must be seen.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is swelling of the liver, and you know whether it is in the belly or the loin: if it is in the belly, the patient feels little pain; and if it is in the loin, the pain is severe.</start_of_turn>
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is finished, if you think the patient is cured on his head; then sign with ink the place where the vein or abscess was opened, and then burn the cautery that is similar in shape: that is the form.</start_of_turn
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cauterize while the hair is thick and even, and come until the root is quite strong; after that, cure as for ordinary wounds until they are healed; and I advise you of this cautery that it must only be used by one who has studied long and diligently in the art of medicine, for by whom these diseases have never been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, he must be very cautious, and in my opinion it seems that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	because of the fire of the cautery.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make with tears the cautery of roots of aristologists, and in part: take a root of aristologist long, the greatest that thou shalt find, and be dry, and be as thick and as long as thy thumbs; and the slime in oil, and the print to the fire, and cauterize. I. cautery between the forces and the heel, and II. small cauteries one at a time descending in the part which is under the beard; and III. cauterize between the fifth rib and the breastbone, declining behind one at a time; and I. cautery in the navel, and I. another on the stomach, and I. between two ribs, and I. two costae do pis defend the cautery which is between two ribs. And do not press me your hand, but make it open as much as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no former has ever used a fire cautery like this raiser, and has put alum and has put it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and there is great pain in this, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient dies immediately, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	The mouse is small and harmless,
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it brings no profit, then there remain two methods of cautery which you must use.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you make three cauteries, or four, and bind them according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the foie cautery which we have said before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient rest on his back; and another method of cautery is if you remove the hair which has two ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and keep the nail which is in the place of the hair, or the edges of the patient’s wound come from the left, and lift up what you bind to the nail according to the nail, according to the length of the bone, and the cautery according to the width of the bone.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, if two nerves are inflamed so that the knuckles are perceived from the other side, then draw out the cautery quickly, and there will be three left. And if you see, if you cauterize all three nerves at once.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the cure has grasped by long tension, and this is worth as much as the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not worth hydrotherapy, except for the method which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the methods we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make three cauteries around the buttock, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the groin; and let the cautery be very close to the edge of the wound
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery over for a long time to cool, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will speed up, and the two joints will be reunited with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the belly cautery is like the key we have shown you; and that on the back is olive-shaped, as it is shown here.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the pieces
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the thumb and index finger are swollen in a hydropic person, and are filled with yellow citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the middle phalanx between the metacarpal and proximal phalanx; and keep your hand steady with the cautery toward you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep into the wound, for otherwise you would burn the yellow citrine, and let the cautery be as follows:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two incisions on the thigh in the crease of the knee; and let the cauteries be of moderate length, one of them on the front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the thigh; and leave the cauteries over a long distance in order to cure them, that they may be fixed; after that, perform the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After that, make two incisions on the thigh in the crease of the knee; and let the cauteries be of moderate length, one of them on the front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the thigh; and leave the cauteries over a long distance in order to cure them, that they may be fixed; after that, perform the other cures that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, as the retaining and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is drained, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and very pale, if you make a great cautery on the stomach as has been said above or a cautery of the stomach, to the cautery that circulates; and three cauteries around the spleen at every cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the nipple [areola], and on each areola, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the breast, because the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the nipple [areola], and on each areola, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the breast, because the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When there are hemorrhoids, or swelling, or one or more, and they are old and are of thick cold and moist humors, corrupted, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does no good to burn them: three on the spine of the back, which is all that is beyond the buttocks at the almonds, and one burn on the buttocks two below; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling of the face, then you must make a large burn on the face, as it has been said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with the whole burn clamp; and leave the burn open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling on the face, then immediately apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and one on the spleen with all the nails of the cautery; and leave the cautery on for a long time. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you feel the swelling of the armpit, if you pull out the cautery which appears to be scraping, and then put it all in again on that swelling which is felt; and leave it until the hand is as limp as the cautery has gone up from the vein, without straining; do this once or twice; and if there is much swelling of the armpit, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after that cure the wounds that remain profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the armpit, there will be more effective aid.
de plaie mal curee	From wound not properly cured
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate the size or opening of the wound, as we have mentioned before, if any other illness comes upon him which cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and is swollen and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, if the surgeon has already made a slight incision, and has kept that she has made as much as she can, let her leave it as much as she can.</start_of_turn>
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After removing the cautery which appears to have raised the wound, and having placed it in the fistula according to the amount that she has entered, restart the cautery until the burnt flesh and corrupted matter are consumed; once, or twice, or thrice, according to the amount of smoke required; and take care not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.</start_of_turn
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes towards the bladder and the intestine, if you take care of these parts, and do not make this fire too fierce, think that it is not very dangerous; after treatment, let the limb be sound, and if the parts are solid and tough, say that the limb is completely healed; and if the parts are not solid, say that the limb has been twisted, and that the bone has been fractured.</start_of_turn
de la maladie des reins	Of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from the flanks comes with vomiting and great wind, and does not take a woman’s hand, then it is to be known that it must be cauterized over the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery needle which we have mentioned beforehand; and if we cauterize it in the middle, if there are two cauteries in line, it will do more good.</start_of_turn>
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is swollen and weak from pain and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then it must be cauterized on the lower part above the bladder, where the hair ends and the skin begins, and be done at the front and back, and with two cauteries as long as a thumb; and make one cautery on the back or two if necessary; and make the cautery needle according to the form mentioned above.</start_of_turn
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow me to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if there is great pain: then it is necessary to make two incisions around the joint, as we have said or cautery of the bladder, and three incisions on the back; or the cautery of the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
de la hainche	De la hainche.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and because of this the limb becomes stiff; the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the limb is stiff in the groin, if one must cauterize the patient on the hip joint at the circle, and make a sign in front of the limb around the hip if it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and if the cautery is made as it should be, like that which we have cauterized the stomach.</start_of_turn
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two cautery marks of the olive tree kind, and let the cautery marks be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two cautery marks of the olive tree kind, and let the cautery marks be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, due to cold and moisture, the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division; and the cure is not worth it, for the disease is old: therefore it is necessary to purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills, or other solid pills that are similar.</start_of_turn>
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is two: namely, together with medicines that are burned, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is two: namely, together with medicines that are burned, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is performed in two ways: sometimes as follows: three triangular cauteries are made on the hip joint according to this shape, and sufficient depth and extent are made, and between each cautery there is placed the thickness of an olive, either olive cautery or otherwise. It is never made in the middle of the hip joint, for there are three according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery is made upon the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is parallel to the brim.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and three cauteries are to be made below the ankle, one on the left side; either the cautery is fine, or the surface is rough like a wart. And if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers or almost to the knee, if he feels pain at three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the patient persists in his mischief, if the pain has extended from the knee to the thigh, let the physician perform cautery with the blunt or circular cautery, and take good heed of all your cauteries, neither leaving the cautery on too long nor burning the nerves and great arteries, and inflict no further pain and contraction upon the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was completely gone, and the bone was also fractured, and was perforated and corrupted throughout the bone.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which there is death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the doctors say concerning the cautery of the groin, that thus it should be done: make I like this with the tip as large as a nutmeg, or less, and with tweezers or from one tweezers to the other, spacing out the amount of a bean; and let the tweezers cover two parts, and be as nails, and there should be one inch of iron well made; this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And so, if the wound is completely red and pulsates with sensitivity, place it on the sufferer’s hip box; and turn it against the sufferer’s side; and cauterize once. Let it remain for two days; then make an embolus of wool, and leave the wound open for a long time. After that, treat the swelling until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that our methods for using this cautery are too rough, and that we see those who use it often; and all of them are scarred bones, which can suffer from it, and there is where they are careful.</start_of_turn>
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine is thus done when you make I instrument with tweezers in which descends the margin of the door, and be of linen or iron with one end long, and at the height there are II nails, and between each there is the amount of the thickness of a thumb; and be open upwards and downwards, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the basin of the shoulder on the patient who is lying on his side, and pressing your hand down on the basin of the shoulder; then pour between the two circles of the arm warm which is heated on the fire once, and leave it for an hour with tension, and offer the patient the heat and the burning sensation of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is true biting also with fire; and when the biting has passed, keep your hand with the instrument and lift the arm gently, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment as long as the black of the eschar is osteitis; and leave it for three days until it is healed. And that would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is sane.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds the arm following what you have done in the shoulder immediately; and this is the manner of the warm arm, and I have written or treated it of the rectification of medicine.</start_of_turn
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live broth, equal parts of each, and grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And when there is too much water and it is administered with medical remedies and other cauteries of other members. For it makes parts overheat like fires, and if there are other medicines of which we cauterize well the hair at the root as with mustard and honey and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some men were cured of the pain of the groin and sciatic nerve, and he praised the Lord, and said that no other cure had been made, and that they were healed at one time when this cure was performed, and that he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in part that you take two green and fresh barley grains, and grind them with a little fat, and put them on the groin, thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind them; and leave them for three hours, forasmuch that the patient does not feel the burning sensation anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter or bathe until the flesh is slightly swollen, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away and be healed
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And wounds that no one must use fire cautery of such medicines, except after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And thus Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with pieces of sponge, if it helps moisture; and must be done cautiously.</start_of_turn>
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and soak it in oil abundantly, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the great toe and the one that is called the fossicle.</start_of_turn
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry pieces of sponge, burn them over fire until they are charred, and put them on the lint, and leave them until they are stained; and do this several times, and do not stop doing it until you think that enough has been done until the swelling has gone down and the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "sponge cautery".</start_of_turn
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things of cold expanding matter, none of these symptoms is worth resorting to cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is devoid of foul pills or other things of the like, that one should make three lines signed with a needle on the back, in the loin or in the place where the pain persists; and make three or four cauteries as much as the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called the "needle"; and if you see that it is necessary, make two or three cauteries at the middle of the cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it has burst open the underlying flesh as soon as it appears, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and on us appears what comes after the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns a part of the spine excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the burn penetrates to the spine too much, cauterize around the spine two or three lines from the point where the burn penetrates. Keep the points close to each other.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the burn is done, keep the limb sound as we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery too close to the nerves.</start_of_turn
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture that swells every limb, and when pain originates from the bone itself, that is when the sufferer cries out "podagre" in pain; and when the cause is cold and the disease does not yield to medicine, if it is cured by cautery in part: make a mouth of cautery around the joint of the limb, and let the cautery be of olive oil in this fashion:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you make the burn with all the cautery, say "point".</start_of_turn
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the joints and other parts, and this happens often, make the burn on each joint three times with the olive cautery; and if you must do more, make more, but do not hold your hand too long in case the burn gets burned.</start_of_turn
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pain is as far as the hands, if you prick twice at the base of the nail; and if there remains no pain after that, prick once on each joint and on the root of the hand; and if the pain comes down to the buttocks or the shoulder blades, burn a part of it, and give good governance to the patient and prescribe medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the disease
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the scapula is fractured, and the bones descend as coions, it is new; if you see it cured, do not trust that it is healed; and if it uses things that release its belly, so that the pain descends from its belly; then make it sit on its buttocks between your hands, and command that it hold its flank until the bones are repaired, and keep it still at your thighs, and mark with a sign on the edge of the fracture above the collarbone, and do all that is like half a circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery like this:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as he is limp and has a dull sensation.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then bind the limb to its place; and he holds your hand so that it does not slip back; and work well the wound on the patient, and put a cushion under his elbow and under his thumb, and another under his wrist; then put the cautery on the sign at the whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you burn the bone, and if you do not reach the bone the first time, try again another time as long as you live until you reach the bone; and be wary that the limb does not swell when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this means the patient does not die, or any other evil
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And soaks that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be known that the cautery of small wounds must be subtle in measure, and of great people also great in measure; after three days cure the body of the burn until the scab is bony; after that cure other ailments until they are healed; and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it must be known that their movements must be restful, so that the swelling does not arise when he walks to his bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be carried in a good litter, and carry him for forty days more; and let him rest well, that he work little and take care of himself not to eat too much or drink too much, and not to eat too coarsely; and when he has learned this he will be entirely healed
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell you afterwards about the treatment of the heel in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the root of the belly</start_of_turn>
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come from other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, if you do not prick them with the cautery at their root, hold the eyes steadily as they do not move until they grow.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the wound and make a line along the width of the wound, and another beyond, and hold your hand firmly with all your might.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in no limb</start_of_turn
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether of bone or flesh, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical treatment is not sufficient, then it is recommended to cauterize with the cautery called “pointed,” and to cauterize according to the length of the limb, its width and thinness, its toughness and its capacity for twisting and its pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the cautery upon that one, for it is customary that it must move to the adjacent limb, so that you may make the cauteries while the patient is sane.
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, or from sitting or from any other cause, and the pain persists for a long time, the remedy of medicine is not sufficient; therefore it is advised that it be cauterized with the cautery known as "poins," or with such cautery as is appropriate for the length of the limb, its width and weakness, its flexibility and its location of torsion and its pain. If it is successful on the first cautery, well and good; if not, repeat it. Indeed, it is customary that it must move towards the limb that is nearest, because it is believed that thus one can make the cauteries as long as the patient remains healthy.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are never aided by cautery in any way, and even the disease which comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay, for you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole disease; then make five cauteries on the head: one at the new root, and the other towards the front at the end of the beard; and two on the two corners, and one behind on the shoulder; and leave as much hand as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as much as the scabs fall out so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before you
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if there is a general looseness of the humors throughout; and it becomes manifest, as it is fitting that you should cauterize with these cauteries which we have mentioned or chief, that is to say, cauterize on the low side of the neck, and two on the spine of the shoulder, three on the spine of the back, and one great one on the armpit and one other below, two on the two scapulae, two on the flanks, two on the tendons of the wrist and hand, and one on every joint of the fingers and toes, and on the fossae of the hands; and be wary of the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the heel or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And so it is that the more the physician makes use of the cautery, the more he renders aid, and the more he profits; and so it is that the patients feel no pain from the cautery as much as if they were feeling no pain at all, for the flesh is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the cautery must be great and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you find in the handling of things.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment with flour poultices several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and dressings, and it is not well, then one must cauterize the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery penetrate deeply as much as the nerve; and then cure with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never must the cautery be performed with the hand and the arm and the back, at the issue of a nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is bony it swells; and in any case nothing must intervene between them unless one is familiar with the limb and the issues of the moving nerves and bones.
de albaras	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils and plasters, and is not completely healed, then one should make cautery on the limb according to the size and degree of the swelling; and let the cautery be performed at a distance from the bone. Then cure with ointments until it is healed. And under no circumstances should cautery be done on the hand, foot or back, at the exit of a nerve that makes the limb numb. And if it is a bone that causes the swelling, nothing should interfere except for those who are skilled in bones and the issues of nerves that move the limb.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and medicine has no power over it, then one should make cautery with a needle at a distance, according to the thickness of the swelling, until the blood is seen to bleed, and let it bleed; then cure with flour of wheat from time to time, with lentils and rose oil, and plantain leaves, and colon and aloe, half of each; mix them all together and bind them with a bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil comes to the beginning, and you see it stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all these people say that one must burn at the middle of the boil; and all these things do not seem good to me, because I fear that it will ulcerate and become corrupted, and I would rather leave it alone never to do it again; and the better thing is to burn around it, with the cautery which is called the "circle", as we have said before.</start_of_turn
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has an ailment which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing or because of the excess it makes or because of the swelling of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and there is a lot of blood, or for fear; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of the small cauteries by pricking; and afterwards leave it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if thou seest her perish with all the cautery, if thou dost burn the cautery too much: this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perceived the heat, and be such cauteries that the patient feels a tingling in part as the course of the decay is joyous.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards cure as long as it is perfectly sound
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," and is nothing but the eating away of a limb, for it causes the limbs to swell as if by fire.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb which you can treat with fire cautery, then burn the nails small and great according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; after you have cauterized all the parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains of it except the bone itself.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized parts ointment with oil so that the blisters from the fire become ossified, and all the corruption
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of oily substances which cause swelling.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the hair has not begun to grow back, it is good; and if this does not happen, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this symptom is never cured by ordinary medicine; but indeed fire cautery is of greater help. As I have already said in the division, take as much as you need of it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The burn cure by iron. Another method of disease that is called "corrodens" and is nothing but the weakening of a limb, for it causes the limbs to swell as much as the flames do to dry linen. If you see this disease in a limb that can suffer from an overall burn, then cover the small and great nails closely together according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; then burn all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains but bone. And then leave it for two days, and put on the burned limbs and burn with oil until the burn blisters are ossified, and all the corruption is gone. After the cure of the wounds that remain. And if after two days the wound has not healed, it is good; and if this is not the case, repeat the burn on what remains of the corrupted limbs. This weakening is never cured by water medicine instead of fire burn; but every burn is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of water medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there arises a disease called “clos” according to our understanding, and it is a great burden that boils up like blood
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire if it is that you are shaving I cautery cheveit as well as is a pin of wool, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the head of all parts, and that there be subtle margins; after that put all around above the head as far as it goes to the front of the head; and leave it for three days until it begins to ooze pus; then make an embolus of wild mallow broth with wool, and leave the embolus on all night, and close the wound tightly and it will be healed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound by stretching the skin until it is sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by boils many times happen and on hands and in feet, if you must know that you must bring an aqua cautery of hot water; and this is in part: take a sickle of barley or iron, or a pin of wool, and put on the wound and the dressing, that is to say, nails of barley; and put the sickle on so that it pinches all around, then put a little of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand by turning so that the margin of the sickle comes to the root of the wound, and can find the hot water going deep just to the root; and give the patient a little dose of the hot water an hour; then leave it like that, and it will break out all at once at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do another after the other, until you have scraped off all that is on the body, then cure the wounds that cause carbuncles.
li cure dou trembler	you cure the tremor.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When the limbs tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or from any other, if you command .iiij. cautery or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between the shoulder blades; and .i. cautery or pinch, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them to tremble, they will haste the healing of the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	When the limbs tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or from any other, if you command three or four cautery marks on the spine of the back, one cautery mark between the shoulder blades; and one cautery mark or pinch, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them to tremble, they will haste the healing of the cold sickness.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear by discharges the body bathes, or boils filled with pus, that come from corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it be convenient at the first when they appear that we make cautery upon every head of the abscess: a subtle cautery of mustard seed, so that the point be grasped by the fire, or of aristegall root long, or the lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never before we cauterize when they appear, according to this manner, that they do not cross forward, but are broken by the fluid from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.</start_of_turn
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	When the artery is cut, there is often a great outflow of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is often a matter of great distress.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming down your thumb, and no blood comes out anymore; then take some olive oil cautery pieces, small and large as you like, until they are all red; then press [it] in, that is to say, large or small as is suitable for the wound and the limb in which the artery is obstructed, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as necessary.</start_of_turn
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out violently when you take your thumb away from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of another cautery that is already on the fire immediately.</start_of_turn
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the limb is restored; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and do this with such care that when the artery is large, it can be closed by itself without any other method than those we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to close the wound. And be certain to bind and strain afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about the restoration of the limb with tight draping or with the placing of hot things upon it, or other similar things, will gain no benefit from it unless it is of use in this case
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no remedy and no medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it still until it is healed from the wound and from the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that the wound is not frozen and does not swell and heal; and make inquiries of what is necessary to cauterize and administer medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ci encourag le second livre des cures de taille.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already said or in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or to apply hot medicine, and to inquire about the odium, the cause, the instruments, and the forms of the cautery; and in this chapter we shall speak of the treatment of wounds from the chest to the foot, and I shall deal with this matter in the same way as before, for it is easier for me to speak of these things in order.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, as I begin this chapter, I must tell you, dear sir, that there is more peril and fear in this chapter than in the previous one concerning cautery, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not act rashly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many times people come to grief through rashness.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have suffered so greatly from their ailments that they move lightly from the fear of their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and of these things we must have fear.</start_of_turn>
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these things there are those who will tell you: “Wait, I am strong enough”; and the disease is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not enough for me that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner; but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly delay but prudently from what you are certain, and from what you have taken and lost; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either restored or converted; and this will help you to obtain good renown, glory, and memory in the long run.</start_of_turn>
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords, you are doing well to understand and to grieve, and if you are stirred by the Holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’à piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have ordered from the chief until the foot, because you will find it lighter than what you have had to bear
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have ordered from the chief until the foot, because you will find it lighter than what you have had to bear.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen such a disease leave so quickly as in the countryside; and all those whom I have seen with it grow desperate. For this reason, it seems to me that it is worth omitting the work in parts for the cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have often seen children in whom the head of the shoulder was dislocated by moisture, and the head grew so large that it could not be supported; and there was such great moisture that it became blood, and this moisture if it is collected between the bones above the elbow and the bones below, and the work is done when the moisture is between the elbow and the bones, and the incision is small, that you must make a large incision; and it must be as long as this moisture has lasted.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If moisture swells the bone, and you see the teeth of the jaw protruding outwards in a portion, and there is an acute pain when you press with your hand from within, and this does not subside: if you suspect that the jaw is fractured, make two incisions as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out all the moisture with force.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After that, drain the blood clots and humours, and pour wine and oil, and leave it until the fifth hour; then remove it, and close the wound with sutures and stitches, and leave the head exposed, and give the patient dry meat in place of the moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look or open the opening of the abscess, and the collection of fluid; for never is it before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.</start_of_turn>
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides murió dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	If the vein or the artery is opened, and the liquid is instilled, and you do as you please; but beware that you do not cover the artery; and let blood flow freely, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding and discharge of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no other disease which is called "catarrh" which has pus or swelling, and when the disease is old and medicine cannot cure it, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which will cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary then, that you do not cover the patient’s head; after that, wipe the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open; then pull out the patient’s neck with all your might; then look to see if the vein has burst, and the upper and lower lips are below the ears, and if so, restore them; then mark the places of the sutures, and close one and the other with a needle of two parts, until the size of the vein reaches the bone, which is done by means of the large head of the needle
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, loosen the tweezers from the artery and join at the top, cutting as much as two thumbs together.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is joined, if you do not hold it steadily, it will immediately burst.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open on feeling, if you deem it necessary, measure the amount of space of three fingers, then mark and hold until the bone; whatever it is that you must force out blood if it is six cubits, and more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the refilling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains over the point where the artery was pierced, if the edges of the incision do not meet, then strain the wound and bind it, and cure the bleeding until it stops.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open on examination, if you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers' breadth, then mark the point and proceed until you reach the bone; and what you must do is apply pressure if it is more than two finger-breadths, or less. According to what the patient can tolerate and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the wound that you have made does not bleed, then strain the wound and tie it, and leave it to heal.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient secretion comes and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the chalor in the temples and the old saliva forsened and similar things, it is medicated by means of medical cures and all that does not help, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is as follows: if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating; and when it is opened, strain his neck the patient with some cloths, then wipe the area of no rough hair, and raise the area of warm water until the artery opens clearly; then take the sponge and that is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently pull away the skin until you reach the artery, then hold it high with forceps, and remove the dressing from the area below the wound; and if the artery is delicate, if the nail has caught on the bone, then close that part according to the quantity of two fingers.</start_of_turn>
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not fixed, if I do not jump with all my might.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from .vj. cubits, just up to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it is convenient to ligate it in .ij. loops with a strong thread of silk, so that no blood will be seen before the wound is sutured; and withdraw blood steadily. Then cut away the excess that is between the .ij. loops in that middle hour, and if you see that, if you wish, cauterize with a fine cautery needle until the blood is clotted; and that is the perfect remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful in finishing off moisture: for this reason it is of greater aid than moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the cavity with much cotton and make good stitches; and when one removes them, if one has cured with dry medicines which cause new hair and stitches, as long as it is healthy; and if without support of the artery as much as one does work, if you are in a hurry to cover with cautery, or if you use the cavity of vitriol and strain your hand, as it should be; and if you do not have this present, if you must take out the cavity, you must do so while the vessel is not frozen, and rise the cold water until the vessel stops moving, and strain as it should be; and what is more painful and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from a third to a fourth of an inch, but the cutting should be well spaced to prevent it from lasting too long.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have between the joints a space of one inch; then when you have signified the nails, let the loop burn until it reaches the bone, and close the vein with two nails; and let them be spaced between the joints, for they are not firmly joined by this cautery in all cases; and this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	And must have between the joints a space of one inch; then when you have signified the nails, let the loop burn until it reaches the bone, and close the vein with two nails; and let them be spaced between the joints, for they are not firmly joined by this cautery in all cases; and this is the form of the cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the test of the chief of force, and it does not profit from any medical cure what is done, and you see the face of the patient to become swollen, and to feel or front ambulation as if of fear; and so are they tense and moist if the paper tissues are held together, and are shaken by the heat of the tears, if there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For if it is not fixed, if I do not jump with all my might. And they call it the ancient "cure contuse", and you must make the patient who has this disease grow the hair as long as it has front, then make three incisions or as many as are equal in length according to the length of the front; and let one of the incisions be as two should all encompass the front swallowing down as much as the juice until it is almost healed, and the others two as two costles from above the papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are as two costles from above the papers; and keep your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and be attentive to any wound of the quantity of three must pass through the joints; and have learned a piece of sponge and a mouth of cloth to wipe away the blood, then apply the sponge tightly of two parts of the way that is the form.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is at the root of the temple until the second incision; and scrape away all the marrow which is between the two incisions to the outer side of the bone, then make the other half of the wound until the other second, and then remove this sponge.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first fissure the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", which is very well-trenched on one side and on the other is soft, do not trench, for that is the shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the scalpel towards the armpit at the shoulder, and the cutting edge towards the bone, and hold firmly until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut through the veins that descend from the head as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches the armpit, and then do the rest in the middle fissure until the other edge; then draw out the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken; then put in the wound a piece of cotton about the size of a thumb, and put on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and bandage, and keep that the incisions do not swell; and after a third remove the ligature, and give great doses of cold water, then cure the wound with basic ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou reume des eulz	because of repeated bleeding
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no acute cautery is used, you see the pupils tense and small, the vision blurred, and papers burn; and the hair grows, and when it is plucked, there is severe pain, and the patient coughs; then blood comes from these accidents, from many veins, and the cure is that which is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And commandest thou the patient to raise his face, then make a great wound beneath the brow, and another wide one here below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commandest thou the patient to raise his face, then make a great wound beneath the brow, and another wide one here below. Begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision down to the bone; and take hold of the nerves of the temples that move downwards; and when the bone is discovered, if there is blood, drain it all with a sponge, and then dress between the two layers of the wound and put in cotton wool, and try to keep it in place; then lay over wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it from moving about; when it is set, it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then cure it with drying things that make it callous.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part: take .ij. parts of rue flower and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to make swelling disappear throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	... of the swelling of the ear.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is found in the ear is either grains or best or stone or metal; or seed such as peas, beans, barley; or something fluid such as pus or blood and other things.</start_of_turn>
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he bites in the earlobe or any other way that does not fit my ear, do not put it in the ear, but hold the earlobe to the sole.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the earlobe, if it discharges no violet oil or poppy seed oil, then order extraction; and make him spit out any phlegm, and wipe his nose when he spits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear down.</start_of_turn>
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, order extraction with fine needles, for this is the form.</start_of_turn>
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by itself, that is good; if not, we must extract it with fine tweezers. If it does not come out by itself, we make an incision of small double thickness; and if it still does not come out, we make an injection of laudanum and cut off the chief of the injection or pierce the ear very much, and stamp what is around the injection with butter if it comes out with the injection; and the pain often comes out by itself; and if it does not come out partially, we take hold of the olecranium and put on no instrument that may cause damage, and put a little plug of cotton around; then we press on the olecranium above the stone or whatever it is, and the pain comes out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things do not suffice, if you are in haste to make an incision, do not hesitate to pierce the earlobe along with the abscess cavity. In such a case, if you make the incision first at the crown of the head, drain blood in proportion to the measure of its virtue. Then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty tissue or cartilage below. Make the incision as wide as a moon until you reach the bone, then remove the bone according to your ability, and extract the pus immediately to your mouth; and cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If grains are swollen and painful, administer extraction; if it cannot be extracted, administer opium in the form of pounded poppy seeds according to this fashion:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order incision of that hair.</start_of_turn>
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think the hair is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract with fine needles and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.</start_of_turn
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear aches, it is certain that the patient uses too much vinegar at first, and fills the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Or the pain is in the ear itself or the ear is affected.</start_of_turn>
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If the ear is seized up for this reason, it is good.</start_of_turn
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this is not the case, if the patient has many stones in the ear according to the length of time they have been there, and they are stubborn and cannot be expelled, and if you can see that the patient has pus in the ear, and if you pull out one piece from one side and put in another piece from the other side, and do this until the pain is gone; and if you see that the pain has gone, pull out the pieces one by one until the pain is gone, as we have said concerning the stone.</start_of_turn
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the stone, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, if there is danger of extraction of teeth; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you cure it as we have said in the division and or treat with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, if you must know that the ear is exposed to the sun: if there are no worms to be seen, if there are subtle teeth, and if there are none to be seen, take the tweezers that are like this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the wound be wide and deep.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And leave the wound more subtle above the ear in proportion to the amount of suffering of the patient, then afterwards do whatever seems necessary; do this often until you see that all the pus comes out.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if it does not obey, if I push in the cotton around the wound as I have said in the stone; and if it does not come out as we have said, give distillations that the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, this is the form that you see.</start_of_turn
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let the dressing be of silver or lead, wide and loose. That is, small losses, and above all let there be distillations; and let there be pressing from this instrument of lead well made for this purpose. And if you see a splinter and wrap around the point immediately with cotton wool; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the dressing, and put the dressing in the ear; and press from within the splinter to the bottom of the cotton wool, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or almost from the ear; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	... of the swelling of the ear.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some mark on their ear; and the same thing happens as we age from wounds or earwax buildup. These imprints never appear without leaving a mark on the ear, if we do not see them; and never is there any time when one cannot see them.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When these imprints appear without being seen, it is a sign of great suffering in many cases, and in this instance it is seen that you put the painful ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the pus, if the wound has all the surrounding pus like this, then it is formed like that.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be cautious both front and back all around, if the ear does not bleed; if the pus is of earwax or from a wound in the ear, if you have subtle bruises, and if the swelling is slight, as long as the tumor is entirely bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the incisions are inflamed in the ear, take a slight scraper and burnish a little with fire, then put in or remove the earwax.</start_of_turn
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling which the patient feels at the ear, prick it lightly, and hold only the edge of the ear; then put in the ear a plug according to the size of the perforation, and the pus in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this without delay until the wound is healed, or you take a piece of lint and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you see it fleeing from the ear, it is likely that you have pulled out the piece of lint and put in another piece of lint made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is bony; then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is discharge of blood comes, if you plunge a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures which are useful for loosening the discharge of blood which are either to apply poultices.
de la char des papieres	De la char des papiers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the paper's char. When it comes out of the papers, the blood comes out of the eyes when they are moist and dry; if you extend them from their nails and from their roots, and support them with a spatula at their root; then take out the broken glass piece.</start_of_turn>
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without this, if the fire cautery is done with a subtle lentil, and it is cauterized afterwards at the incision, it is enough; and many times it is repeated, so that none of their roots remain fixed; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not recover.</start_of_turn
de la gresle	De la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in paper some things that seem greasy in their form and in their hardness, and because of this is this disease called "granule", and is an assembly of large moisture in the marrow of bones; the work is like this: take guard if the granuloma moves from one side to the other, and that is a light thing to know; then do the following: make the incision wide, then remove the soft tissue lightly, then take hold of the abscess, and drain it.</start_of_turn>
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not perceive with the eye the swelling of the bone, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the fracture is great, if the mass has a curvature, and the cure as long as it is whole; and if it is small, do not do anything violent, for the blood will restore itself quickly and cause harm.</start_of_turn
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulation descends to the depth of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch the granulation with tweezers, and pull from one side and the other; and if the paper is pulled out by the incision, it will not grieve; and when the granulation is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of that which causes pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The oily discharge is enclosed in paper tissues and appears more abundant in women than in men, and causes itching at their eyes, and they come out with morning sickness, and do not dare to look at the sunlight for that the tears hurry away from their eyes; and because they lie with their faces downwards, and sleep on them, and their paper tissues are wet with moisture that swells and appears covered with the oily discharge that comes out in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your chest and feel the oily discharge between your shoulders
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And thus the work is that the patient puts his head in its place; then take one cloth of linen, and make a loop resembling a circle according to the quantity of exinach in the upper part, then put it on; and press on your belly from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered into the circle; then make an incision at the navel, about the size of a wound made to the vein; and do not make it any larger than the wound made to the vein; and stretch the leather as much as you can while you see the exinach. And in many cases comes exinach from the incision, like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out all the fatty tissue from the entire piece of charcoal between your hands at the flanks, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the incision, that you do not go beyond the navel, that you do not stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the dislocation does not spontaneously reduce at the beginning of the incision, if you widen the incision slightly until it opens; then grasp it as we have said, then moisten the drape in oil and water, and place over it, and strain of bending.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such people exist who crush it and put it on to corrupt that moisture that remains immobile
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is safe.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the vein bursts suddenly, the cure of plugging the blood clot is to leave it whole as long as it is steady.
des poilz des papieres	hair of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers are born with hairs attached other than their natural state, and are enclosed, if they irritate the eyes, they cause various diseases like tears that are accustomed to flow and soften papers and gum, as much as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in three ways: either by complete fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or alongside the fire cautery, or it is done by incision and suture or by sutures, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the chief of the patient in your left hand, then draw the paper from the oil at your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a hook at every thread of the paper; either cut the edge of the paper or the hair will grow out from these hairs, and take out one thread from under the paper, and draw it to the end; then make in the lower part of the paper, the hairs attached, at all the breadth from the great tear to the little one; then take out one thread and put under the paper a little patch of cotton and bandage, and sign on the paper a figure like that of a thrush, and all that is necessary is that the figure be according to the quantity you see that the paper that is destined to you is elevated.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If the vein bursts suddenly, the cure of plugging the blood clot is to leave it whole as long as it is steady.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then hold this that which is above down with small forces equally in conformity with the form which is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the teeth firmly, and the thing is not even, take a needle or two and pass a thread through the figure; and pass another thread loosely from the great toe, and the second thread loosely from the little toe, and join the two threads evenly; then stretch your hand evenly, and stretch all the skin over that which you have marked, as we have told; then join the two layers of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and similar soothing dressings. Never again shall there be anything more converted than the hair of a hare: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the sutures in one and the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for armpit hair is as follows: convert the hair and fat according to what has been said, then make three hairs by art, and three fine threads as long as the hair and as wide as a span; and hold two threads of each hand. Then assemble the one and the other securely over that which covers the oil of the hair, and strain the three hairs from the three parts. Leave for a few days, and the skin which has been strained will wither and darken and will fall out, until it comes out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the wound has great force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the arrow is extracted, the hair will not grow again; and this is the form of two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is immediately a thread of silk subtle; then assemble the threads and know each one from the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be equal; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not touch the chief of the thread; then place the patient's chief in its place; and let go of the sun if the work is completed, for this is a subtle and minor work, then withdraw the needle at all the chase to the root of the hair to the joint; and make it pierce in the membrane as much as you can until you have pulled it out from its natural position; then draw out the hair until it reaches the chase, and withdraw the needle from the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then draw out your hand until the vein is completely withdrawn from the chase with the natural position of the hand.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from its piercement through sight of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair has healed in its place and the wound has closed.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the putrefaction of the oil.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction comes to the head, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes about by wound, or by bite, or by cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of working in this is that you make that suture, and dry the flesh, and put in there some linen threads, and keep it until it is healed; and do not do anything except use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but there is need for emollient things, such as fennel; and the rose of water or violet and poppy seeds boiled in any oil, and it wraps around a bandage, and treats it in this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from its former shape; and this work that we have mentioned is not fierce except in addressing this disease, that it does not return differently from its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	De la char qui vient en l’oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called by the swelling that really exists is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that if you grasp an awl, since it has two threads, and the point in the thumb, and it makes pierce the left thumb as much as it has gone astray, so that the thread of the vein comes out at two fingers of the thumb; then extend the thumb from below to the whole awl, and the handle at one large spatulate.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb returns according to what is convenient, that is good; if not, take a saw and put it into the incision, and twist the limb, make two incisions or break through the bone in the middle of the limb; and let the two incisions be at two angles of the incision that you have made, or make one angle so that when they are assembled, the limb is as it is with a letter that does not have "I grieves"; then fix that bone, according to the quantity of its cost and swelling, of that which teaches the limb, then join the two separated parts, and bind them with a thread of silk; then cure this according to what we have said of the mollifying medicines and bands, until it is healed
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a fracture or sprain, or from cautery, then it is to be known that you must make a full incision of the hair with paper; and according to what has been said above; then remove between the two leaves of a book a tenth of an inch, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the surgeons will appear to be very learned in all sorts of things as to how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done in the work and the instruments in greater disposition.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the disease comes from a fracture or sprain, or from cautery, then it is to be known that you must make a full incision of the hair with paper; and according to what has been said above; then remove between the two leaves of a book a tenth of an inch, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the surgeons will appear to be very learned in all sorts of things as to how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done in the work and the instruments in greater disposition.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stiffness comes to the hands at home in a part like that in which the limb of the hand is soothed with oil white, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if it is to be known that you must bite the point of a scraper from the outside of the limb and hold it up; and extend as many times as necessary, until you have reached the part of the nail which is under the callous substance, which should not be too great nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the callous too much and does not bleach the oil; and your incision, which you will make alongside that which is already assembled, must be slightly wider, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and all that is assembled must be secured, and no longer make any cuts in the oily water, but with soft water and vinegar; then put between the limb and the oil a tenth of an inch of linen, and put on the oil wool thickly in abundance; and after that use a little vinegar and other substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the oil of the unguent.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The unguent oil is of two kinds: one is nervous and somewhat dark in color, like pitch; the other is not nervous, but is like solidified moisture, and when touched with iron and warmed, it causes blisters. Both seem to begin to soften towards the great marrow, and spread throughout the body, covering the eyes and the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And as for the method of the incision, if the patient puts his shoulder in its right place, then hold the eyes; then take hold of the oil with your hand, and grasp the hair with tweezers of small double curvature, and stretch it downwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and pierce the hair with the needle, and tie the hair with a thread and stretch it downwards, and drain at all times the surrounding area of the oil that surrounds the nail and the hair up to the root, and leave the natural discharge or secretion, if there is no crust of tears usually caused by the incision; and in no case should the oil be stretched only with the sponge and thread, as we have said; then the sponge should be wiped clean of the oil, which is the proper form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the spatula not touch the fleshy part and break it, and that the needle be not seen; and after the incision pour into the oil a little ball of burnt silk, and apply a compress of alum, and leave it until the other side; then cure what has happened as much as it is possible.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread will not pass, many times it is cured by this semblance of a medicine; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you see the oil of the patient, take the spatula lightly somewhat as I have shown you.</start_of_turn>
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And withdraw the nail silently, and if you see that it has diminished somewhat and the edges are pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil compress of alum and red alum, and burn the silk, stamp the oil until the other side; then repeat the other work as I have said, until it is entirely healed.</start_of_turn>
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing hinders thee in oil, as with a postulation of chaut, then milk, and first cure the postulation until it is healed, and then renew the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there appears fat in the oil at night with great discomfort, if you suspend it on alum, and take a part and not the whole, that tears of tears do not arise; then distil in the red oil of the coleyer, which is made of litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the mark that comes on the plumule
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you temper the treatment with a weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not move your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Des voines des eulz.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The veins are red which are covered with oil, and endure the weight of work and unburden the oil throughout the days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The master must first look at the oil, for it is strong, and there is no other disease fierce than this; therefore the master must command the patient to put his head in order, and then suspend the veins throughout their length as he knows how, and be double-folded in this fashion:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be double-folded by degrees in one fourth of an inch according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And bind them loosely with thread in fourths of an inch according to this form: then draw out the forces of those veins silently, and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see that those veins have been freed from the oil; and make sure that you do not burn the oil with the spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and keep your mouth open in your work if you do not wish to faint from the heat. And when you have done this, if there is anything remaining that is still clotted, distill in the green and red oil to corrupt that which remains doubtful.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of soothing things that will calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and is assured to be relieved; and then begin again in the same way as before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of soothing things that will calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and is assured to be relieved; and then begin again in the same way as before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces from the fistula of the oil.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire so-called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine with burning water as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is remaining moisture in it, you must make an incision over the abscess, leave it open, and drain out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the corruption and blackness, if the wound has all the instruments of the body; and is called "aspire chief", and is made with fine iron like a chisel when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put upon the limb the corrupted bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand as much as you sense that that corruption is resealed; and do this never, then restore the limb of drying medicines.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limb is swollen, and there is pus in it, and the skin of the limb is swollen, and remains so for forty days, and does not heal and is not post-treated, and other bad things do not come, except to bring the fistula to the surface as it is; and uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and by strong medicines, and when it has been uncovered take hold of the fistula according to this fashion, and the angle of the iron should be at three angles, and the flesh should be thinned as much as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and pull your hand away from the oil; then draw back your arm until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through what comes out from under his arm if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and when the bone is fractured and persists, if there is anything to the elbow; if it is less serious for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then put it on the bone below the elbow, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, afterwards turn the limb completely until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through what comes into his ear if he keeps his hand on his elbow. And then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the mark appears and becomes firm, if there is matter at the elbow; if it is a lighter thing for the patient. From the issue of the oil.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb is completely open without any displacement of the marrow, without any relief, if you must bind the patient; then do the same, put on bandages or a dressing to absorb, then put on oil. Indeed, make of acaice and aloe and incense and ochre, and then strain the oil, and put it on bandages and cloths; and keep the cloths if you take cloths enough soft, and double layer in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that there is between them; then strain by the weight of a stiff bandage that forms, and resume the dressing by absorbing in the direction of the wound; then pin the dressing and leave the oil strained for a while and night, and if the marrow softens, if you must strain it out; then pin the marrow afterwards the marrow and the nut, and if you see the oil repairing itself, that is good; if not; repeat the dressing and the cloths and the marrow and the dressing until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, then open the joint, and if there is paper there like barley grains, and it is expected to see; if you see it covered, the work is like biting a thorn at the root of the limb until the other thorn comes out, or there is double thread of the limb; and pull it out, and leave the first thorn in its place; then gather up the double thread and bind a part of the limb around, and strain it well, then pull out the thorn and put on linseed oil soaked in abundance of eggs; and leave it until the thread breaks with the limb, and cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by the limb that is closed by a circle of silk, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has a great appearance, if you prick at the fatty tissue that comes from the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and draw out the wound, and enter inside as much as possible; then take it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This ailment called "alcunnati" is not fierce but appears in oil, resembling descending ice, and it is not actually ice; and the manner in which it appears is that if you make the patient sit on a chair that appears upright and straight, and take hold of his head between your hands two parts, and move him until you see the ice coming down to your eyes; then either bind it, do not let it descend, or break the light, and the patient will see things as if he saw before; and if it does not descend by itself, it is like acute pain, and if it descends again, the ice does not appear as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and place it upon the cornea; and hold it in place by continuing the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the brow quivers; and when it comes out, distillate in warm aqua mellea with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek is boiled with honey, then be cured of another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the belly of the oil bowl.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen signs of moisture in division [of the eye], and this is what must be perceived; if in this case it is in accordance with health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, and illuminate the eye by the sun; and apply the pure oil to the eye and tighten the mouth firmly; then take in your left hand the instrument which is called the "almagda", or in your right hand if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument at the edge of the cornea with the thickness of a barleycorn against the yellowish part of the oil at the lower edge of the tear; then move the instrument called "almagda" smoothly, and restore your hand until it touches the bottom of the oil, and feel that the "almagda" has reached the empty space; and know that the measure of the "almagda" should be equal to the measure of the space from the prunele to the end of the black spot; and that is the cornea of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the cornea, and therefore put the instrument until it reaches the eye or the liquid is gone, and then express the drops afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the patient feels the pain increasing now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if the pain returns, put the force with the instrument and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, if it is necessary, stretch the limb gently by circling your hand around it; then put back the sealegem and remove the oil from the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force oil-soaked gauze or cloth in oil rose and in abundance of egg yolk, and bind with clean oil
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Indeed, and those who are of our company, put on a hot compress with abundance of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda does not manage to enter the oil because there are parts of the limb that have too tough hair, then you must take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the limb subtle, then I put in the cushion, as we have said; and when the work is finished appears to the patient the attendant coming behind, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark; and let him have no movement, and take light nourishment, and do not move his head to the left or to the right, and bind him as he pleases until seven days; and do not do anything else until the cure is finished or after the incision now, but make sure you feed him, because the pain will rise very quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Leave the hair long and even; if you prick at its root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then went out of the house quickly, quickly, and converted in his case; and the women that no disciple dared to interfere in that case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Yrach who said that in his peace he had seen an alum of blood perceived, when the water succeeded the pain, but he had never seen or read of such a thing in our land or in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of almonds, for those who do not know them; and they are like peas properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their tops are of this same smoothness, and their backs in two angles like a goosefoot.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never do new or old ladies of various ranks appear, for there are some who seem like scorpions at the mouth of a piece; and if there are such or if they have hair entangled with hair of a reddish color, or if they have hair of a pale bone color.</start_of_turn>
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those cases where there is pale hair which does not tangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and cover his nose, and spit on those hairs, and throw away the mucus; for it is better to support the subtle gut from one side, while you know that that hair is entirely bony.</start_of_turn
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains, if the wound has all its edges loose, if nothing stays in place; and if without support it breaks away, or is undermined, or if it is an abscess, then take hold of it as you would with a burn; and if it is malignant, burn it away as quickly as possible until it is quite black, and leave the charred parts untouched.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he does not move, and moisture comes up to the palate, saliva that he is sane; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, saliva that there is hair newly born in the bones above, because the instruments do not come down to the root: therefore it is necessary that you put in one thread of linen a little thick, and hold it with your hands, and leave between each knot no space at all or less; and put the patient’s hand under the thread at the end, and stretch until it comes out through the mouth; and often do the children do this, and it is a light thing for one who has seen it done; then take the fist that comes out through the mouth with one hand, and the other fist that comes out through the nose with the other hand, and bite the one after the other as we are or as the thread is.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Or of silver or gold, resembling a large coin, if like a chain; and guide it thus. And if you see, make a closed chain, and the instrument will be flat to purge the tooth; and have one hand on the thumb of the tooth to hold it when we burn the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises at the root of the arm a disease which is called "telul," and it grows and becomes great at its outset, so that it is visible to the eye; and for this reason it is necessary that you immediately compress at the beginning, and break the bone, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you wait too long to compress it when it is great, if you take hold of it too tightly, it causes great pain to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of great color, you can easily bring it under control, if you empty the patient and compress it without fear, and cure the limb with dry things that restrain.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the arm is cut and bound together
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do not do that while the continuation is in its cartillages, for in many homes it has been found to be harmful.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it be for naught, if you see that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety; then join the two layers to a staple, and hold until it is healed. And if the layers are already separated at one end and the other, if you must pull out all the edges around the circumference until they are level, then reassemble the two layers to a staple, and strain, and sprinkle upon it powder of dragon’s blood and incense. Then place upon the powder a piece of dressing of great or other dressing that will adhere, and leave until it bleeds by itself, then cure when healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the costure is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said concerning the costure of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	from the incisions of the layers
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of the home, there are veins apposed like sharp grains of wheat, smaller and greater; therefore it is necessary that you return the veins, and make incisions above each knot, and grasp with tweezers and compress in the middle part; then employ the blunt end of the needle after making the incision of the vitriole, until it is no longer stained; and then withdraw the needle easily, and cure the limb of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the hardness of the jaw bones.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it happens on the gums of the teeth that they become loose and the old people call them “albules”; if you support it, grasp the root and leave the socket or blood clot; then take out the blunt end of the needle, or other astringent and drying powders; and if the gum comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize it: if it does not come back after the cautery; these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	When the teeth are assembled at the root of the jaw, between the gums, which are loose and rough; never are the teeth black and yellow and towards the front, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting; if you make the patient sit between your hands, and their shoulders are against your chest, and open the jaws or the gums split open, until nothing remains; and thus do you make blackening and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if you remove what is at the root at the first attempt, that is good; if that is not the case, if you must repeat the second and third time, until you have everything back in place; and the teeth that have been between the jaws must have various shapes because those that you remove to drive out the teeth have other shapes than those that are left between the teeth; and these shapes and others appear to you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth from its pain that you wait a while before retracting too much, because it must not be made to move too much; because it is a high-quality substance, so we have no excuse for retracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that he will not suffer further.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient endures, and care must be taken that it is neither too great nor too little, and that it should be administered with care; and although it does not always depart with the pain, while the malady persists, for we have already wished to make these cures; and when you are certain that it will not do harm, if you must pull out the tooth entirely, then grasp the tooth firmly to ward off the gums from all parts; then bite firmly on the thumbs or hold with the fingers at the first joint, until they are well embedded, and then secure them firmly; and let the patient’s pain cease between the knees, and hold firmly if it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After is stretched out the tooth upright, and if it does not spring up, take none of these instruments and pull it out through a smaller hole, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the root is pierced and softened, if you can, cover it with bandages, or extract it; and if you grasp it too tightly, do not break it while grasping; and must cautiously move over the gum around the tooth with a scraper.</start_of_turn>
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care well that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with greater pain than at first.</start_of_turn
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware that you do not act carelessly as the ignorant layman, who often break bones without any consequence, and bring no benefit to anyone except for our teaching; but they cause many to die from serious illnesses caused by roots that remain lodged, or by fractured bones, as we have often seen; and when the root is drawn out, cleanse the wound with wine or vinegar and oil, and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply a bandage of vitriol; and if this does not suffice, cauterize it.</start_of_turn
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, forasmuch as they are mute at first, whether with long points and broad handles, that they do not double when you draw the tooth; these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of great size if they do not bend when you draw, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so as to hold securely.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains lodged at the back, if you command that I take out the wet cotton ball inside, I shall do so immediately.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the limb is pale, for in it are held the nails that are called “algrip,” for in this way the head of the shoulder appears like a beak of a bird; and they must be filed in the same way as with a file, and this is the form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not yield to all these tensions, if you must, uncover the flesh entirely around the root and place the instrument which is called “althali,” that is to say, a palainche, for this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If force and bulk are not sufficient to break me, and if the root jumps by this, that is good; if not, if you assist with all your instruments, for when the forms come they will follow.</start_of_turn>
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has just rained, for this is its form:</start_of_turn>
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let there be great and firm grasps to hold the bone, so that it cannot slip but can be held and moved; and then restore the limb with the appropriate medicine for this case, and if there is any fracture in the bone, even if it is small, if the grasp has held all the instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears does not follow the natural course, and the shape is deformed, even in female patients, if it is suspected that the tooth has penetrated too deeply and is not properly aligned, and cannot be remedied: then it must be extracted. And if it is affected with the tooth, if you take hold of this instrument which has the shape of a small beak, resembling a file, and is made of iron without a cutting edge at the top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And you must hold the tooth firmly in the palms of your hands for the duration of the tooth’s extraction, and because of that do not move the others, and if it appears, you can limber it, if you file it with a file that has the same shape as this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is just like when we file nails; and while you are filing the tooth firmly in the palms of your hands, slightly move it until it stops bleeding; then at the end there is no rasping, and if it has penetrated too deeply and it bleeds the tongue, if you limber the root as much as it is necessary, so that it does not bleed or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth are loose, whether by percussion or by pressure, and the patient cannot press against anything that would make it bleed, and you must treat them with restrictive medicines, which is of no use; if you command to restrain them with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and softens, but the blood does not move; and let the wire neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth moving, if you take hold of the wire and pass it double between the two front teeth, then put the head of the shoulder between the teeth that are next to each other, as many as there are, until you see it clearly up to the sound tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand skillfully and steadily, until it does not move; and let your thread be fixed to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the head of the arm with two pinscers, assemble them, and place them between the teeth of the jaw; and hold them in place so that they do not slip; and leave them in place until they can remain without support, for if they slip or the pinscer breaks, if strained by another thread; if it remains and serves its purpose, this is the form of a tooth and the figure of the arrangement of the two front teeth, and the two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth aches, if you reset it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let no other be between who is wise and soothing, and never make the shape of a tooth of ivory, and put it in its place or where the fault is, and strain it as we have said, and leave it so for a long time with constant tension
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is this thread that comes from the tongue or the nature of the tooth absent from its place at birth; or by the accidental wounding of a deep wound; for the work is such that you must cover the mouth of the patient, and take hold of his tongue; then grasp the large nerve, until the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is pain or not, and this is the sign of a wound, if it comes loose and grasps the thread; and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that comes from it; and when you have done this, if you raise the pale and easy blood, or cold blood, and put the tongue back in, and bind the patient tightly, that the wound does not clot.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes from a wound, take out the clotted blood with the forceps; and if it does not go away, burn it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	The tongue hangs limp and loose,
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes blood comes from the throat, which is called "godath", and it has two almond-shaped glands at the root; and when you treat them, as we have said in the preceding section, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and with a yellow-brown colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it, for if you do not, it will break by itself; and if it is pale in colour and the root is thin, if you have brought the instrument to cover, look first whether the abscess has settled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fais seoir le patient devant le soleil, ses bras soit en ton sain, et il serre la bouche et prend les serjans entre ses mains, et presse la langue vers le bas contre tout l’instrument, de sorte qu’il adopte la forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi comme un couteau.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	...press his tongue down with all your might, as this is the form; and let it be of silver or lead as thin as a knife.  See the boil, if you see it, grasp the poultice and insert it into the abscess, and push it out further than you can. And do not take away any cloth from there, then cover the instrument with the thumb, as this is the form, that looks like a force; and when the chief is bent, one place over the other, and is very sore, and is made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you can hold the teeth firmly, know that this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	If you do not have this instrument present, if you can hold the teeth firmly, know that this is the form:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	Then make the patient sit before the sun, with arms at his sides, and grasp the mouth and grasp the serjeants between his hands, and press the tongue downwards against all the instruments, so that it takes the shape; and either of silver or gold subtle like a knife.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so big that it had forced two grains through two holes without pain.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had done so much, and remained alone in one place, and the traitor fled away, and took away a great portion of my bow; then I returned another part to the other side where I did not want it, and I closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; after that I returned the index finger to those wounds, and closed up a part, and only a little blood escaped; and as I was going to draw the conductor of the throat, the woman began to drink water and wine, and did not stop spitting from that wound until it became large; so I bound and cauterized it within the throat: since then I have had no sense of crossing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to me after that.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb hangs downwards, and it is fleeing and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure brings no benefit, and you see that the postulations are appeased, and it is subtle, so you must avoid the incision. And that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of a yellow or black colour, so you must eschew the incision of the latter.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	You must therefore, when you see it, as I have said, from its redness and its length, that you make the patient sit in the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke before; then put on the ointment and drain, and hold for two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it must be known that you must not cover more than the superfluous that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, you will grieve the voice and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two thumbs, and cure as much as it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, it must be known that you must use an instrument at the cautery in the painful area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery if it is acute is harsh and fiery
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in its sound, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the treatise of cautery, and grasp with lively hair, if it is not too thick or too clear; and make use of the handle of this instrument, as it is in this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus is the swelling of the eye.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, for the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take alum, isops, origanum, rue, chamomile, ivy, and all of these herbs together in one pot, and put them in, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot put one instrument that is pointed according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or of gold, or be one of the hands pressed into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises up to the eye through the canine, until the eye is dead; afterwards let it recline often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot fever, for many things happen; do this only when the hot fever subsides.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if these instruments are not present, if you take a quill and put inside the head a speck of egg, so that the patient’s mouth does not become too hot; for the speck of egg does not make the vapor grow in the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened at the throat bone or fish spine, or no thing; if you therefore take care that you show what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instruments, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned in the throat, take that you make the patient vomit the sickness as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it comes out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, and then transfix it; and when it comes back, if it is broken, and then draw it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take one instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the gorge, and keep the head lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not slip from your grasp, do not bite down on the bone inside; and must you take care that the patient holds the instrument, for it is likely that it is swollen or the thing is loose; if the patient swallows, or if he treats it fiercely with the entire instrument equally, as much as he is able.
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the gorge, and keep the head lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not slip from your grasp, do not bite down on the bone inside; and must you take care that the patient holds the instrument, for it is likely that it is swollen or the thing is loose; if the patient swallows, or if he treats it fiercely with the entire instrument equally, as much as he is able.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is medicine without sense, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, look at the patient’s throat in the sun, and then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you of.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoulder, if the arm has a slight twist, or if there are subtle tensions that are worth as much.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If these are not worth considering, take a vein from the patient’s armpit and insert it into his throat, then insert or withdraw the vein with the cautery, and do this several times.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient groans in pain all the time
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a cold bath, cover the mouth, and let him vomit several times in the direction of swallowing; and if he persists in this state with the shoulder, he will die
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If this does not happen, if we have said enough, if you suffocate the patient with safety pins, with the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be of benefit.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And concerning fumigation, if you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces visible, cover the patient’s face with a gauze veil perceived in the middle; and in that place put the head of the instrument; then pour the fumigation and the patient puts his chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the fumes do not go out, but come out until the nausea; and the nausea will now cease, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, eat dirty and bad things, and drink no water; and thus will he force it out by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument is like this, which we shall treat the swelling with, if indeed we can see it, it resembles tongs with curved handles to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a bird, and there is lime on it, so that whatever it grasps, it will not let go; and when you have seen this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the physician of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The seeds of an abscess are, according to what is remembered in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which they appear, one of which is in their own likeness and the other of which is due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for loose joints or when they are stiff.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the swelling of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the swelling of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and the bones have their judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if the swelling persists, one must not pierce it until the swelling has subsided according to its completion; and if there are those who must pierce it when it is hardened, and they do not subside according to their completion, as with swelling which is beside joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	for when the swelling comes from the joints, and it is left as it is until it is resolved, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When an abscess is perforated too late, if it be near the principal part of the limb; or if it be at the root, if it be pierced too deeply; one must only pierce the abscess in the normal course of digestion, unless it be at the root, that it does not split into two, and be prolonged, and there will arise a fistula; and it will not heal in a great length of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It must be known that you must wash the opening of the fistula that is dead according to its completion, when the pain is calmed, the departure of fever, and the fading of pain and redness, and the cessation of shivering and the burning of the fistula, and other signs; and it must be known that you must keep the opening or more dependent from the fistula, and the place where it is open. And let the opening be long enough for the bone or if the fistula is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and for all the bones that are equal or that have no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the situation of the limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is close to a callous bone, if it is worth mentioning that you must leave the perforation confirmed in the normal course of digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, if it swells with poison from it, and there is plenty of mucus of ordure; and by chance you strengthen the bones and deepen it from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no mark to be perceived at the circumference of the large wound, according to that which the limb has in its mastery.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it must be known that you must bring in small incisions, small holes; in great incisions, great holes, and many cuts according to the size of the wound; and if there are such incisions or it must be suspected that the wound has burst, and is covered; when it is as thick as a cloak, and is softened, if it must be done as with bubbles: and if there are such as are cleft in three angles, and such as we cover with ivy, as with wounds of grapes; and if there are such as we make a circle around, and others of a similar nature.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, if there is a superficial wound, it must be known that you must simply prick; and it must be known when the wound is large, and it has a great swelling, and you must prick, if you do not drain all the swelling in that hour, but only a part; then stamp the wound until to the other border, then do nothing further; do this many times until the swelling is all gone; even if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman in labor, or a young child, or an old man decrepit
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grands apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood spurts out during your work, if you mix cold and sharp water, and moisten the drape, and draw out the staining matter many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood continues to spurt out, if you mix in government and cure, and the matters that I have said take hold in this book, and if it is cold or wet, if the hands or the apostemes are pale and nervous, if you must attempt to cure it, and if the hands are fleshy and the apostemes soft, if you must put on wet patches and moisten with wine and oil; and if it is in this state, and the hands are fleshy, if you must put on wet patches and moisten with water and oil, or with wine and oil, until the third part, as we have said; and then take out the apostemes and dry and cure it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have already said, before treating abscesses, you must be wary of the patient.
des soros	or as I have already said, before treating abscesses, you must be wary of the patient.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or come fire comes from the chief, it brings little after-effects; and it is our practice to hold them in webs, like the weaver of a geline, and there is resemblance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Or there is fat and such things where there is moisture as well as mice; and if there are such ones that are hard and rough at the root, and there is no doubt that if the artery does not resist it will not be in vain.</start_of_turn>
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of this size is such that you must expect all the instruments which are called "entromissories," because their form comes afterwards, whatever thing they contain.</start_of_turn
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it remains long.</start_of_turn
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, do not leave the peel which contains that moisture, for it will return in its place when you leave it alone; then soak in vinegar of Egyptian, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and use the wound, and leave it until the other side; and this will correct what is remaining which is diminished by night.</start_of_turn
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound begins to close, as before, the second layer, and the third, until you are sure that it has healed completely; then cure the wound according to what is appropriate, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the wound remains open after the fat has hardened, if the wound follows this form, long; then let your ointments go, and the swelling of all parts, and put all your cure to drive away the clot or where there is congestion; and if the artery opposes you, do what I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same with a perforated abscess, and cut and cure as I have told you before
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are any of these abscesses or swellings, or if there is no moisture, and if these be abscesses that I cauterize or swellings of a woman of mature age; and find the abscess as a hard, rough and white stone, and cannot burst; and if there is no break in it, it is as well to make a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head or neck, for those that come from the ears and have roots in the temples, it opens every day more and more; and it must be cured as it should be.
des scrophules	And the size of the wound on the penis and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these wounds or chieftains and there is no moisture, or if these are old wounds which I have cauterized or chieftains from an old woman; and find the wound just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if no blood appears, we must make just as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, because these which come from the groin and from the roots of the ears, the opening must be made if it is at all possible every day, in order to prevent the swelling; and the treatment must be made as it is fitting.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times it happens that these abscesses occur at the collarbone, and they swell, and cause pain, and never come from anywhere else or from bone, and are black and bloody, and are fixed together
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And sometimes a scrofula is properly placed within its sheath, if like the nipple and the incision above the head, as we have said; and the semblance of these scrofulas is many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some diseases that contain moisture, and if they have malignancies that do not obey the laws of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those cases where you see a good arrangement of bones at the touch, and it is like the color of coral, and soft from the heel to the knee part and is neither deep nor superficial; if you must manage it, grasp the heel part by the toes, and burn the soft part, and stretch out the two lower limbs as we have said above the head; and do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cause any spasm or bruising, only that the hands do not escape, and do not speak too soon, that you do not touch anything that you are not supposed to
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if thou dost close the vein or artery, and this doth thee not permit to work, if thou put in the wound a bit of vitriol broth, or some powders which remain bloodless, and restrain the wound; and let it alone until the swelling has subsided and the wound is softened, and then commence to move.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the swelling is gone, if thou returnest to thy work until thou hast completed it; then if thou must mark an index, if there remain no little scrofules, if thou dost cope and crush them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is in the root of the swelling a great vein, if thou canst not bear but to cope that swelling in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging loose; then apply a bandage of white cotton pressed with Egyptian balsam, and then cure it
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you remove all the boils, if you are sure that you have reassembled the two layers of the wound, and you sew them now, there will be no remaining excess due to the size of the boils.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you are sure that you have grasped the root of the vein, and that you have tied it off, and you sew it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The boils which hold excess [fluid], pierce them or they will burst and die; and pierce them as before was said, depending on the matter, and mix attempts with ointment and similar things, so that it corrects what has been corrupted; and when the wound is well closed, if the ointment cure that which remains of the corruption, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn
de squinance	And if you cauterize the clot, if you dare to unite the four limbs of the wound and bind them now, and there is no longer any surplus due to the greatness of the clot; if you understand to cover the root of the vein, and to draw out the foreign matter, and to bind it as we have said. Those clots that hold surplus, pierce them through or they will open death; and pierce in the same way as the one said before, depending on the case, and mix with sponges and similar things, so that it destroys what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing covering the scar, as long as it is healthy.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient men spoke of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen it in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who are quarrelsome, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the " epiglottis," be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and the blood vessels of the patient are at those who have placed their faith above in the mouth, in the throat or in the almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the chest of the vomiting, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when our wings break the epiglottis, to cut them three circles or four, a little cut through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the cartilage; and if the blood vessel is close to the epiglottis, there must be no clot, and the blood vessels are long enough.</start_of_turn
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is fearful, if he commands that the skin of the throat be stretched to the chin, then cut the vein as far as the nail; and avoid the blood vessels, for if you see nothing, and then close the vein as we have said; and prove by the section of the smoke of the nail that the blood spurted out from the broken bone, and by the hoarseness of the voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and doubt of strangulation exists, unite the edges of the wound together with sutures, and bind them all around the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause the growth of flesh, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The Albucasim does this only when the throat is entirely filled, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned.</start_of_turn
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, close the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound; and thus is kept from death; and for this reason the ancients command that the wound be left open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they command that the wound be sutured and healed, until it is healed; and I shall tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a damsel take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut a part of her gullet; and I fled called for help, and found her just like she was dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that it had not pierced any vein or artery except for the throat, and the blood had come out through the wound.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and dressed the wound, and cured it until it healed; and the damsel did not feel any pain, and returned to her usual self; for in the cutting of the epiglottis I did not see any fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "neck hernia," and are great abscesses of the color of butter, and are much in women; and there are two ways of them: natural, and accidental. The natural kind has no cause
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is said to be of two kinds: one is like butter that has solidified, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one cannot safely perform surgery except in a small area, and the surgeon and attendants must be wary of all the surrounding parts: if you find it just like butter that has solidified, and cannot be bled from any vein, if you prick it, as we prick our fingers, and pull out all the contents, if there is none; and encircle everything well and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed
des nous	And encircle all around, and treat as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods exist for us, of which I shall speak of all; and know that I shall tell of all the difference that exists between a wound and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is caused by heat and fever that persists, as long as the swelling has not subsided, and is accompanied by pain; therefore rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With neither wound nor fever nor pain, it contains I syfac, which is its own sac and is of the color of burnt gold, and begins like wax and becomes thick; and they are like grains or grease or moisture, and the colour is such as I have said in the division
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, to inquire and examine first the instrument which is called the "entromissoire", according to its shape or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for inquiring about abscesses is that you take more moisture than you find in the abscess, and twist your two thumbs and two little fingers, until you know that the instrument has grasped the knot; then that it is done according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the entraume and be careful that the spur does not burst
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes too close, color it as you will; for if afterwards the interosseous membrane does not bring moisture, if it is fat, do then cross it, and grasp it with your fingers, and burn it lightly from the outer side and ward off the coat where you will treat it sound with the thumb; and if you do not treat it sound, tear it out piecemeal until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, if it returns to us many times; and if some remains, without grief, if you use for the wound some corrosive powders of vinegar, hold the wound tight, and put on soothing things around the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if it is great, cut out two fingers of the wound, and treat it of that which engenders pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the vein swells up against you or if it is another thing that makes you haste, and if you apply to it a little vitriol powder that has been ground, and leave it for three or four days, until the wound has closed, and rest the swelling of blood; then come back and do what is necessary to make it disappear.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to embrace the fistules; and they are like needles which we sew the sores with, and they are made of saffron, or iron, or silver, and sometimes gold which is yellow, and are more proven for black blotches to embrace the cortices of fistules; and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the needles are like pieces of various appearances, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and for needles which have two cortices there are three kinds; and for needles which have three cortices, there are also three kinds; and for needles which have two cortices and a single cortex, there are three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus is broken and from such fractures there are some that do not pierce the skin but only one side, on which we must support the limb, for otherwise the vein and nerve are ruptured; and these interferences are the nails which are placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and they are not used for any other fracture than in the arm, leg, and elbow, and shoulder and collarbone, and similar bones; and no other instrument is ever used except for the nails, resembling the handles of fists, according to this fashion, because in this way we staunch the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he must never be placed in a place where he has previously grasped veins, arteries, or anything similar to that in form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Under no circumstances do the bones of the limbs of certain patients swell when they begin to become corrupt, so that they appear like female breasts; and they lie still and limp, and anyone who sees them will consider them cured, if they are bandaged according to this fashion from line b to g inclusive.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and use the medicinal plaster thickly smeared; then join the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed; and if the wound leaks fluid, which is caused by its great size, if it is in the second rib from below, by two similar cuts; because one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the lesser in this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and oste the fat, and bring together what has been said of stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order.
des apostemes des asselles	And leave it [hair] as long as it consumes the remnant and fat, then cure it when it is healed.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And leave it [hair] as long as it consumes the remnant and fat, then cure it when it is healed
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the cavity of the abscess is emptied, if the wound has a great amount of cotton, leave it in place until the other side is reached; then remove all the cotton and cure the wound that arises from that until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess cavity is like that of carbuncles, and if the wound has a wound rent, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de l’artere	of the root of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is obstructed, and the skin is swollen which is above, if there are many abscesses there, and also comes out the vein above and abscesses; and if the surgeon knows when this is from the artery, when the abscesses are long and burst; and when he feels it in his hands, when he feels the extraction; and when it is from the vein, when it is reabsorbed downwards broken. And this is folly to cover this abscess, just as when it is swollen with boils and boils and spleen or in other parts, it is great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to discard the cautery of fire, and he who is at the head must also discard it, and in that which there is swelling of an artery that has been made known by the skin being long; then uncover the artery from its tissues, as long as it is covered; then take out an awl, and pierce it until the other side, and tighten the artery with two threads, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then hold the place that is between the two links of an intro-spiral until there is no more of it there, and bind the abscess; then administer the cure that is required, until it is healed; and if the abscess is of the size of a vein, it is necessary that you hold your hand in that way that you can make the abscess with all the skin, then take out the awl that you held in your hand, and pierce it, and there will be two threads, so that you can handle it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, or bind two threads of the two sides of the abscess with two threads; and if you doubt that the threads will hold, insert another awl at all the threads from the incision of the first awl, and tighten the threads to three threads; then cut the abscess as much as it is necessary, cut the excess of the tissue and leave only that which is bound; then put on a wet drape in wine and oil, and administer treatments of tentes and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Des apostemes des ners.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As with a wound comes an embolism in the vein or artery, comes an embolism as a nerve when it is irritated, or by too great a labour, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens with adjudiers and two musts and their limbs or if there are joints, and it is in great pain after incisions; and its color seems like the color of raw flesh, and is in many situations painful. And when it is strained, if it feels pain, it is not like the color of raw flesh, but like black bile; and it mutters loudly from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and he who is in joints does not cover himself with iron: by chance there is contraction; and he who is head or front, makes the skin taut at the staple.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the incision is small, if he has one nail, grasp it at the root; and if it is large, if he hangs it on the bone, and pulls, then bone and reunite the wound at the suture, and cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	From the armpits downwards.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never has it been seen in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease which is called "funge" because of its resemblance to grapes, and its root is subtle, and its head is large; and there are many small and great spots. I have known of two bellies which appeared more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were split open, and corrected themselves with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I saw two of them weighing eighteen ounces and six pounds respectively; and in the incision it was seen that the patient was moist, and the color of the artery was pale and moist with a thick root; if the bladder is large and the patient is present, apply the fire cautery to the fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the shoulder comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not stop, if you are hasty, then do thou burn; and if you see the patient fainting and fearful from the incision of the flesh, if you take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then the restraint, and do not cease to drain the thread of silk until it has closed the artery, and do the work by that; and if the roots are large, if there is fear of a fracture through the belly, but thou must well bind half, then burn that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that thou cover only the bulge which is of soft colour and of poor sense and of milk-regurgitation.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is fierce.</start_of_turn
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling comes from a burn or cut of the flesh, and is on the belly and there are some bowel movements, as is the case in other routes, or blood that has clotted in veins or arteries according to what is before, or from vomiting; and if it is through the rectum and through the outlet of the bowel, if it is the colour of the abscess, it is a light matter of pain, and has various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when one presses it there, if it returns and comes back, and by chance if it is caught, and brings forth much blood at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter; open it well when you press it in your hand, do not constrain me; and if it is due to blood, if it is opened by these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed in quantity; and if it is due to wind, if it is stiff at the touch, and the work if it is that you see that it is due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or the wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you think that you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as the chapter says, concerning the abscess of the artery or the vein.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If it appears to be the intestine or the boil, command the patient to keep his hand steady, and if it is prolonged to the right, then mark it down at the edge of the wound; then order him to move his hand between your hands, then bring his thumb to the middle of the wound, and extend half of the abscess downwards over the entire breadth; then bind it with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and leave it in place; then cover half of the abscess extending above the thread, and put your index finger and the intestine together; if you find the intestine caught in the thread, if you pull it out, bring the intestine out from under the belly; if you find the boil, if you grasp it at the head, and cut off the excess; and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, if it comes together, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have done in the shape that you think you have pierced; then strain the abscess for three days on the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the limb as long as it swells, and cut off the dead tissue by itself; or you can drain it when it has gone down and swollen, then cure the wound of what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what is necessary, and suture the limb.</start_of_turn>
dou chancre	Then strain the abscess for three days on the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the liquid alone until it bursts by itself; cut off the dead flesh by itself.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said concerning the appearance of carbuncles, how one must work upon them with medicines, and how one must shun the cautery; and we say that carbuncles fester in marshes, and cause great pain in their cure. The ancients say that when carbuncles are in their prime or can be scraped out like those which are in mammels, and in the gut, and in similar places, one must remove them at their commencement; and when they are great and old, if one cannot approach them, for I know of no remedy for them; nor have I ever seen any healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the work is in its prime or can be scraped out as we have said, do not purge the black bile from the patient at any time; then make the patient healthy if he has shown repletion, then expel the patient. i.e. give him good liquid to make the work. Then remove nails or carbuncles, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts round about; and let the blood flow freely, and keep your hand or any other thing away from it, and if the wound is closed from the artery or vein, do not cauterize more than is absolutely necessary; then treat with another cure until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	You have said in division that the signs of hydrophobia are seen when water is assembled, and the signs of spleen resemble those of chescune, and the treatment for the former is by medicine, while for the latter by iron: if only the light is eclipes; do not touch iron in these two signs, that is to say, tympanites and iposarche, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when medicine is taken for this sign which is called "eclipses" of medicine, and the treatment does not profit, if you observe that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides hydrophobia, as in most cases and solution of the belly and other things; do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great vigor and there is only hydrophobia, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work: take hold of the patient with your hands, and the assistant shall press the abdomen at the lowest point of the water, and then take the spine in this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let two parts suffice.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let two parts suffice. When the wound has reached two parts, and all the rest does not protrude more than to the intestines when it is grasped, and does not bleed; then look if the hydrophobia is leaning towards the intestines: if it seems that it is in the spleen, if you make an incision three fingers breadth to the left of the spleen; and if it is from the disease of the liver, if you make an incision to the left of the spleen; and if it is from the bile, if you make an incision to the right, and do not let the patient rest on the incision except for the slight tremor of an nail or as much as when you are scraping off a nail; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and extract the spleen, and keep your hand over the wound with all your might between the skin and the bone as if you were grasping the quantity of a nail or as much as when you are scraping off a nail; then pierce the bone until the tremor ceases. This is the way the instrument should be held.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver dollar, with a vein or an archway at the top; and on one side there are one small hole and three holes on the other side, and two on the other; and the head of the shoulder is cut off like a quill, and this is the form of the incision which the writer makes to cut off the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	The head of the sufferer is the stake, if when the instruments come into the water, if they are now resting on the instrument, it is necessary to remove half or a third of the water; for if you remove more than that, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he will vomit, or he will approach death; but remove according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to the injunctions of the virtue of the patient himself, and his wounds; then take away the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the cork which is stamping the hole which is above the socket, as I have said; that you pierce according to this manner; then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering in this way, and take away a small quantity of water; do this under no circumstances, and keep it until it stops being a matter of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if thou doubtest of the patient, and thou seest him mouthing with pain, if the physician doth cure by burying or washing with sand the caulker, and by mouthing with sweat or bath and sun, and if thou dost observe him to drink; and if the physician doth give him drying medicines until he be healed, and doth cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the extraction of the pain, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Do this to no man, and guard yourself from using it until it ceases to linger; for if you doubt the patient, and you put too much water in, if the cure be of the burying of earth or sand, with water or sweat, and by the sun, and drink wine; and take drying medicines, until he is cured, and cauterize upon the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born who have not a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not well placed in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If he coves so much that he cannot perceive at all all the surrounding things according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put or prick the clot of blood of the loin, and bind and hold it for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if he keeps it closed, he will urinate, and then put it back; and by chance it will not be able to stay closed, because the urine which comes out will not leave it closed.</start_of_turn>
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	When the opening is small, if medicine is applied with a lead weight, as we have said, and it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	When they have not recently had the opening in their limb, they are black because none are born with the opening at the head of the bone, for they cannot urinate before they lift up their thigh; and they cannot urinate because the material cannot come down to the marrow, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the work is that if the patient lies recumbent on his back, and the head of the bone and the hip are as wide as a thumb, if the opening is in the middle, as it is right; you must prevent excessive bleeding that comes often, and if it comes, if the discharge of that which discharges blood is stinted, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des pustules de la verge	of boils of the hip.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these boils onto the limb, and are an appearance of foul matter; and in them there are both malignant and benign ones; if you take them at their root, anoint them subtly, and evacuate them all out, then put on a wet cotton dressing in Egyptian fashion; then cure them with diafinicon until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of dark colour and purulent, it is necessary to bring cautery there.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the swelling is at the root of the thigh, and has some inside the bone and some outside, you must first break the swelling that is inside; and when it is broken, if the wound is outside
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure them altogether, if you do not firmly secure the shoulder, black bile and corruption will arise in its marrow and bone; if you remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and sometimes, cure them of other diseases until they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood clots come away, if you mix the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two situations: that of blood clots and of corruption; and if the head of the bone is corrupted and withdrawn, if you swallow or force out a clot of blood, and the patient urinates; and when the hair has fallen out at the root of the bone which has not been circumcised, or if there is pain or incision, if you then burn it with the instrument which severs, until the ligaments are loosened, and deliver the head of the bone from all parts; and if this causes division of the limb, if you then burn it at the tip of the bone and the nail; then dry thoroughly between two, and put on a bandage of fine linen moistened with cold water, which does not adhere.
de la circoncision	If it is urgent to divide this, if you must, then cover the head of the limb with a cloth without any hair or nail; then slowly separate between two joints and put a wet linen bandage on with cold water, so that it does not slip
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not simply a continuation of the ailment if like other wounds; however, since we are doing this work of our own free will, and properly undertake it, if it is necessary that we do it better, and the milder way for the health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old doctors did not teach me circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and doctors who performed circumcision to make a hole, and to force, and with all their skill; yet if the testicles escaped because there were two threads, and by chance if one sews up the lower and leaves the upper unsewn.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound closes again, and the pain is doubled, and there is swelling which is more than just a little discomfort; and by chance the thread escapes, and corrects the work, and many times comes out without there having been any need for it, and I have seen that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification which is made by force throughout the whole length of the thread, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces tear just as well downwards as upwards.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is equal all around in height, but the thread is well stretched over the leather; and the manner of the first work is that if you make the child think, if he understands, do not make him force the thread through the hole only as much as is necessary, but pass it through in all the ways that you can; then pass the thread between your hands straight, and return the forces between your hands or remove your fingers from those which the child cannot see, neither any of the instruments; then take hold of your hand at the wrist and blow or call, and draw it up as high as the head of the bone is extended; then move it well from the dirt that is assembled, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it again from one side to the other; and hold for two minutes by the second loop to the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two loops, then leave the callus down slowly and draw out the head of the bone; then leave the blood to flow freely, and put powder on and over the powder a bandage glued with a piece of rosewater seed which has been ground up with oil of rosebud and balsam, and leave it until the next morning, and treat in like manner until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	If the force of the limb is weakened in this way: let the two shoulders be tense and taut, and let the limb be as strong as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the limb is when the nerves are injured during the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your finger, even though it makes an incision; and hold it equally, and if you do not manage to hold your finger, if you keep it tense, and then let go.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they trespass two days, and what is beside the navel is inflamed, if you leave them as long as the afterbirth is quiet, and the swelling is slight; if you touch them as you wish, and hold onto the navel, it will do you no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you touch too much powder to a wound, as we have said, or treat it with powders, and you touch it more than enough, and it swells up, if it does not heal; cure it as we have said before, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding the retention of urine...
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or blood clot, or bowel, or a worm, or other things, which we have mentioned in the previous division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the obstruction is caused by the stone which is inside the kidney or the neck of the bladder, if it is suspected that the patient is bent over his knees; and let him place his feet outside the back, and extend his belly from the part below his back, and restrain the patient so that he does not move as much as he can; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is freed; and if it does not come, as we have mentioned, and the patient feels great pain, if it is suspected that there is an instrument which is called the "siringue," which is like this: either of silver with a narrow neck like a bird's beak; or the caine of a palm half-grown; or like the beak of a sparrow.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus it is with the issue of urine: if you take a pair of fine needles and bind one to the head of a wool or cotton swab, and pass the needle through the bladder; and squeeze out the excess wool and pass until it reaches the head of the bladder, then join the bladder with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the oily parts with oil of olive and tepid water; then gently insert the bladder into the vagina, until it reaches the root of the vagina, then double the vagina backwards against the pubic bone; then withdraw the bladder forward until it reaches the bladder, and make the patient feel the urine coming until it reaches the empty state, for this is not done except in this order because of what it brings or what it goes with; then draw out the needle at both ends, and the urine follows the thread, and withdraw the needle again, and correct the urine; and do it again until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are stones or blood in the bladder, or if pus is accumulated, and you see urine and medicines boiling over, if you do everything that is called the "clepsedre," which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped so that the medicine can be forced down as well as possible, if we can manage to drive out the moisture, and push strongly as necessary; and when you see the medicine vomiting in the bladder, put the head of the sufferer over the moisture, and drive out the one who is fainting. If you drive out the moisture from the sufferer, and then push strongly again, if the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder, the patient will feel it; and this is the form of a subtle cluster from which we clusterize the bladder.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from I seam or the two bones meet; then take a bladder of a kid and put the moisture in which you see clustering the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double bow, and burn I part of that moisture over the fire; then bring the head of the cluster to the verge, and strain your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, if you take a piece of parchment, and make I circle, and pierce it round the edge; then pull out the thread strongly through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling I doll, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up with the instrument; and do as you would with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	De la piere.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division how to perform an incision of the stone, and the extraction with medicine; and we have mentioned the difference between a retained stone and one that must be extracted; and in what case a stone must be opened by size; and in the bladder, and in the kidney; and I will tell you openly and concisely about them.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is retained in the bladder is oftener painful than when it is outside; and this is a sign that the bladder is suffering from excessive urine which resembles the suffering in its subtlety; and there is frequent straining, and the patient suffers great pain in his side, and he goes to the toilet many times, and then grows stiff; and from these strains the foundation is loosened.  And it is easy to cure these strains until they are three years old; and after that it is more difficult in old men, and is as bad in young men as in old; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, if it is necessary, we must first cleanse the patient by vomiting, to drive out all the poison that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never fails to require cutting into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the limbs, loosen and move downward, until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and let it never go too high; then make it sit between your hands, and put your hands on its thighs, so that the bladder is completely relaxed downwards; then touch and feel inside; if you feel the stone in the space, do it quickly and cut above the stone immediately
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not yield to the touch, put your left thumb on the belly, if the patient is elderly, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; and press in its foundation, touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if the spleen is at the collar of the bladder; then press above your finger, and the stone will come out whether you see it or not
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder to his hand, and command him to extend to his right hand the ribs above, and to his left hand bone the skin which is below the ribs in the part where we make the incision; then put the sponge in covering, as it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between these two that are between the buttocks and the fundament, do not put it in the middle but at the cost of the left hip; and be right over the stone, and your two thighs must either be adducted or flexed, and be the size that it will traverse if it is wide enough, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not put it too large; for chance the press if you must put something over the stone that it leaps forward in its work; and the hair that is on the edge of the stone or that is angled, and margins: if it is hairy, grasp it to hold it; and if there is something soft there, it is like a gland, rounded, from which it issues lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are angles and margins on it, make the size greater; and if it does not leap, it is certain that you must pull on the nails which are just like a file at the head, for the nail must be pulled out if it escapes; or you must grasp it with forceps at the head; and if you do not manage to grasp it, if it is loose, the opening will be large; and if it is not properly closed, it is like a burn from vitriol; and if there are several stones, pull out the largest at the belly of the bladder first, then close and then pull out the others.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is too large, if you cover it with a cloth, it makes a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And if it is too large, if you cover it with a cloth, it makes a greater wound. For in this matter two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out with such force that the testicles cannot withstand it; but whatever you do, if you try to remove it by pieces, as long as you are doing so, until you have completed your work, if you employ incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and hold it tight, and put upon it a moist bandage soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the burn; then restore the patient to his collar and do not loosen the knot until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, if there arises much pain like the smell of oil and water, then cure with ointment of diafinicon and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if there are urine scalings in the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and either because of this the urine is retained, which is known in part as without a splash with the urine: take then your dose in the wound, and evacuate that blood, for if it remains, it will burst the bladder. Then wash the wound with water and easily and with silk, and give him aid in every way that you can, until he is healed; and know that all the times you treat him, bind the two edges together and assemble the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is either a tube or a passage from the bladder, and is fixed firmly, and the urine cannot pass; if the physician who is treating this should say thus, that you must many times, he will hear of the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already heard of this from someone
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the iron as described above and be at a right angle with two handles fixed at a distance of one thumb:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then I take a thread and tie it around the bladder below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then I hold the thread lightly against the stone, until it comes out; and I turn the thread towards my hand towards the stone and towards the stone, until I can see the stone from the other side; when the urine comes out, then press your hand on that which remains of the stone which is in the bladder
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is fractured, and a spur of urine comes forth with the urine, and the patient is in pain; if you are unable to do this by any other means, then take a thread and pass it through the hole of the stone and another through the other hole, and pass the string between the two lines, and then draw it out, and loosen the string, and solidify the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	If you are unable to do this, grasp the limb firmly by two fingers, and then place your thumb between the two fingers and grasp the limb at its base. Then pull the limb out forcefully, loosen the ligature, and massage the blood clot that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the limb is dislocated in women, and if this never happens, if it is cured, it is defended by two things: the first is that sometimes the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to manage her household, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method if by chance you cannot find a woman who is very skilled in this work of hands; and the fourth method if the woman’s stone is more prominent than the man’s, for it is capable of making a deeper cut, and great pain it has. And if it is necessary to do so, if you take a slight measure which is well knowing, and prick the trueve bone with a needle, and if you do not find it, do not cast aside the subtle measure; and present a dance well wise in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the work, and command her to do what you command of the inquiry of the stone; and look well whether the woman is a virgin: for if she is, you must push her head or foundation and query the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her head from her head, and command her to hold her head or with the patient, and ask and press her left hand on the bladder forming.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she be true, if you must move her from groin to groin from the entrance of the bladder to the knee, as far as she comes to the root of the thigh; then clamp upon the thigh at the root of the thigh and find the middle of the bone there where it is usually seen, and feel the thigh in that part; and do not move her up or down the thigh or knee, and make her small at first; then tighten her up to the size, if you feel the thigh is swollen as much as the wound will bear, and that her thighs are like many other thighs: that is to say, small and large, round and square, long and round, and hairy.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if her thighs look like the others you will know she is cured.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if she does not go away, if you put in vinegar broth and hold it for an hour until she is dry; then return to your work, until the wound is healed, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the arrow as home to help you in your work; and if she does not go away, and it is the artery that is clamped, if you put powder on the wound and strain out clothes and bands, and do not begin again, and leave the wound alone and do not touch it, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the color of blood has subsided and the limb is relaxed, if it returns to its work, as long as the wound is still open.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is like lumps of wax, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and never is it truly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not another act; and it is the skin of the egg between the white fat that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this leech is from weakness that comes from the eggs, and it is spread through that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if percussion comes upon the bones, and this moisture is of many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or pale blue, and this is more; and these are signs of congestion in this assembly, for if it is white or pale yellow as we have said, if the abscess is round like an egg, and does not open the bones, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is round with a part of the yolk, and because of this it is thought that this is one egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white pith, if it feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it appears throughout the entire mass, as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, following the introducer, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we bind it with iron, if you command that the patient be calm and still, then lift it up on its back, upon something high, and put on it some thick cloth; then sit on its left side, and tell the minister to sit on its right, and extend the limb to the second rib from the navel of the coions; then take the sponge and wipe the skin of the coions among them from the navel down to below the navel; and make a straight incision dividing the skin of the coions up to the white spot, and burn it subtly as it comes; then pierce the white spot with water to I large opening, and drain all the water, and then put on your sponges, and raise the white spot; and do not touch the navel, but only the white spot; wipe all or in pieces immediately the cost of it subtly, for if you do not wipe it well enough, the water will return; and if the blood spurts out on your work, keep it in its place until you have finished the work of the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the navel to a costure, and cure it as the others wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the jaw corrupted by another illness, you must tie up the blood vessels that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; then cut the bone throughout its suspension, drain the abscess, and cure it like we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is collected into two parts together, like two roots; if the other part is similarly shaped as you have made the first one, then dry the blood, and put in the wound a layer of lint soaked in rose oil; and put on another layer of lint soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two bones, and put under doubled cloths, and bind on all around as it is customary in this case.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool yarn as described above and be assembled by stitching in the armpit, and one of the bones grasps on the foundation up to the shoulder, and the other at the painful part; and the other two thumbs on the two angles, and when all is assembled, restore the restriction in the armpit loop; and never is this branch of cautery like the size of iron, and take only one needle burnish, and prick the skin of the bones, and if there is a white swelling that contains the blood is discovered; if you take the cautery as described above, and burn that swelling as we have said, and burn with this subtle burnish.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if you apply it in all ways as you wish, until you are satisfied; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and take that this work is more profitable; and observe that the works of this size are safer; and do not do anything that opposes, or incisions or other things that may harm, until you have cured what opposes.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horribleness, if he accepts perforation, as I have said, and when you are certain by the indications that the aqueous extract is sufficient, if you make the patient sit on a low chair; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with the whole of the surrounding area wide open, and make the perforation deep enough; and if the wound is large, make the opening wide enough for all the blood to drain out; then put a pad on the wound and bind it tightly, and leave the remaining blood to drain out naturally; and cure the wound until it is healed; and if the bleeding does not stop, drink a penny or the instrument used for treating the hydropic swelling, as it is formed above; and widen the wound and make sure the blood returns, and assemble it after six months or when the pain has ceased, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the heel of the foot.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Hares that in this section of this twig have doubt in many places, for I believe that moisture is worth leaving; and I shall tell you the work and the signs of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come or break, and I have seen this often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive swelling and pain, which is spread as far as the joints; or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is like that of honey; and there is no pain, and it is an abscess of grief; and sometimes it is a perforated abscess, full of pus and blood, of a reddish color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the disposition of the abscess that it is solid, when you touch it; and I do not believe that you should touch it.</start_of_turn>
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of pain in the thighs, and can well make the size above this semblance, and above the other limbs; and that you must keep close to the coions, then the egg is on high, and the thread is of white silk, and deliver the yolk from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these legs that are not needed, if you must therefore draw out the egg, and keep close; and if it is in the silk, or in that which is within the blood vessels, if you must deliver all that is within, and keep it rounded off.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the cartilage is loose at the root or behind, it is necessary that you grasp it all, and pull out the root, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is finished, if you employ wool wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme des coions	of the heel of the foot.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering similar to an eye, with the softening of the coions, and the patient groans greatly when he moves; and the cure for this disease is very similar to that which we have said before, and all that we will tell you about this matter will be according to what the ancients have done
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on the left side of the chair, then suspend the ligature from the two hooks at the waist, to all the vessels that stretch to the groin, and hold them firmly, and stretch them out; then pierce through the thick membrane with a large needle to open the vessels, as much as they are uncovered, and then drain the pus from the wound, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in the temples; then insert an awl or a double thread, and tie it to the first part or where the vein has come loose, and tie it firmly to the other part; then press firmly around the middle, according to the length of the bone, and remove the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as usual or apply a bandage, so that no vessel leaks that nourishes any of the testicles; for by that there will be no harm, and if all the vessels come together, if you tie the testicles to all the vessels, if they do not lose their nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and dry and do not swell.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the disease
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The coming of this root is by section which comes from above or by extension upon the belly in the part of the intestines; for the intestines descend from that route to one of the buttocks; and that route is either by section or by extension of the root, and these two ways are the causes: either by percussion or by jump, or by pressure or by raising the grief weight, or by similar things; and the signs when it is by section of the syfac are that there is swelling and swelling in length, and that it does not come immediately; and the abscess is equal up to the navel, because the syfac presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the shoulder is dislocated, it causes sudden pain, and the scapula is displaced, from the stretching of the skin and the protrusion of the bone from the shoulder socket.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never does blood flow with the intestines, and is retained when it is pressed, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of fire with fear, because it is known to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	If you command or the patient must retain the intestine in its place within the wound, if it can return there; then either sew on its collar between your hands, and hold the thighs; then place the thumb above, and grasp all the skin of the buttocks from the length; then push inwards the intestines to the size that you must do to open the wound, and so on; then pull out the syfac that is below the skin of the buttocks, as long as the white syfac is discovered throughout; then place your index finger in that which teaches the buttock, in that which is between the white syfac which is below the skin of the buttocks, and between the second syfac, and depart that which is behind the buttocks, and between the second syfac; and then move the hand of the wrist inwards of the buttock, and place the white syfac at the top of your left hand, and hold the buttocks to the whole syfac towards the size; and command the minister to extend the buttocks in high, and unfasten that which is behind the ligature; and ask at your sides if there is any intestine or white syfac hardened, and if you find nothing, if the wound is at the back; then take a needle or make a large stitch of X threads, and pass it in the back part of the syfac, which is behind the skin of the buttocks; after the size, then grasp the threads that appear from the needle, until there are three threads; and assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is behind the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of two parts; then cover the threads with the skin, and tie them in two parts, so that no vessels that support them can enter into the wound, except for the wound itself; and put the thread back according to the first thread along two fingers; and after these two threads leave the syfac that is behind the buttock with a great space; and after all the rest according to the roundness of the egg. Then grasp at the part that is behind the skin of the buttocks, as much as without remorse, and bow; as we have said before; then mix coarse wool with oil, and put it in the wound, and mix the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the fat surrounding the wound as we mentioned before, after the incision, in doubt of further bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the limb stay still until it quiets down; and if it lingers too long, if so be raised from hot water, and put on what we have said, until it quiets down; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I have never seen anyone succeed in curing it with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And they say that it is made like the twig that binds the nut, in part as you bind the blood vessels, after the size above loosely to the dressing; then join them together, and cure the abscess of what causes it, until the blood vessels cease to bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes rupture in anger, as we have said, and open the wound; and do not touch any intestines as they are connected, and if you do, that is enough, and repair all the hours; and all the blood that remains will depart; and this happens from the extension of the sinew that is in anger, as we have said, because it is extended, then is softened and relaxed and open; and cure it if by cautery, as we have said before; and never cured by iron in this manner: and let the patient lie still on his back between your hands, and grasp the limb of the rupture inflated with a large measure of three fingers; and then draw out the sinew that is under the leather that covers it, and take hold of the hair and bring it out from the swelling; and press down on the belly, and cut out the two ends of the sinew that appear from the swelling, and cut one and the other; and then draw out the root of the swelling, and do not cover up the swelling or extend the egg or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the root of the intestines; and cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you have closed the wound, if the swelling subsides and heals the wound, as long as it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and has no mark in its course, and the burn is mute in this place, and more adjacent to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the nails
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times is the skin of the nails softened in households, because the nails that are within are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when you see it cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to cut the softened skin over the natural skin; then gather the layers together with a staple, and if you see that, close the excess of softened skin with two or three stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the hair.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	That which chastens is commanded in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to force it except in two ways: one is that the witness to the wound responds when asked and gives the cure; and the other is that we often mix up the chastening of some beasts with our attendants, as with oxen and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastening is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the joint is softened and limp; then we grasp it with our hand, until it is set and you can no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the shoulder joint: it is commanded that you hold the best position, and press the skin of the armpits to your left hand, then bind the sling, and support upon each side at the top of the shoulder when you have well supported them; and leave no trace of a scab or any secret matter which is on the vessels; and this method of cautery is more delicate than that which is done by traction, for in traction remains by chance no hair, for it desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary for us to do so for two reasons: the first is that the patients themselves can respond when asked, and the second is that we have often had to cauterize beasts for our assistants, such as oxen and sheep and goats and others. I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways: by traction or by incision.  In the former, we seat the beast in warm water, until the hairs are softened and limp; then we grasp them with our hand, until they are firm and we can no longer feel them.  As for cauterization of great size: it is necessary to hold the beast steady, and to press the skin of the hairs with our left hand; then to bind the suspension, and to grasp each hair with our thumb and index finger, when they are well secured; and leave no trace of blood or clot on the vessels.  This method of cauterization is milder than that which is done by traction, because at traction the beast desires to move; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is in two ways as at home: one is if between the two testicles there appears as much as the figure of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in court it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has on the navel as much as a phallus and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure for wounds and boils is that you cover all the boils with lead plates; in the second method, for those whose urine spurts through the pores of the skin, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Hermaphroditism is in accordance with two manners: one if between the two testicles opens as with the figure of female nature, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine of the female. And the other manner if it is in women, and has on the navel as with a girl and two testicles. And the cure for the tumour and fame is if you cut off all the testicle stones, and the cure is like for other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tension of a wound is a boil placed on the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have had as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to hold the superfluousness of the tension at your hand or armpit, and to grasp it lightly; and do not go too deep, for blood does not come out, then the cure of other medicines as long as it is healthy; and at another wound that arises at the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance spurts out, and that is called the old "coward disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you manage to keep it still, as we have said, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is erratic because the woman’s nature is not known, or if the rupture is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that comes with it; or it is caused by injury, or by a subtle or thick scab, and it is made by dirt, or gravel, or pus, or anything similar; and if it begets conception, and the birth, and by chance the flowers are to have; and the knowledge of this is by the regard of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling is close to the surface, if you wish at the shoulder or at the elbow.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle scab, and it is close to the skin, if you are in a hurry, and it bursts: put your two thumbs together, and the patient should be behind, with her legs spread; then the two thumbs are to be placed, as long as the subtle scab is round, and above the swelling; then take oil, and pour it on the wound, and put it on the limb, and lie the patient down on her chest, so that it does not swell further
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is recommended that you grasp it with pliers resembling a laurel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of a hard nature, if you suspend it on the incision and grasp it; and have medicines at rest, such as chamomile, dragons blood, incense, and plenty of eggs; then mix in some lard, so that the wound does not adhere; and let it be long, and mix in some lint; then let it be cured by other means until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the marrow comes soft, if it is grasped according to this method, it will not be an abscess.</start_of_turn
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is in the marrow, do not touch fire.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	Des emorroides.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	Emorroids are openings of veins which without support are not usually cured, and when they are old if they become swollen; and we have mentioned in the preceding chapters the signs and symptoms, and I shall now say which are the ones which bring about cure
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	The ones which are at the bottom of the belly, we can sense them, are those which we can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the abscess tightly with your hands, and press on its roots, then sprinkle on soothing medicines like acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces when an hour has passed, and put it in cold water; and when the bleeding stops, if you wish, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and similar things, and then give her barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make I plaster on her back
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is swollen, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make a circular bandage at the back and have lumps towards the wound; then take linen and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elderberry with old wine, and make the wound air-tight.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the abscess rests, if you cure the limb of its swelling as long as it is healthy; the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a blackhead, if you cover it as I have said before; and then cure as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn
des apostemes de la marris	Emorroids are openings of veins which without support are usually not accustomed; and when old, they become swollen; and as we have said in the division, their signs and symptoms, I will say here those which resolve cure. I say that emorroids and swellings, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the cure with iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the testicles tightly, grasp the head in its roots, then sprinkle over medicines which restrain blood, such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then close the wound an hour later, then put it into cold water; and if there is still bleeding, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and similar things, and then take oatmeal, and mix it with honey and assails, and make one application upon her back. And if it stops, that is good. If not, if there is a wound at the back, and there are clots, take lint, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make it bleed. And when the wound is healed, if it is a swelling which is called “albathir,” it is red, and is similar to a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the swelling; and then it will heal as well.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come about in the belly, such as carbuncles and pyreous abscesses and herpes and worms and tumors and fistulas and hemorrhoids and scalded abscesses, and other diseases which I have mentioned in the previous section.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is obvious that you are in great distress at this treatment of the carbuncle that appears in the armpit; for it is not of the common carbuncles that remain stuck; and if you are able to learn the work of iron, behold if the carbuncle is already in the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red as you see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not be in a hurry to pierce, but make me wait until the pain is gone; and then seat the patient on a chair, and take two small stools or a cushion and support him on his back and join his limbs together; and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his hands under his knees, and bind them securely with a bandage; then draw out the swelling towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument that we use to open the armpit, so that this thing comes into its natural shape; and know that when you bring this instrument, that you should first make a hole to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters under the instrument does not go too deep and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the armpit with a cloth so that the instrument does not hurt; and know that you must put the cap of the instrument under, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when an abscess ruptures, and one washes the hand with oil, if the clot covers the head, the spleen and the liver; and when the wound is emptied, one must put in the wound some soft wool soaked in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the dressing firmly over the wound, and put over it a layer of linen cloth soaked in water or mallow, which must be cooked; then one must cure the wound after two days of washing following this. As long as it is not healed, do not remove the dressing and the wound by force with water and honey, but with water or the root of rue and arnica, which must be cooked; and then repeat the washing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the wound, one must take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the previous part.
de l’enfantement	From infancy.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The peasant is first of all at the dance when he knows the figure of natural birth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down on her belly and desiring to smell the broth: then the child is immediately born; then the afterbirth that follows is like the natural figure of a birth, and the child comes out head first, and supports itself with its hand; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on her belly, the child will come out head first; for when it comes out head first, it supports itself with its hand, and the mother delivers the afterbirth of its superfluities by natural confinement. This is what comes not from nature but from the devil.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It never comes from its feet, but comes from the ribs or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes from its belly or its side, and is converted by an accident from its collar, and by other harmful figures; if the peasant is at the dance and is wise and discreet in these matters, and avoids error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures in which one must help him
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child naturally descends on his navel, the woman gives a gentle push, and the child’s ability is weak; if she sits on a chair or the women hold her; and she should have an oily substance or rue to anoint herself, and then she should join the dance between her two thighs where she forms a small space.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and bind its nail as long as the moisture which is inside comes out; and press the belly of the woman as long as the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to clench the woman with muscle spasm of ruegen with oil of poppyseed; then make her drink and vomit violently, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour: if the fetus is now gone.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out violently, if you can, hold them lightly thus and thus; and if they will not enter, put the woman on a seat, and support her feet high; then withdraw the seat from the earth, and hold the woman, that she does not sneeze; and if the hands will not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you grip the hands at the shoulder which is in front, and pull out the fetus, and strain equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon his feet, if you can push upwards; then twist a little to the right and to the left, until they are even; then grasp the feet and extend them to the right and to the left.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he cannot jump up to the hips, if the master commands him to jump, and makes him cough; if he jumps up, God help him
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	If not otherwise, if the limb hangs limp and limp, as is natural.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For in such a case it is easily done.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump up so willingly as we have seen, say if he takes muscle powder of elevation, and oil of poppies, and gum masticated, and grind them all together; and put on the nature of the woman inside and remove this swelling, then let her sit in hot water until the ribs are dry; and when she is softened up again, give her a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour; then let her sit on her seat, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and take her pulse gently, for the child jumps now
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the child’s discharge from his genitals.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the boy comes in this shape, if he puts his hands on his face and chin; then either he is sleepy on his collar and hangs his head down, or he is asleep; and he folds his hands on his chest and then grasps his hands under his belly, and pulls up his buttocks as much as they appear from his throat; and if the boy does not jump, take his hands and move them, then move his belly upwards, and put back his hands; and the boy will yawn and stretch; and tell the woman to hold him until the boy is better.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child who comes out with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you to make the limb move: if it will not move, if you cannot lift the limb, call for help; if she cannot call for help, make her lie down on her side, and pull out the legs forward; then bring in the muscle that I told you about; and if she does not move, make her sit on the edge of the bed, and study to restore the limb; and when the limb is restored, the child will recover according to his natural figure, and make him cough, and command her to hold him until the child is better.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face twisted towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command thee to grasp his hand firmly, then rotate it forward and backward, and move it lightly; and when it is equal, place upon it the oily substance of alum and oil, as we have said, and then command it to move forward and backward; and when thou hast done this, command him to sit down and command him to grasp it; and make him sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same measure at all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes forth with force in this manner at every second, if thou grasp its finger, while the moisture is evacuated; and if it hangs upon his face and neck, grasp the abscess, that it be not retained, and the child will die; then draw the child inwards, as thou didst command, and command the woman not to touch it again: for it will be loosened lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	Therefore if it is slightly dislocated.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	For often in the issue of these bones there is evacuation of blood, never two or three; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Why are strange things happening, and why do people die without a name? I know that they are multiplied, and are devoured by the syfac which is linked to the bud; and they never go out as naturally as all the others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they go out suddenly, if the cure is as we have said, and if there is the subtle dance, and make broth and lightly what it makes; and make peace as much as it is worth to save life.
de plusors enfans	Moreover.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen; and they are all formed like children by the measure of the glorious sage, and it must be known that the subtle dance brings about many things; do as it is commanded.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfant mort	De l’enfant mort.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman of a dead child or womb, if she does not suffer greatly, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; if you believe that the woman is in good health, and has no accident or fears of death; if you believe that the woman is lying on her back, with her shoulders flexed forward and her legs raised; and that the minister takes hold of two fingers, or binds her to the bed if she does not recover at the descent of the child; then smear the mouth of the woman with oil moistened with muscus of alum and fenugreek and poppy seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscus; then put her in the basin lightly, and wait until she comes to or until she vomits what is convenient for her, and take care that the child descends from his head; if you put the sponges in his eyes or nose or in his mouth or in the palm of his hand or by the beard or in the forcele or close to the ribs, and if the descent is on his toes, he will grasp or bite and has low ribs; and take hold of the sponge with your right hand, and put the heel between the two of your left hand, and hold her firmly with your whole hand, and grasp the sponge in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and that is the form of the sponge.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the hook finds another bone, or the third one if you are dealing with it, if so the extraction must be even; and then stretch them evenly by moving from side to side, for that is the way to break, and if the nails are left in, keep them in place by means of force.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If some remains stuck, if one sees a little of its fat there, and pulls it into that part, and treat the other part; and if there is still some remaining, if put this bone or higher up again, and do so until it comes out whole.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be pulled back by the stretching, then you must cover over the drape, until it comes out whole; then grasp it at the joint of the thumb or the wrist, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and have two thumbs.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the shoulder is great and swollen at its exit, or if there is much pain collected there, if you must stretch out the spinous process between your two thumbs and hold the pain and draw it out; or you must twist it with the instrument which is called the "almidach," as it comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one; and thus make the swelling grow naturally; and then force out the bones as they hold them, and if the head of the shoulder leaps out and strains at the forcele, if it is split, as much as the moisture that comes out; and if it cannot be closed, if the cavity fills with pieces of bone as you must; and if it is swollen in the belly or the ribs, if you must loosen the ribs as much as the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	if the swelling is on its feet, if the limb is drawn towards the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is swollen in the belly or the arm, if you must draw out the swelling with a drape wrapped around the hand; and hold the belly or arm, as much as the moisture that comes out; and if the other limb is stiff and the shoulder remains dislocated, if you see the patient raise their hand up to their armpit with a spasm, and treat them until the spasm subsides; then apply an ointment or two, and force them out; and if the mouth of the armpit is narrowed by scar tissue that has come, if it is not possible for me to pass, then it is necessary to bring moist and fatty things; and to apply poultices, and soak in soft and moist water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the fetus lies on its cost, put it even; if he stirs, remember what we said concerning the living child; and if he cannot be delivered whole, if his limbs are torn out piecemeal, leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	When you have done this, if you remember what we said about the postpartum period, as is the case in many women who are in labor; if blood comes, if it be put in a restraining bath, and if other cures are administered.</start_of_turn>
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had a child in her womb, and she consulted with one beside her, and refuted the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she came to have an abscess in her belly, which grew so large that it burst, and began to cause great swelling.</start_of_turn>
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for help, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound.</start_of_turn
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after that a few days another.</start_of_turn
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at the mouth, for in this belly there is no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that this was the bone of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wish for the wound, and in treating the hands bones, as long as the woman is in a better state; and I saw the woman long tense in the belly, and this was all for naught but a little bow of blood. I have never remembered this chapter except for the fact that whenever the master finds a strange thing, he calls for help.</start_of_turn>
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to restore the head of the shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, as we have seen in the books; and there are two returns as two blows of the hand.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Whatever be the curvature of the nose, whether blunt or pointed; and whatever be the breadth of the face or the length of the chin; and whatever be the width of the mouth and the teeth, and of length half a palm or more; and between these two limits there must be two insertions of this same substance which are closed one against the other, half a palm in length or more; and these two insertions must be fixed in the mouth of the marrow to open when the two noses are bent.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails; and it has two holes at each end, as you see, of a palm in length, and two wide at the base; and when you see the marrow open with all the instruments, sit the woman aside, keep your feet still and your legs over, then insert the two nails together into the marrow, and hold the handle of the instrument between your thighs; then grasp your hand with all the instruments, as you did with the nails equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the patient feels what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very sharp, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when you behold them appear, the work hastens, and the higher your home is for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not expect the instrument until it appears, because its necessity is not dispensable
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, if you command the patient to retain its afterbirth, and then expel it forcefully, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose; and if it spurts through that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not happen, if you take a pot and make a perforation or incision, and put herbs in that can open the mouth of the womb, like chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, be boiled or stewed in water over the fire; then put a cautery or perforation in the pot, and the other hand in the mouth of the womb, and hold it tight until the vapor comes from inside the womb; then make her expel it, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is sprained,
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and there is no other remedy, if it is commanded at the dance that she dips her left hand in oil of sesam or in almond butter, and then puts it back in its place, and desires the second one; and when she has found it, if she grasps it and stretches it out both to the right and to the left, so that the mark does not bleed; but it must move slightly to the right and to the left, and then treat. If it comes and disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mark of the wound is black, as we have said, for the cure of exterminating and fumigating herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, do not use anything for treatment; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie it to the woman's hip, then clip it with oil of tetra-pharmacon; if she will go and remain, there will be force; however, whenever she has gone, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and the patient bleaches.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it be certain therefore that fumigations are helpful in this case: neither of the ancients has proved the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which we fumigate the woman is that we keep her at the retention of the flowers and the secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is seen like a dog in heat, and put the head of the sufferer in the nature, and the limbs large over the fire; and let the fumigations rise over the charcoal, and the smoke until it is consumed, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	No child is born who does not have the solid basis perceived, for it is grasped by an subtle spark: if you wish to cure that which pierces this spark at its root, do not prick with any sharp object, and keep the dressing so that it does not touch; then put on a bandage of fine linen dipped in wine and oil, and then cure with oil until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, put or pull a piece of lead and leave it there, and be still as long as the patient sees a tremor in the bedchamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Never comes this stumblement from the support of a wound or an incision; if you cover that support: if it be cured, as we have said of the lead weight.</start_of_turn>
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its foundation</start_of_turn>
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the destruction of the foundation are nodulations, and those that come from the breaking of the foundation are protrusions, or in the space of two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, if it is behind, and includes moisture and white pus or a subtle swelling, and never are these fistulas harmless; and they are known by the patient when he makes an evacuation, or by a sudden movement towards.</start_of_turn
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and half the thigh; and reach as far as the hip joint, and as far as the coccyx bone.</start_of_turn>
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Or thus one knows at the fistula bursting at the root, and not bursting: and it is only that you bite your thumb index or root, and insert a fine needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no swelling.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is swelling, if you insert a sponge or a horsehair, as long as you feel the swelling or the hair at your root; and if you do not feel it, and there is no other pain, no vomiting, no diarrhea, as we have said: remove the hair that is causing the pain; do not linger in curing.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urinary tract, if in a jump the urine spurts out, and cannot be held back by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived up to the hip joint, if there is a vein swelling up to the limb; if there is no swelling and the pain persists, if it has already been reduced, and there is no other pain, medicine or support is of no use; and in these bursting fistulas there is no cure except work, and folly of the fools who interfere.</start_of_turn>
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that one which is neither new nor old, hope of health by fire exists, as I have learned; and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he holds his legs up to his thighs, and inclines his thighs towards his belly; then make an attempt to pull, or plunge if there is discomfort, until you see or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the root of the limb, if you must bite your thumb index finger, if you feel that the attempt has been perceived; or uncover or feel between your thumb and index finger the flesh or bone, then pull out what is foreign; if it does not yield, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One cannot well heal any wound, but this is often the case; and the help which one makes is this, if one should burn the cautery cautiously according to the size of the fistula, as it is said; and pour toutes les plaies du corps, tant qu’il vienne delez le fondement; and make this two or three times, until you see that these hairs which are similar to a quill of an oyster, must be burnt; and then treat with soft compresses and oil, until that hair has gone, then treat the wound by stitching the edges together and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is still sane, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is still sane, that is good; for if he attempts to do otherwise, and does not pierce straight through to the very foundation, and between his thumb and the attempt there is a thick covering of hair or chaff, and you see the fistula at the point where the covering is broken; if you seize the start of the fistula, and hold it fast before the attempt, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the attempt; then the attempt will be delivered, and the pain will cease. Then remove the hairs which appear like a feather of oil, and there will be nothing left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not please you, and if you are in doubt between the two things, if the fire cautery or the medicine is strong.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, two things are assembled: namely, the burning of these hairs and the coagulation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of soft swellings with ointment applied with a brush or chopped chaff, until the liquid escapes, and is forced out by the burnt hair; then cure the wound of the surrounding parts with rough chaff, and these are the dry medicines
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes right up to the bone, and is pushed out by the flesh, if the bone or the foundation is loosened, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If thou feel a pulling, and between two fingers is the thumb or the index or the wrist, or if it is near to piercing, if there be naught but flight and hope, by the administration of one of these three remedies: either thou cauterize it as we have said, or thou bind it firmly, or if thou puttest if with force and cure it as first; and do not go too hastily, that thou cover not that which holds the foundation, and bring about the evacuation in the right direction; then cure it as we have said; by chance if it be healed, or thou eschew that covering and the mucus then that it is bound from the foundation; or by pulling or by other pointed instrument; then bind up that wound which is in the wound, as thou dost; and study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it be a less grievous thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistula made in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either cost beside the root of the skin underneath, if you take an attempt pierced at the head according to this fashion:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	...and you must hold the attempt at the root all the way through the fistula until it is at the shoulder.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And never are fistula made in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either cost beside the root of the skin underneath, if you take an attempt pierced at the head according to this fashion: if it is pierced at the root of the foundation, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, as you bite your head or foundation; and draw out the head of the thread, and reunite the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and leave it one or two; and do not restrain at any time, until the thread has overcome these bones that are between two, and are swollen; then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not break through, if you force it to break in every way you can, it will not be too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to force it with stitches if it is deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is sound.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny spa detalle of the fistula is thick and blunt on one side and smooth on the other side, for it is not to be grasped with that which must not be grasped, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrhages are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation like grains of resin, small or large, and are cured with pressure alone; or if there is one or more and they are driven out of the foundation and up to the head of the foundation; but those that are driven out again have some moisture in them and are cured with pressure or with a little orange juice or blood, and have the color of flesh; and the cure for those that are deep in the foundation is that you command the patient to stretch and walk about until the foundation is forced out, and the thread is seen; if you are in a hurry, and you cannot hold it with your nails or thumb, then grasp it at its roots; if it cannot be held by its moisture, if you take it to the drapeil or cotton or a piece of chamlet, and strain it out, then grasp it and powder the surrounding area with hot powders instead of cautery; or you can cauterize it as it is said or according to the instructions of the treatise, because the cure of other cures is when it is healed; and if the foundation cannot be forced out, if you bite the patient with a biting and rasping clisteer to force out what is in or under the foundation, if it can be forced out openly; when the patient cannot endure it, and the thread is forced out of the foundation, if the cure is simple, then grasp it with your thumb or nails and pull it out, and cure it as said above, until it is healed, and that it avoids a new incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is suspected that the shoulder has slipped according to this method: take I thread of thread, pierce it with a needle, then draw the thread down and pierce the needle through the other side, and twist II threads of thread from the spool around the needle, and if it is thick; restrain the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and do the same with the rest, and leave I to correct the excess of blood; then put upon the foundation I bandage soaked in oil of roses or cerote, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it blanches, and when it is white, if the cure of oil and other cures, until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	if itching of skin or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There is often itching of the intestines due to worms or constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is suspected that a sprain or fracture is at a point of the nail or the nail-bed, which does not allow it to moisten; then cure it until it is healed if it is possible; and if it cannot be healed, if you must repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until the wound bursts, and be scraped out; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	indeed.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small appearance that appears before the body, and goes out through the pores; and never does it freeze, and is felt just like death from fever, and comes throughout the body, and more so in the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure for this is that you take a sponge of goose feathers, or a sponge of strong vulture, and put that sponge on the fever, until the circles of the fever turn the palm of the hand; then move your hand all the way up to the fever, and put it out through the pores, and scrape the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, if you do this with a wasp's claw or iron according to this shape, and be subtle and attentive below:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, if you do this with a wasp's claw or iron according to this shape, and be subtle and attentive below: do not perceive it, for it must hold tight, and press it. And if you see it, if you cauterize the edge, if it is before or next to the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a blister.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a blister of silver or gold, or of wasps' honey or beeswax; and never make of these small and great things, according to these things which are brought before them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who accompany me in the treatment of children who are feeble and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	They appear in clusters in small and large sizes, or the belly is tied in such a manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a swelling or the belly is bound, if you see it, and the shoulder is dislocated either frontally or backwards; and if there is one puncture on one side and two on the other; or if the belly or one of the thighs is filled with medicines from a bladder or parchment, or if it is pierced all around with fine needles, and there is one inch of space between each puncture, then insert in these punctures one strong thread of thread of flax twisted into an X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a nail; and when the medicine is inside, if there is an instrument in front of a strong thread, then clip it; and that is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let neither the medicine be too hot nor too cold; smear the chief with ointment of oil or balm of egg, or something similar; then bind it loosely. Then hold the hands together of the operator until the veins are full; then draw out the ointment, and leave the patient’s legs exposed, and if the operator sees that it is sufficient, if the swelling has subsided; and if he sleeps all night, this will be a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you order him to lie down for the relief of a stomach ailment, and the physician hastens to leave, if he resumes his ailment as soon as he is well again.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is swelling of the limb or the foundation or an abscess, if the ointment is as subtle as for a young child; this is the form of subtle ointment that should be placed so that the skin is not strained:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned in this chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather, the treatment of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on what causes them, and depending on the place or the wound itself, and how it is made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are by biting of stone, and the size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or sickle, or similar things; or that are made according to the laws of bones, as for wounds that bite on the cheek, or on the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, or similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for a wound of the head, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come to mind in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a wound of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the depth of the wound: if you do so quickly, you will make the patient worse even if blood comes from the wound itself; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction of the affected part; and heed the patient’s swelling of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does not recover, if he has lost his appetite, and does not drink wine, does not eat flesh; take out the wound, if there is any suspicion of infection, cover the wound with soft cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine; and if there is no suspicion of infection, put a dressing on the wound while it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by wind, dust, or anything else; I will tell you later about this. If the blood has moved, put on some ointment until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a nail and the edges do not reunite by tension, if you reunite them by stitching, as I will say later about wounds of the belly, of stitching.</start_of_turn
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and is open, and only held by a single ligament, if the bone is grasped; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat coarse food, such as testicles and barley, just like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you find or see decay of flesh, and it is not at the bone, if you grasp the limb firmly, and pull it out completely, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched by medicine, if that is the case, and if you find it dislocated, if you can join it with a thread; and if that does not help, burn it.</start_of_turn>
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a minor cure: then put on this powder which adheres as soon as it is moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them finely, and apply to the wound, and bind firmly, until it is well healed and reunited with all its blood; and then bind it well and leave it to drain, if it does not swell; for one does not plaster up medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we perform this treatment alone, when we have neither incense nor blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, even in this state, if you do not put on this powder; but put on some unguents digested, or poultices of ground barley made with water and honey, until it boils over; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, if you grasp the edges carefully; I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the neck or the artery is cut.</start_of_turn>
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, if there is no other cause except to leave the cure, and do not put anything restraining, because it hinders the nerve and makes it shrink; and do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold, and the continuation of the blood is with the brain, which is the most sensitive limb; but if the medicine is applied, as for example with chammock bathed in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and urine bathed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this method, and moist unguents.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the edges are raw and bleeding, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is deep and the flesh is swollen and full of blood, if the artery is severed, and blood flows profusely; if the vein is cut, and marrow and bone marrow are mixed together; if the tonsil is cut, or the epiglottis, and the tongue is grasped, by which the meat will go; if the thumb is fractured above the wrist, do not touch the throat but return it to its natural position; then stretch it out gradually and leave it for a while; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed; if there is a piece of bone in the wound, if the fragments are numerous, do not remove any of them; leave them until the wound is healed and aligned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure is as I have said in the chapter.</start_of_turn
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of from a wound of a lance or a knife</start_of_turn
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it be a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if thou seest that the wound is open to the wind, know that the wound is mortal; and if it be not deep, and it be fresh throughout its extent, if thou dost not put medicine on it at the first hour, do not bind it up with the skin only, but raise it up from the body, and comfort the patient; but put in an astringent, and bind it twice round; and if thou dost not have an astringent, put in the wound some cotton to absorb the moisture, and cause the patient to sleep over the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there be no spasm, do not move the body excessively, neither stretching nor straining. When thou seest the bones in their place, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tension of the tent and other cures, as long as it is sane; and if it cannot be cured, and if there is an opening, drain the pus that has formed; if the cure is to be made as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision with a needle or knife, and it is simple or deep at the front, or if the cure of what is before; if it is great, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is fixed in the bone, and if it is fractured, if you can remove the splinter; and if it cannot be removed, if you leave it to fester, if it aligns the extractions; and for other wounds, as for other members, it is the judge’s decision as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	it is the judgement of other wounds as with us.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The belly is large and painful; from a great wound never does the intestine come out, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intestines are introduced; the costure is more painful, and never is it better than a small wound than a great one, because it makes the intestines swell more, if they are not returned bit by bit; for when they are returned too much, they cause more pain, and for this reason it is better to leave the intestines in their place rather than to pull them out again. The intestines are returned from the belly in three ways: the two common costures are in the costure of the belly, and the costures of the other wounds are in the ribs and two others are common to other wounds; and all of them are more common with the costure of the belly.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is affected, and there is pain, two things must be done: either by the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, soak the area slightly: moisten a sponge or place a wet drape over it only, or rub with vinegar and salt, and elevate the intestine until the swelling subsides; and do not make this movement restrictive, and be silent that you avoid further swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the swelling going away, if the intestine is filled with liquid or is cooked and callous, because by this means the entrance to the thing is aligned; and if it cannot enter, if you make a hole in the wound with the instrument to remove the clot; the first cure is to be silent that the size is not increased, that you should not cut excessively without necessity; and this is the instrument for cutting: if you cut from within the curve and do not deflect, and once you have done this, shape it like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestine is pushed forward, if you stop bleeding in accordance with its natural form in its own place, you are mistaken, for this is of no use.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and is at the lower part of the belly, if you order the patient to sit up behind his back and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is at the lower part of the belly, put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and in the same way if the swelling of the belly is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand over that part which is higher than the other; and thus you must order what I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, put what appears between your hands, and join the edges; this is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or more according to the size of the wound, then leave a space equal to the thickness of two fingers at the top of the wound, and pierce the two holes of the skin with the two holes of the needle, which is from the inside of the skin, until you have pierced through that part, and join the two ends of the needle together with three or four stitches; then strain with a double thread around the needle from two parts, and join the two holes of the wound together, and then leave a space equal to the thickness of two fingers, and pierce another needle; and tie the knot of the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely restrained; and let the needles be neither too fine nor too thick, for the fine needles close up all the flesh, and the thick needles do not penetrate well: therefore it is better that they be neither too fine nor too thick; and do not push the needles too far into the flesh and leather, for they do not close up and open the wound before the suture; and then close the holes of the needles, that they do not bleed the patient while sleeping, and put on patches or bandages over the holes of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them on until the wound is healed; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for there is only one or two stitches to make, and join the two holes of the skin and the two holes of the needle together with a needle or with a strong piece of thread in the middle. And when you have pierced these holes all together, if you remember the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that we usually cut the threads; and leave a space between each suture equal to the thickness of a thumb; this stitch is useful for a wound that has been caused by a knife or something similar, which was more than a palm of the hand wide, and was full of intestines that were two palms of the hand wide, and was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will restore the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound has healed for fifteen days; then the cure will be finished, and he will be healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the madman thought he was dying, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with medicine, for I was in Italy where there was no medicine, no drugs; and I used only oil on the wound twice a day, and applied honey until he was healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will say two ways to stitch: take the needle and pass it through from the underside until it reaches the nail on the right; when it has perceived the nail on the right, if you have pricked the skin or if you have pulled the needle, and you have passed through again from the underside until you reach the nail; and you will understand this stitching if you stitch like a leatherworker, and that you leave once the nail of one side, and you take hold of the other, until the stitching is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galiens does properly, if it is so as none other, which unites the two parts naturally, and joins one chief to the other chief, in this manner: pierce with a needle or chief of a needle close to the other, and make the one pierce only, and leave the two chiefs of the face; then draw out the needle, and make it pierce from the back until it reaches this far side, having two chiefs of the face; then make it pierce one and the other from the back until it reaches this far side, in two other chiefs of the needle that are on the other side; and this is the perfect method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens does not often testify to this, and no one bears witness to it; we must sew up the belly with two needles, or there is thread in the yarn; and one needle must be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and when the belly has been rotated too much, if the stitching is more tight than in other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestines and the cost, then put on the healing powder; if it has moved, do not put on any dressing except what is present until the wound contracts; and close the wound, and be bound by the stitches and the edges; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, if you put on nothing, it will start to swell and fester, and move two or three times until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You do not need any other medicine in many situations where wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will not heal properly at its principal parts, you must know that you can moisten coarse linen cloth in warm oil of tempor or rose oil, and put it around the wound, and soak the buttocks; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this happens many times, if you give them wine vinegar enemas, and the same if putrefaction comes up to the intestines; and pierce it through, and drain what is inside, as when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called 'jeuns' cannot heal when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and because of the slightness of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the flesh leaps from the wound, if it is reset backwards as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is yellowed and becomes black, if you must tie the black part, for there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the tendons, and suspend the two ends from the part below the wound until the flesh has healed, to align the extraction when the flesh leaps out, and the wound will bow.
de la routure dou boueil	because of the wound's swelling.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small pieces, because I have seen that one bone has been swollen or pierced by a lance; and the wound was at the stomach and became filled and became a fistula, and in this there was discharge and wind; I treated it according to this, and I did not cease to soften it until it was healed, and the wound closed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I see it soldered, I doubt that the patient has no harm in his belly; and there is no point of harm, but it remains in many better conditions, food and drink; and they say that whenever there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated in a timely manner: take tweezers and grasp the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have grasped the mouth, if you put two fingers on the wound, if it stretches its mouth upwards; then pull out the tooth, and this is kept if it does not slip, and put another tweezers after in that manner until the wound is completely closed; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief tears in the intestine, and there is no further nuisance to the patient, and it can be ligated with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast, in a timely manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is loosened, and then tie to the head of this thread one thread of linen that is twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and in sewing up the intestine, and keep it in its place; and this manner of stitching with tweezers is not fierce but according to the way of engagement and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the large intestines, if there is no danger or discomfort, except for slightness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds that break open or are incisions, when they burst, if called out universally are 'fistula', and even when they are plugged and rent bowe.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to the truth a nodation that is hard and white, or one from which no pain is felt; and it is just as plugged as the quill of a bird; neither in clear liquid does it break, nor in thick liquid; neither does it break at all, nor does it break too much; I have already spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no corruption, is healed only by one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or the hardness of the flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hardness within, and on the bones, that does not allow the blood to grow; or because there is too much liquid; or because the blood vessels are corrupted, and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property of the region is late in digestion, and late in recovery, and flees by nature; or because there is a vein or bone: and I have already mentioned all these causes, and their signs, and their cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you should know that I will tell you about the cure for fistula, which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Wounds that occur in all limbs due to corruption; for there are fistulas that arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the spleen, or intestine, or bladder, or in some of the bones, or at the spinous process of the backbone, or at any joint of the hand or foot; and if one part comes to the property of the main limb, and the rest remain.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only toil and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not reach the root except as I have said, you must take for granted the possibility of cure, and you must see it confirmed; and if the fistula is straight, if the mark of the burn lies on the bone; and if the fistula is crooked, if the surrounding tissue is tented to sink, for the swelling swells inward towards the curvature; and if the fistula has burst through the skin and you do not know how to cover it properly, if the cavity fills with pus from one burst to the other, for the moisture is too thick from one burst to the other and makes it soft; then as soon as the pus has drained from your hand, that you may know whether there is any bone or nerve, and if there is bruising around the joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or vein, or in any of the things that I have mentioned, if the cavity follows what I have said, and if the bone is fractured, the corrupt matter that is within must be broken up; and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply embedded from the outset, if you can cover it up as well as you can, then put in poultices soaked in vinegar, and keep them until the medicine has eaten away the superfluous matter that is remaining; and then put on oily dressings to cover the wound, until it is healed. And if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as I have said, and if the bone is fractured by the fistula, if you can cover it up.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the veins or arteries are not congested, or the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb remains as long as the corruption is entire, then cure the thing cautiously as long as it is sane; and if it is not sane, and it returns as before, take out the nails until you reach the marrow; if you discover and desire as much as you can until you reach the bottom, and remove the whole corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is then sane, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, take out the nails too deeply, for you will not be able to do anything; if there is no other remedy except to leave it to its natural course; and if there is only a small bone that is corrupted, and you wish to treat it, if the extraction is done with a suitable instrument and there is no other bone, do not leave even a splinter; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no doubt or fear, seize and moisten and burn, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you do not wish to remove them at an opportune hour, put upon the wound something that will prevent putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh is rigid around the bones; then it will become less painful. And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, leave only as much corruption as is necessary to expose the marrow, then restore the wound; and if there is much corruption, come down to the bone; if you cover it up and leave it exposed, it will become worse. And if there is great corruption, come down to the marrow; cover all until the corruption is gone, and then cure it until it is healed; I will tell you of a fistula that happened to me in my leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There once was a young man of about thirty years of age who had a pain in his leg due to something within the bone, until the matter came out of the leg; there was no cause for him to open it. But he became mad with fear of reopening the wound, and corroded much matter, and a fistula formed, and there came out much pus that filled the wound and moisture from the bone; and he remained there for two years without any physician, until I saw him again. I saw his leg and the medicines he was given, and what cured him of the perforations was great pain in the bone; the bone of the young man became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound a thread in one of these holes, and then circled all the holes, and found that one followed the other from all parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I thereupon bound it in one of the holes and found a piece of bone; it was corrupt and putrid, and the corruption extended to the marrow; I removed what appeared to be corrupt bone, and I believed that there was no further corruption except for that which I had seen; and since I had begun to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, I could not suture it.  I repeated the process, and again found corruption in the bone, which I again removed; and finally I restored the limb, but I could not suture it until I had removed a palm of the bone, and the marrow thereupon leaked out completely.  I restored it again with medicines and it healed well without further swelling or recurrence, except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear the pain, and for fear of death which I had averted.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is blood evacuated thus, but the patient remained entirely well, and there grew in his place a hard scale of bone, which was in good condition and caused neither discomfort nor any disagreement with anything, neither to the ailment nor to any other.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	If the bone is broken in no place of bone, if you must bandage it in this manner: take I thread and stretch it at the head of the bone that breaks, and command no one to extend it upwards; and put I another thread of cloth more coarse than the first, and bind it above the scale which is detached from the bone, and extend the head, if you tear out the corrupt scale at the bottom, and uncover the scale above the place where you see the bandage; and put I cushion or a plug of lead below the bone to cover the corrupt scale; and bandage as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bandage once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part, uncover the entire bone. Then place a sponge soaked in oil on it, and gradually bring the corruption from one end to the other; and when the corruption reaches the end of the bone as we have said, if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint and remove the bone from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other angle than that of covering. And if the corruption is in the wrist or the elbow, if it is strong in that thing, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appeared to you. And mitigate it in all the ways you can, but do not make the vein or nerve suffer. And take note of the incision and the sutures that cover these bones, for many are the causes of fractures according to the condition of the bones and the appearance of swelling, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their toughness. And for this reason it is necessary to appear similar to the work of this instrument. And note that the work will show you the instrument that you must use, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you doubt the instrument that you must use according to that which is known.
dou feu	If you think the instrument is capable of it, according to what it is intended for
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder doth suffer either by swelling, or by pressure, or by violence; and when thou hast treated that corruption by the means of medicine, it profiteth thee not, if thou dost not cover that limb until the corruption ceaseth; for if the patient escapeth by this means of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb; and the sign of that is when the limb becometh black, as if it were burnt by fire, and afterwards there cometh a blackening of the limb, and it consumeth all the flesh; if thou art hasty in covering, and it be by the percussion of some venomous creatures, as for example a sea scorpion and a viper and the like, if the corruption be at the root of the bone, and the limb be stiff, and thou dost not give it space to come forth until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the wrist, if the callous is at the joint, if the corrosion does not reach the forearm; and if it comes up to the forearm, if the callous is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and nothing but the quantity of its power is of any use; and all the more so when the corrosion comes or goes away: if it comes at the first joint, if the callous follows the other joint; and if it comes or goes away, if the callous grasps all the way; and if it reaches the leg, if the callous is at the knee; and if it comes under the knee, if there is nothing else that can save the patient but to leave the limb broken, and to bind the limb from below and above, and to stretch the skin between the two bones for one span wide, until the bone is uncovered; then grasp or draw out the callous, and put some soft material over the drape, so that the callous does not touch the sound limb, and cause the patient further damage and incision.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the limb violently, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete. Then bind the limb securely with a strong ligature and treat it until it is healed. And I will tell you of a case in which I saw: there was a blackness that seemed to burn the bone, and that corrosion began in the middle of the bone, until it consumed the whole bone. When we saw the corrosion, if we did not cover the bone, it healed. But when we took away the ligature, the corrosion returned to its original place. We had to cut off the limb above the lesion, and we did not stop the corrosion. We had to cut off the limb, and we had no hope of saving the matter. We also feared that if we left it, the limb would die, because its strength was feeble. And he recovered and returned to his home, and when he came back he covered his limb, and it healed. And I have never heard of such a case except for this one.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes an abscess in the flesh, and lingers for such a long time that it makes a great swelling of the bowe; then it breaks and bursts, and in the leap of the bowe, it breaks the skin, as if it were a vessel; and the leather that is under is just as thin as a flag, and does not reach the bone, neither the nerve, and such an ailment is called "sain", and is not called "fistule"; but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone and bursts, it is called "fistule"; and the leather is that if you cut through that leather all around, and even when it is thin, as if it were a flag, and does not yield to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you suspect that the skin has hardened, and the corruption is not in the marrow, and the skin is thick as parchment, if the surgeon of clists is present: look if the tumor is large and the bowe is foul-smelling, then make a clistery of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take barley, oil, and alum, equally, and mix them together, and put the skin in a vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey; then take of this according to your need, and make it hot and thick, and instill it into the tumor, and press the wound; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then take it out, expressing it out; do this several times, until the tumor is softened, and the bone is healed; and never make a clistery with vinegar, when this medicine is not present, but take vinegar of figs, and let it drain out, and then make the clistery, until you are certain that the tumor is well healed; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar, if the clistery is made with vinegar and honey or if there is a little bit of alum dissolved; or make the clistery of honey and wine, because honey has the property of softening and washing out, and the wine makes the wound breathe; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the tumor is well softened, if the clistery of this makes new blood in it, and you take pounded chamomile, and make a poultice with oil rose and wine; or make the clistery of other medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken of their properties or treating of unguents; and if the wound is small, and the pain of the clistery does not reach it, if the swelling is done with a nail, put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or balsam, as much as it is swollen; and if the wound is too wide, if the edge and it leave so much skin or the clistery can enter, and if the discharge of the wound is below, if the head or more of the wound is below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the shoulder is out of joint, if you leave the limb dangling without support, it will not return to its place; if you do not cover the limb adequately as you see, it will appear in such a manner that the shoulder will be pulled below its lowest point. For when the shoulder is out of joint, if you leave the limb dangling without support and do not cover the limb adequately as you see, it will appear in such a way: that the shoulder will slip forward slightly and leave nothing of the limb; and take solidifying medicines to bring back the blood, and place over a cloth that covers all the blood; then close the forces from the place where the opening was made to the widest part of the limb; and keep the shoulder aligned with the other cloth as much as possible, according to the amount of the opening. Leave the greater cloth only for a moment after the shoulder has been reduced; and whoever comes out of the opening often helps to reduce the shoulder, and the patient often feels a sensation of relief, whether it is poison or a wound, or enough, or digested, or undigested. Take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has progressed to such a degree that you see the nature of the leap on the limb, if the blood has already clotted, and approach the health. Then take off the bandage in the morning or afternoon, and when you take off the bandage, if you see the other cloth, renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if it sustains a violent pain that does not subside after a while, its bones split and do not rejoin.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes out after a long tension, if you do not quickly arouse from sickness, for sickness is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes out after a long tension, if you do not quickly arouse from sickness, for sickness is approaching. For there are some who delay their poison in their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if it comes late to the breast, and is prolonged, it is because there is too much moisture in substance and little in virtue, as with the diaphnet of vinegar, because there is a great deal of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine. Take diaphnet and mix it with rose oil and the juice of five wines in substance; then confect and use it. This will make the wound swell up, when diaphnet is not present, or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them up, and sprinkle them on honey when the fire is out; then smear it on the wound and extend it out of the breast; and never give an aristologist anything long, and celestial roots, which is as much like flour sometimes and coriander; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them up, make powder of them, and sprinkle them on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this remedy, then its poison has penetrated deep into the bone, or caused stiffness of the limbs, or swelling; if the cure of fistula is like what we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the incision of the abscess.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that originates from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the heel, or by chance arises in other parts; and when it is inflamed, and care is not taken, if it comes to be an abscess of the thumb, it contracts and swells as much as it contracts the root of the thumb, and by chance it contracts all the way; and there comes corrosion up to the bone, so that there is sharp pain, and the head of the bone is large, and the color is black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have treated it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you must, you must do everything that is superfluous that remains of the thumb, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the thumb is healthy; and when the thumb presses on the sinew, and it begins to swell, and becomes black, if you must put in place all the soft parts of the thumb except for the bone, and put on the cuticle again, and carefully and gently remove the soft tissue, and put on some medicinal ointment and corrosive substances to burn away everything; then treat the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded and the swelling is great, do not hesitate but cut through; for as much as the corrupted bone is concerned, it cannot be healed. If you see the bone cracking, if it is in front as it is said, then cure it until it is healed. If it is inflamed and swollen, and there is great pain, it is best to remove it first; then cut through the upper part of the bone, and keep the cut from reaching the cartilage which is under the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain. If this happens, put something on which will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand must be taken away.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two thumbs which arise from the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some part where there is bone, and never is there a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, or are born from our thumbs directly.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in no way of doubt does not move; he who is born at the joint of the arm by chance moves; the size of that which is fleshy is slight, in part like this: size like the root of a large sponge.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure: if you hold him under cover.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He who is born or must at the rear of any doubt, if you must, first join the rounded flesh around the bone, then join the bone to the corresponding degree to that, then cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come from birth, or from wound, or from burn, or from other things.</start_of_turn>
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you must join that which is swollen, if it must repair naturally; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that they do not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as they are soldered, if it must.</start_of_turn
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	It comes to nothing of its two palms with the palm of the hand, if it sticks together like that.</start_of_turn>
des vils	Des vils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Hair is black, thick and full of black fluid, which comes in greater numbers from those who work and walk and bear burdens, than from others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not give her any purgatives, and then the rest of the balsam.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment for fire is in two ways: one is with the forceps, and treat the black blood; the other method is to cauterize the vein and then drain it entirely
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first raise the affected limb hot and strong until the bone is not felt to bend; then strain the limb of the patient from below the hip joint up to the part just below the knee; then cut the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size; then sew up and drain the black blood from your hand, from the tip to the heel, until as much blood as the patient can tolerate has drained away; and then close the wound and command the patient to eat flesh in moderation; and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The ailments of the limb are as follows: open the limb of the patient, if there is hair, then put or bathe it in warm water, and elevate the limb until it turns red, and swell the veins; and if you have no bath, if the fire burns, then cauterize the end of the vein, or in the part below the ankle; then cover the skin with lint, and draw the vein from the heel up as far as it breaks; and you will see it red and black, and when it comes out or the skin seems as if a white thread; then remove the clot from below, until it is freed from the skin, and then apply a slight pressure, and cauterize once more; then draw the skin up until it breaks, and leave it in place as you did before; and do the same again, or several times if necessary; then leave it, and cauterize at the end; and draw it out until it is entirely freed, then cauterize; and if you do not draw it out and lift it, if there is a strong double hair at the root, grasp it and draw it out, and there will be blood loss; keep your hand steady on one side and the other, until it is finished; and keep still, because if you move it, you will not be able to draw it out or lift it, and there will be harm to the patient; and when you have finished, take out the foreign matter from the wound with coarse wool and vinegar.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the eye is contracted and tortures and surrounded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, do not cover it; and treat it as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of fire from which we cover the eye if it is crooked, do not cut through, but only cover the vein; for if it were slight, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is contained in the arm, in hot places or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises from another place except the arm, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decay of the leather, as it comes from the inside of the serpent's body and towards, is contained between leather and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there is a sign of the commencement of this vein if there comes into the limb a very great inflammation, then it is chained to the bone and the vein begins to swell like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the limb is open, if you think that you should wrap around a piece of sponge from one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and the nail, and leave the sponge in the limb, and every time that there is a point of pain, if you wrap around the sponge the nail and the nailhead; and if it is too long, if you cut off a part and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover the root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, it returns to the bone and causes swelling and pus or death, and is harmful; therefore it is necessary that it be treated promptly and without delay, and that nothing remains or is broken; for I have seen many times that this vein, when treated with five fingers of sponge or ten, and one hand has already come out of ten fingers, and when you cover it, if there is one hair or perforation, and you pierce to the end, so that all is out; and be it emptied of the matter which is inside, and bring to the limb medicinal poultices that do not cause pus, and cure as with apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow joint, or on the elbow, and immediately there comes blood from the rupture; cure it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow joint, or on the elbow, and immediately there comes blood from the rupture; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "bull's disease", because it often causes swelling in the calves, and is a small vein that arises between skin and bone, and runs throughout the body ascending and descending, and is felt well throughout the limbs, as long as the skin is taut or is pulled, and sometimes spurts out; and is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as blood, worms and blisters or abscesses. And there is doubt of its malice, for when it runs through the body and reaches the head, and comes out again, it often breaks the oil (fat).
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot force it out, if you can, then bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, and hold above and press down with your hand, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire on it, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is when it comes near the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, tighten the bandage around it, and hold above and press down. And you must make use of the patient of medications that dissolve harmful humors, and feed him nourishing foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot force it out, if you can, then bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, and hold above and press down with your hand, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire on it, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is when it comes near the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, tighten the bandage around it, and hold above and press down. And you must make use of the patient of medications that dissolve harmful humors, and feed him nourishing foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs, and it spreads from limb to limb; and I saw that which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I went to see a sick woman, and found her with her arms swollen, and saw a small swelling in her armpit; and after that, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, more swollen than anything, as much as half an egg when it breaks from its shell; the pain departed from that shoulder and settled in the armpit, and then after a while corrected throughout the limb, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it often happened that it returned to its place.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed to hear how it twisted back and forth within the limb, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.</start_of_turn>
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I believe that if one tries to move the limb without pain, it will not move; but I do not believe that, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because her bones were dry and her veins were exposed, and because of that appeared that stiffness; and I do not understand according to this reason those who are delicious, and who have moist bones and veins filled up
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see the cure for this ailment and the patient feels the pain, if she opens her eyes as we have said, and if the lower and upper eyelids are swollen, then take hold of the eyelid as tightly as that constraint allows; and cauterize the eye. If you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure what discharges the humors, as with foul pills and serpin pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	When you see the cure for this ailment and the patient feels the pain, if she opens her eyes as we have said, and if the lower and upper eyelids are swollen, then take hold of the eyelid as tightly as that constraint allows; and cauterize the eye. If you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure what discharges the humors, as with foul pills and serpin pills, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The bandages are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the wound or the pain they cause.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of these things is such that there are some with large points, some with small points, some with hair, and some with bristles; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and that which bites in no limb bites in two ways: either in the main limb, as with the brain, shoulder, liver, stomach, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it bites, it signifies death, I will tell you later. Be aware: if you delay the extraction of this arrow, for there will follow numerous complications; and when this is the case, I do not tell you that the arrow is not deeply embedded, for if so, cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrow bites and pierces the bone, and blood spurts from the vein above the brain, and there is scooping, swelling, nausea, vomiting, and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of senses, and black vomit; and sometimes without cause of nosebleeds or deafness; and sometimes the speech and voice are lost; and a white moist discharge like pus appears, and also blood-stained urine; and if this sign tells you, do not delay, and remove the arrow if it is not deeply embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the fracture when it breaks or cracks is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were fastened to a hard thing, not without pain; and by chance the fracture moves like a poultice, and in dark blood, and comes with chills and cold sweat, and fainting: the patient is in doubt that he will survive.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the wound that never swells is only without streaks of blood spurting from the wound, and the swelling is inflamed, and the patient turns pale, and breathes high and stops eating.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks within the covering of the wound, if it is left in, it causes great swelling and pain and breathing; and the limb becomes rigid
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow breaks or is swallowed, by chance there is no digestion of the meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow breaks or is swallowed, and in the leap there is no passage of faeces from the intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the stone of the bladder breaks and the urine spurts out and comes out with great force, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if it be done and the cheek and the jaw and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the shoulder blade and the loin and the thigh and the foot and the limb mentioned above, is well disposed in many ways.</start_of_turn>
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the stone is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, for this reason that you do something else.</start_of_turn
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was at home a splinter which had slipped or was lodged in the root of the ear: I grasped it, and it slipped out by the other side from the grease of the ear, and was healed without any harm.</start_of_turn>
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated a game with a splinter which had slipped into the grease of the olive oil from the pap smear, and the splinter was returned, and did not reach anything further than the tip towards the heel, and the splinter was as long as an arch of a Turkish bow; I healed the game, and there were no further complications.</start_of_turn
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take out an arrow from the throat to a cresting, and the arrow was Arabic: I grasped the beards, and held them tight until I had taken it out, and the cresting was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled out an arrow from the chest, which was hanging or belly-down, and I thought it was dead; and when I had not seen it move for XXX days, if it did not move of its own accord; I cut at the arrow and pulled it out, and there was no mishap.</start_of_turn>
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if I see a wound in the chest with an arrow stuck or back, and the wound is deep; I take out the arrow from the wound, and I do not bind its natural inclinations, and I do not find discomfort in any of its natural works.</start_of_turn
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And thus it happened to another man, that he was pierced in the face with an arrow, and the wound was closed; yet he continued to suffer great pain; and many others had the same experience.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And thus it happened to another man, that the king’s son was struck in the eye by an arrow, which was deeply embedded in the flesh; and there was a great decline in his face; and the arrow was completely extracted three days later.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is much injured
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I would try everything possible to stop it, and I did not feel it; and there was no pain or tingling in his left ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I put on an absorbent dressing and a digestive plaster, so that it would not swell; and the arrow came out by itself
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put my thumbs on the wound, and held the wound steady, and kept the patient’s hand long tense, until he felt the arrow inside his body; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put the corrosive medicine on the wound by hand, until it was overdone, and held it, and felt the head of the arrow which was coming out of its place; then I closed the wound by means of that medicine, as long as the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it went well for three months, and then grew so large that I had to remove the nails, and I held it from one side and the other, and I could not stir it; therefore I continued to torment and irritate in various ways, until I finally took away the nails, as it is said at the end of this chapter, until I had finished, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physician judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it nevertheless, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or you have spoken of the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on that which I do not say, for the books do not teach me everything; but you know the masters well enough to know well enough about great matters, and about what is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, descending from the things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not issue from limbs or that they are ficxed by force only because of two methods: either by the left hand or by the right hand, or by some other way; and that which leaps forth by the left hand or by the right hand, is an arrow that has penetrated the flesh, and leaps no more ever.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, if you leave it until the chariot is carried in, and rejoice in the issue; and if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be moved, if you leave it alone for a few days, and move it little by little; then it will jump. And if it does not jump, if you pierce through all the entrails, until the belly is swollen, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the splinter is fixed in the bone of the shoulder, and goes up to one of the bellies of the brain, and some of the signs that I have said to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days, for if the splinter comes up to the surface, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the splinter is not firmly grasped only by the bone alone, and does not advance beyond the surface, and remains in the patient for several days without mishap, if the pain persists.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is firmly fixed and cannot be moved, if you administer tarterises round about, as I have said; then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is firmly grasped only by the bone, and it cannot be seen, if it has every effort; and if you feel it, if there is no palpable instrument that can cover it; and if you do not take hold of the wound by force, and by the depth of the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the pain is great as the wound is large; then draw out the splinter if you can, and if there is an ear attached to it that it holds, if the cartilage which is fixed from two parts to the muscle that you take hold of, then break or crush the ears of the splinter as much as you can, until you can draw it out; and do so cautiously that you do not break the splinter, that you draw it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not manage it once, if the limb remains entangled, then grasp it firmly, for the extraction will bring relief.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If blood flow is disrupted by the discharge of blood, which opposes the treatment in this chapter; then beware of incisions of the nerve or vein, and take care as you would to remove the arrow without causing further damage; or break off the fragment or leave it firmly in place; and put the patient in the position in which he was when the arrow went in, for this is the greatest aid that can be given, and if you cannot do this, follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The wound which comes from elsewhere, or if there is no visible opening, or if the skin is swollen in that place if it is seen or suspected: then raise up the limb until the teeth can take hold, and then remove it immediately.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, expand the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it does not come out, if you leave it in, and then attempt to extract it again until it comes out; if there is blood in the wound, if the blood vessel has been severed; if there is marrow in the bone and you see it, if you must administer a hook, if the hook has passed through the point of the arrow, then draw the arrow through the hook as well, so that the point of the arrow is at the level of the hook; and then draw out the arrow, and if the arrow is hooked, if the hook is at the point of the arrow, in order to ease the extraction
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the dressing is surrounded, if you must, seize all the surrounding flesh or the venom is there, if so, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the bandage tears or breaks, or on the belly or at the bladder or the ribs, and it is close, and if you must cover it, cover over it; and hold the wound and the nerves still, and then extract the foreign body, and then suture the wound, if necessary; and cure as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the nails with which we treat the saiettes is similar to the beak of an owl, and thus is this form:</start_of_turn>
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: great, small, and medium, according to the amount of the splinter.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the end of the shoulder is like that of a bird’s wing, in order to push out the point of the dislocation, as in this manner.</start_of_turn
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tweezers to push and to grasp if it is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	From veins of common colour
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are veins which we must take into consideration in this case, namely: two veins that are behind the ears, which are above the eyebrows; and two arteries that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the armpits, which are above the nipples; and a vein that is in the forehead; and a vein that is at the base of the nose; and two tendons that are in the collarbone; and two veins that are in the upper arms, which are called the brachial veins; and these are the veins that are above the elbow; and two veins that are below the tongue.</start_of_turn
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that we commonly speak of are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the costus, and is called the large vein; the middle one is called the fast, and is composed of the cephalic and brachial, and is called the large vein; and the brachial is either on the right or left side of the costus, and is called the small vein, and is above the scapula, which is the one from which we speak, which appears openly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The ulnar is the vein which is between the radial and the ring, and if there are two veins; and in the leg and the foot there are three veins: one is below the prominence of the left costus, and the second is the popliteal which is at the ankle of the right costus; and the vein which is called the great saphenous, which is in the ankle of the left costus; and in the other leg there are three veins like these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to expel the old blood; and the quality of the blood, as I have told you, is that you raise the patient’s head and rub the hand or the veins are rough; then you tighten the patient’s neck with a pin, as long as the two veins behind the ears depend from the head: that is if the patient has a throbbing pain in his head or feels his pulse throbbing in his head, it is a sign of infection; then take the lancet and pierce the vein up to the bone, then keep your hand over the whole of the vein above, and hold and pierce the skin and the vein well together, and make the blood spurt out until you see; then strain and bind, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries which are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, soda, and mustard, and has the color of tears of rain; and the quality of the physician is as I have said: and that the patient strains his neck, as the two veins open wide; and he feels a tingling sensation in his thumb, then he signs the incision; then he takes hold of the thumb above the index finger, and pulls out the lancet, and pulls the vein above, and the clot, as he has done in the two other veins, and makes correction of the blood according to his necessity; then he frees the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts on cotton; and then the swelling subsides, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this and its treatment and extraction, or its beginning from the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood from the front vein is as valuable as that from the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face, in embolism, and in redness; and the quality is such that if the patient turns his head violently, the vein bursts open. Then take the instrument which is called the "fosseur," which is thus formed:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood from the front vein is as valuable as that from the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face, in embolism, and in redness; and the quality is such that if the patient turns his head violently, the vein bursts open. Then take the instrument which is called the "fosseur," which is thus formed: put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then pull out the patient’s head, and ligate the vein until it is whole and never again open with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not suitable for me to say that the flame should be too strong; and the same with the other side, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood from the two veins that are two palms wide helps with swelling, tension, redness, and oily discharge, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their blood is such that if the patient turns his head violently, as before, the same will happen; then do the same, and either let the blood clot, for a long time with a wide flame, because there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make an incision of the blood, as much as you are able, and then ligate the vein, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein does not flow if it is cold, and in excess, and in disease of the face, as with migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient is hoarse, then strain his neck to your left hand, take the flame and hold it long, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily, and do not start until now to correct; and do not go too quickly, and make the correction according to your need, and then bind it for one night, for it is moist and restored. This is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two veins helps to loosen swelling, and to commence mixing, and with moist of diseases, and with swelling, and with corruptions, and with herpes, and tumors; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient grasps his collar with both hands, as we have said; then the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient sits on one seat, then open the vein widely, and draw blood moderately, or as much as is necessary; then close the other part in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and gently tighten the veins moderately, so that the patient is not stifled; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the blood of the herbs.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the arms and shoulders helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the arms, and toothaches and pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Of the blood of the herbs, if it is to be made to flow from the patient before you, hold his head down as I have said; then open the vein, and observe two veins, one on the right side of the liver and the other on the left side, and know them by their darkness, and by that which enters them has small dark veins: close therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, if you close the greater one from the front, and do the same with the two smaller ones beneath and above, for this is a like manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the blood beneath the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The blood of the veins beneath the tongue helps after the blood of the cephalic vein, and this is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and holds the tongue, and looks under each rib towards the costal margin of a black vein: close therefore one and the other, and do not press too hard, for there are arteries there
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins which are commonly wounded are usually sound in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp flame, or by means of an olive-shaped incision as with cut nails, and is called ‘anesil’; and they are large and olive-shaped according to the size and breadth of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame of the cautery is known to be mild, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is another method for opening large veins filled with visible blood, which contain much blood and blood clots; and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame incision
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for healthier the small veins, or there is small yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basal vein, which is one of these veins, helps to cause ailments such as swelling of the throat, and the jaw, and the tongue, and the belly; and it is necessary for the health that it should flow smoothly, and that it should avoid the artery which is swollen
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If he grasps the heel and blood flows, if he must hold it back as I have said; and must not be moved by the flame, but cut off like an anesik.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the pulse does not clearly appear, if you must remove it, and bind another in its place; or do you wish no blood to flow, or do you leave the vein open in the arm: it will appear clearly; and grasp the flame as an anesik, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the blood vessel going black, if you must therefore remove the limb, touch the vessel until you see the pulse; then mark the place, then bind the limb, and grasp the vein with the flame; and take care not to cut the artery when you see the limb swell, for that is the artery: withdraw from it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see blood spurting high like the urine of a child, and it is pale and frothy, know that it is without an artery: hasten then, put your hand over the wound, and hold your hand steady until it stops bleeding; many times it has happened to me. If the bleeding does not cease, bind the arm tightly and leave it still, and do not move the patient; and be wary, do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not stained, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, if the artery bursts open, for the head of the shoulder retracts; and close it off without delay.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a bandage and wring it out, and take half of it and lay it well over the wound; if it stops bleeding, that is good; if not, if the physician says so, powders that stop bleeding; the bleeding will not be great in many situations because of the small size of the wound, and the ability of the limb to move.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle aids in healing by closing the wound from above and from below, for it is composed of the basilar and cephalic nerves, as we have said; and it is necessary for the patient to bite on the nerve which is below, and if he does not bite too deeply and finds the nerve, it swells and the wound is either healed or becomes worse; and this nerve is often split many times, and if it does not split in some people due to its delicacy, it is necessary to take the blood from an anesthetic instrument and withdraw the nerve from your mouth.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it is of long duration.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein aids in healing, by pulling the wound shut from above and helping to close it; and it is necessary to bite on the olive or mirtin flame to stop bleeding, for this is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Whatever, it is better to ask for help the first time, and do not grieve if it fails; we can always begin again. And by chance it will burst in someone's face, as it cannot be the first time, but it does not grieve anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is as you think.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that blood must not be drawn for no other purpose than to maintain health and repel diseases; and let the blood be taken from one of the three veins that are or should be: namely, the cephalic, facial, or basilar. And it must be taken at the beginning of prayer, during fasting and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it must be drawn at the first or third hour, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The blood that is administered for diseases has no fixed dose, but that whenever there is need for blood or nourishment, in all hours and at all times; and it must not be drawn from children under twelve years of age, nor from women for more than four months up to puberty
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither shall they treat those who have passed 60 years
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When anyone feels well, in whatever way, if it is known that he has retained a bellyful of wind, if the veins do not draw out the harmful humors from the intestines by their roots; neither too much meat, nor too little, neither too fat nor too lean; and if he has eaten with violence, vomiting, and swelling of the belly, and multiple attacks of sickness, and work, and sleep, and fasting; and all these things together, or by some weapon or poison; then subtilize the humors, if they are not too large, by meat, drink, and medicine, if you can; then give him a bath or wash, so that nothing hinders the healing, and keep him warm until the third part of the night, as we have said; and keep him busy with work, worry, and luxury, and similar things; and bind and join, and make the patient sit higher than he was before, and gently stroke his arm two or three times, then remove the dressing from the middle; for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without; then stroke the wound with your hands, until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the patient with the flame of a little oil, then put his left hand on the wound and hold his hand for a moment or two until he feels well, that the wound does not swell and cause injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like strings to the physician, and if some of them are filled with wind, that when one places the flame on them, they recoil from the flame and will not open; and this is what happens in this case. And if the vein is opened, the wound is too wide, for in this case the physician must be advised of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein severs the first time, that is good; if not, one must repeat the process again until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is inflamed, and the patient hopes for relief, if he leaves it for a year or two, without immobilizing the limb: by chance will come abscesses spontaneously; do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it stops; and if the bleeding is slight, or without a visible cause, and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, if you are confident in that bleeding itself, without any other flame; and do the work quickly, even if the limb is inflamed; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If thou seest the limb inflamed, if thou delay not the bleeding, put upon a little piece of lint of oil, for it doth soften the body of blood; and it doth remain in this limb the lint which doth hold the oil; and give the oil-soaked lint in the wound so that thou doth stop the course of blood; and this doth cause a tingling and swelling about the limb when it is put upon the limb. If thou withdraw it too soon and it is too thick, it will burst.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess which has happened many times, even though it is not dangerous unless at this time or the opening of the vein is small, if thou art in a hurry, put upon the limb a wet sponge and a little cloth, and hold it for an hour; and cover that you have done after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in the limb after some days no black or green mark, if thou seest not; and if thou seest, put upon nothing of aloes or myrrh mixed with vinegar of calamus, mustards, or anything similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is swelling and appearance of blood in the armpit: put your hand on and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave then out of all that we have said, for by chance in court without an artery; but make it [the wound] i.e. emplastre dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another remedy, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.</start_of_turn>
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, leave it to darken as long as it is red; and if you see it large, leave it to dry until it is subtle; and if it is too thick, let it cool down.</start_of_turn
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is to be known to him who is plain and strong, and has need of the extraction of blood, that we make the wound larger, and let the flame be large; and to him who is weak, do the contrary, and make it healthier more often, and must do so by cutting across, not by pricking; for this way of bleeding is saved from the decay of blood and nerves, and is worth more than bleeding for a long time is wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him who needs to be given food with the blood, it is to be given soft bread in the juice of pomegranates; if he is pale, if take blood three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat before the blood soft bread in mustard sauce, or in honey syrup with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he pricks at the blood, after the issue of moisture of blood, then it is appropriate that he swallow coarse barley and aromatic oil, and use other things which we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he sees his arm swollen, and recovers again another time, if it is known, when it is soaked in great blood, that it must recover and recover, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has severe pain, if he waits until the third hour after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who has seen himself cured of another kind, if he must wait until the second or third day?
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the body which is already swollen, and causes fever; if one can drive out a great quantity, and expand the opening until it cries out with bones; then that when you have treated all the conditions of the blood, and put your hand on the pulse when it is well, that the blood does not come out in place of bones, and this happens many times, when the patient is negligent; and it is not right that you should see it slip from the arm, and cause the blood to go out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press further; if it is crooked, that you extend the arm greatly, because that would be bad; but leave it until it goes out a second time; or you touch at the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the opening of the vein is forced out with the blood, and put on some oil and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not constrain it, as long as the incision is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary is to drain blood the second time, if the same vein is the same, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is stained in place for that which is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And thus concerning the bleeding, if the patient grasps his hand in warm water, while the blood clot is red; then bind it moderately, so that the wound will open well; then pull it out quickly, not too wide nor too long; or make a large hole and place the finger close to the wrist joint, and if that does not suffice, grasp the hand in warm water once more, and leave the clot in the water until you have enough; and if this is the case, do not reinsert the hand in warm water, for more is put into it than in the case; and the blood of this vein is more precious than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the saliva of the right hand is valuable for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: strain the hand and immerse it in warm water, until the vein is emptied; if it comes out whole, and if you pull it through and if you grasp it throughout, do not grieve; and do not grasp too tightly, for the nerves are already loosened from their sheaths, and then grasp the hand once more in warm water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not attempt to remove it.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and lint on the wound, it will stick and prevent healing, and do nothing.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I have told you about the other side.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the spleen is worth for all diseases that are caused by an excess of heat in the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, diseases of the reins, and tumors of the legs and arms, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its blood is that if the patient has too much pain in hot water, and rubs on the belly until it boils, and lies down on the joint of the bone; if the belly is at the ankle, and from there the bone comes out with the blood; such a thing is either a great wound or a large wound, or at the ankle, that much blood is worth.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you keep it healthy on the bone, if you keep guard of the nerves which are sore, and keep the limb straight as when you are grasping; and let the flame cool down.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be moved, if you reset the bone in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the patient must be bled the first time, if he does it again the second time, because his blood is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do the spleen of the other limb equally
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The thigh bone is at the ankle of the buttock, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that flows abundantly.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient is lying or bathing, and the wound has been strained two or three times at the ankle, for otherwise it will not open; and if it opens, no matter how you try, and even by cutting through; it is better to leave it alone, for the pus is thick, and it will soon fill up again with its own hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find any blood flowing from the wound when it opens or if there is little pain, and towards the little toe, and you take care of the wound as much as you like, and even by cutting through; it is better to leave it alone, for the blood is thick, and it will soon fill up again by itself.
des sainies de ventouse	bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selon ces manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sang, ou sans ferir.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	There are two methods of bloodletting: one is with great heat, the other with moderate heat. Bloodletting that is done by cutting and by extraction of blood is best done in twelve pulses, of which one is at the top of the head and the other at the nape of the neck; two on the two costal cartilages of the neck; two on the two armpits; two on the wrists; two on the two arms; two on the two thighs; two on the two calves; and bloodletting does not treat any disease that comes from an excess of blood, until all the diseased blood has been evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is necessary to vomit, or by custom, if the physician commands it at the beginning or at the end, or during the course of the illness; for there are some who, when they must vomit, have a great weight of chief; and there are some who find swelling and redness in their face, in their head, and at the collar, and dark circles under the eyes; and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and vomited blood; and there are some who dream of it and see black spots and blood and death.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when moisture has come to the middle of the month, we command the patient to keep the wound covered for two hours more.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the physician helps with the pain of the head … which comes from the dark circles under the eyes; and it must not be given before the evacuation of all the humours; for this vomiting is in lieu of the blood of the cephalic vein, and must not be given to those who are of a hot complexion or who have a cold sweat, because this causes great discomfort; and for this reason it must not be given to those who have cold fevers.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who remains silent in such a state, if he becomes oblivious, it is necessary to place the ventouse somewhat lower down due to the doubt of obliviousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wind blowing in the neck is in lieu of the blood of the head and the bile, and because of this it is worth a great swelling of the face, a splitting of the windpipe, and all sorts of things; and it is necessary to bite fiercely, for if it stays too tightly, it will cause obstruction of the throat or the stomach or the liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The swelling of the neck is worth as much as the pains of the head, vomiting, diarrhea, strangulation, and toothache; and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile; and it is necessary that you order the patient to express his hand to put it on, that he does not cut an artery, and does not vomit blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds blow cold from the coast, and causes chills of the head, and pain in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in lieu of the ailments of the two upper teeth.</start_of_turn
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds blow cold from the coast, and causes chills of the head, and pain that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The swelling of the armpits is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and order the patient not to be too tightly bound, for the flesh is soft, and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling that is on the flank is as much as blood vessels under the foundation, and there are diseases of these, and it is advisable that the swelling be large and coarse, that it has mixed well; and by chance, if it were slight, if it should break, it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The hair of the legs becomes loose and wide open, because it attracts blood from all over the body, and causes an ancient pain of rains, and of marshes, and of the bladder, and makes swell the flowers; and is in lieu of two sophies and two calves, and all of them cause the body to swell afterwards for a long time, and bring about vomiting in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the suction cup is that you apply it immediately when it is empty, and do so steadily, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing so until you see the blood flowing freely and swelling; then withdraw, and reapply the suction cup, and take care of the position of the body, for there are some who have too much hair, and pores that bleed: if you cut once only, you will cause great wounds and deep veins; and do so cautiously.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is not large, if you must cut twice: the first time to remove the large blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If he does not moan excessively, if you may wound him for the third time; when our wounds trail blood so profusely, so profusely that our hands are stained a third time.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If our veins burst with blood, if we see them swell often; if they are not quickly treated, if they are inflamed and swollen, and if they are perceived to be perforated, it is useful for those who have thick skin and tough veins, and who have numerous pores, to apply an aperitif and dissolvent oil of the following: violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; or in the springtime, cresson oil, or radish oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the swelling is large and cold, if you take bitter oil, or balsamite, or rue oil, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If he has strong nails and large pores, it is not appropriate to put oil on them, but it is appropriate to wash them afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or of elderberry, and of thyme, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have superfluous humours must rise from wine strong, or from aquavit, or from decoction of rue or chamomile, or from other such things; and must not cover themselves with a bandage before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and must not sleep after the ventosation, and must get up when they are to get up and when they are getting up.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are pale from eating too much and being inflamed; if they must take cold things, as pomegranate seeds and radishes and lettuce easily, and other such things; and eat barley gruel, and broth of wheat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if they take honey syrup, and fragrant wine middle between strong and new, and eat barley gruel, and eat barley meal and eggs and almonds; and when they have a cold, they must drink more than eat; and must give to others no meat triacle or muscate before or after the ventosation, in order to comfort the main parts; and be discreet about it, but it must not be that they do not drink it
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made with a knife are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and podagra, and upon the belly and the bowel and the flanks and the heel, for these members do not suffer much from wounds upon their surface, and one does them only to draw blood from a limb into another, as we do when we place them upon the nipples when they do not bleed; to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we do when we place a blister upon the belly and the bowel to make the limb limp; and to relieve the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, for it relieves by its attractive force the swelling or frees the stone from its place; and thus it becomes elevated when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained congestion. These blisters are administered empty without any dressing, and never together with fire or water that is cold, as in the case of pleurisy; and in such a manner we fill the blister with warm water or with water when there are herbs that are covariant with this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the compress administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there are two large and half palms of barley and either the cost or the price of an inch and a quarter, as for driving out an awl; or it may be of flaxseed, before if it does not harm the patient in setting it on the limb; and there is in the middle of it a twig of flaxseed or iron, to hold the bandage in place, and these are to be of a size appropriate for the disease and the nature of those who take it; for the blisters of the intestines are not like other things, and the leanness is not like fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And must be put on the limb: grasp the bandage with the thumb or index finger, and place it through the twig which is already in the ventouse, so that it bites either at the back of the ventouse that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and two must be placed either on the wound or as we have said, so that when we pull, if it goes up, we remove the ventouse; and grasp the lining as before, and repeat often, if you are in doubt.</start_of_turn>
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the ventouse therefore which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all severity, there is no verge or perforation, and it is only administered when it is plain of severity, and is placed upon the limb as little as possible; and this is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	No needles are administered except in limbs where it is impossible to put on venuses for their small size, such as bones and teeth, and similar things; and in their skin devoid of hair, such as the groin or navel, and other similar things; and the quality of the patient is such that when you find needles that are in soft, smooth hair without causing perforation, if you take them out; and put one in a sweet liquid, until they are limp, and they have nothing in their belly; and then either drain the vein and the needle, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the needles; and when they are full and painful, if it is possible to put on the needle, put it on, for this is worth more.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this does not suffice, if you lift the limb easily, then gradually with water, mix well, and then press; if the limb still swells too much afterwards with the skin of the wound, if you pour water over ice, put on, as long as the wound is extended; and if the wound is multiplied, put on broiled vitriol, or scraps, and similar things, until it is extended; or you take out half of the black bones, and leave them until they burn out in the limb, if you stop now; and if you still have more to do, take on other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take hold, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you put in a needle until the wound is closed, and then put on, as long as it feels the blood, if it stops bleeding; and when you see that it bleeds again, if you sprinkle on a little aloes and bruised saffron, or charcoal, if it will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	When you see that they groan, if powder is sprinkled on a wound of aloes and gum, or charcoal, if they will groan from now on.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	When you see that they groan, if powder is sprinkled on a wound of aloes and gum, or charcoal, if they will groan from now on
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear me, dear son, for the book tells us nothing of this chapter, neither in ancient books nor in letters; and for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never found any good example of it. I know of nothing, save from the ancient books or from what I have learned through study and experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abridged it at the end, and I have made it clear what instruments are necessary, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book that it contains words and chapters which put understanding into the science, and teaches the truth, so that those who are proved in this science learn and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs, if you must hasten the healing of the patient on one side and on the other, if nothing else hinders you, if weakness of the limb, or youth or old age, or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and if the patient is suffering from cold bile, that is to say, cold humors, and oily and sour substances, and does not drink wine, does not eat greasy foods, and does not fill the veins with too much meat, until you are certain of the absence of any post-traumatic inflammation or expansion of the substance in the limb; if the patient then resumes their former activity, it will be for the better.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, if you command that the patient be nourished with meats that cause great swelling, or if he has viscosity, as with millet dough in water, and wheat germ, and testicles, and spleen, and pancreas, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at this part of nourishment, the muscles relax and become more brittle.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	Know that bones broken in various places and decrepit do not mend well by themselves according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs; neither do those that are too tender, as bones of small children. But there is no remedy, except to support the broken bone with great tension which has arisen, and to join the limb together, so that it becomes firm as before; and do not move it from that point. For this reason it is commanded to nourish the body with large quantities of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the marrow, and others by cutting, as with the size of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And with regard to the fracture of a bone, it has its sign and its proper instrument in its restoration; as one remembers from its place. The fracture of the bone is known by that which causes it to twist, and it opens well by drawing, and by pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there may well be twisting or fissure or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move your hand, but put on medicines that will come afterwards, and then hold it firmly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And wounds that break that go into the marrow, and are two parts of the joint, it is now necessary to put them in order equally, as well as after the incision; and if the incision is hot, if you leave any marrow, as long as the incision is not calmed; then put it in order with the muscle that you can conveniently and safely lift, and the wounds that restore the limb are lighter than the restoration of those who have pieces; then strain, as it is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if they are two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or two strings, or a string and your hand; and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the limb that break are loosened, if you rejoin all the fragments in their place on the muscle that you can conveniently lift, and keep that in your work does not cause the patient any lesion or pain; and adjust well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if the dressing is good and is not too tight, do not press as they do who make come by their work to cause swelling and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is fixed in place, if the patient keeps it still, neither awake nor asleep, neither turning nor moving in any way; and keep the limb well secured so that it does not cause him any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, if it is not at its proper place, it must be put back into position so that he feels no pain; and keep it straight so that there is no twisting when restoring it; and the quality of the limb will be as I have said.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The limbs are various in small and large size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as bones and joints and the like: if you can cover them with soft and fine cloth; and for those that are large, such as thighs and arms: cover them with a wide and strong bandage, because the large bandages embrace all the great limb and constrain it equally, so that there is no slack; then put on firm supports, three turns or four according to the limb, and constrain the hand a little more than the rest, then go up to the break and constrain it less, than the break itself then lets go of a little of the break; and soften the limb a little more, as much as you take hold of a large part of the limb, then take back one bandage, and re-tie the support above the break; then put back at the bottom of the break, and constrain it moderately, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said at the beginning of this chapter; then put in between the supports some bandage or cloth, so that they are even all around, and then tie everything up with strong bands, and put on your boots well made above, if there is no opening or swelling.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If there is swelling or abscess, put upon something soothing the abscess externally, and which hardens the swelling; and leave it in place for some days. Then strain upon your toes, and let them be half of a broad cane resting firmly, or of wood from which nails are made, or of barley straw, and let them be as this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the staple which one places upon the fracture be greater and broader than the others; and be as long as it is necessary for the part of small or great size; then strain upon the toes in the same way as before, and tie a thread around them immediately, as in the first hour of the fracture; the tighter the thread, the less; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen. For if the thread is thick, as some fools do who make their knots of linen thread, and it is great error, because the knot will not be even if it is too subtle, and it will not hold properly.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is numbed by the bites of the nails after stripping in the groin, if you put sponges of lint or coarse cloth on them, they will not bleed.</start_of_turn>
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bone fractured, and the bone is broken, I shall speak of the cure afterwards.</start_of_turn
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And those threads which he cannot bear to withdraw from these stars shall break all the bones of the first hour.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not permissible to put these stars in place except after five days or seven, or more as you deem necessary for the safety of the afterbirth; and once this is done, the manner of the ancient plasters will restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take some flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundance of eggs, and make this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it. And this is the common manner of plastering that restores the fracture in many situations, as well as for women and young children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of packing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and flaxseed and linseed and saffron and arabic gum and mugwort, in the amount of ten; myrrh and aloes, in the amount of five; chamomile, in the amount of seven and eight. Mix them together and grind them into a powder; mix this with abundant eggs. If the patient’s complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is good for torsion: take mugwort and chamomile, each in the amount of X; myrrh and aloes, each in the amount of VIIII; acacia in the amount of VI; chamomile in the amount of X; mix them well, and confit with water or abundance of eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of restoring joints and bones that have loosened from their sockets, and relieve the pain that arises, and reduce the swelling: take new linen, and moisten with oil and hold on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These methods do not permanently restore the joint, but they are good for relieving post-traumatic swelling and pain, and for repositioning bones properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other means of displacement that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pell leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods include restoring the fracture of the bone and diminishing the remaining swelling.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallow, chamomile, violets, barley flour, and rue; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, soak with vinegar or water, and apply
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess hardens during restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of vismalve, seed of flax, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, of all an equal part; and bruise, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except for certain things that make wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two, not too soft or too hard
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen would have us put something dry and warm upon the broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and other such things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped onions or fennel seeds, and beeswax, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bone is not moved from its place; if you do not loosen by hand from the start, and if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, stop and loosen, and support the limb now; and put on a lighter bandage, and a wet sponge, and immerse in water, and lift the limb until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, wet with water or rose oil, and bind up with a nut, until you are sure the abscess has drained; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be sure the pain is gone, then repeat the binding loosely, and a little displacement, do not strain too much, and be discreet until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that at the incision point there are swelling, redness, pain, and swelling, then you must immediately stop and bind it firmly, as you did at the beginning.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not happen to the limb anything of what we have said, if one must force it loose, do not do so before three days or four, or five or seven; and in no case leave it for twenty days, as one sees, until the swelling has gone down and the limb is nearly back in its place; then the restraint must be more severe than before, and the limb must be well fleshed out, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than usual, the swelling will not come down; then take an aquaphoric solution and bathe the limb every time you loosen it, every third day, and cut a little of the sinew; by this means the swelling will be reduced in the limb and the patient will recover quickly from what the fools have done, and will restore the limb correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	from various forms of breakage</start_of_turn
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many are the ways of fractures, and various figures, and the causes are diverse; for there are fractures which are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone is fractured throughout to the syphus which is broken off from the bone, as is made by a break or crush; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	or if the spear pierces the bone in a reverse direction, this is called a «complete fracture»; and the wound of these fractures can be large or small
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	and if there is embedded percussion, or fracture or dislocation of the bone, or fracture of the joint, or any other similar thing.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a fracture that approaches the joint that is below the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and whether the wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound which is closed in the bone as subtly as a nail, and the fracture is slight, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by a wound from a stone, or by a thorn, or by anything similar, and causes the piece of bone below to enter the cavity, and the limb is bent as when people sit upon hot pots when they are placed on the embers; if between the bone ends.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this often happens with those who have soft bones or joints like children; and in all these ways, when small pieces break away from them, like stars; and I will speak of this in more detail later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all these ways of fracture from the separation above them, from tension, and from the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary mark is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and has rubbed fat on it, if the fracture is black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s ailments, and if you see no other mishap, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, feverishness, and other similar things, if these do not heal, doubtlessly there is a serious underlying condition.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you see no imminent danger and hope for health, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When you arrive in this state first, and it is in the armpit, then you must immediately remove the bone in front of the wrist toward the thumb
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this state, if you delay in removing the bone in front of the elbow toward the thumb, the tissue surrounding the bone will become corrupted, and there will be the accident that we have mentioned
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if a break of the bone comes right up to the skin covering the brain, if you must open the fractured part: if you grasp the patient’s head and uncover the bone in every way you can, and on the figure of the wound more roughly than you can; and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or incision, if it is aided by this, and that you fill the cavity with moist cloths soaked in rose oil; and rest the wound until the incisions are calmed, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then as you twist the bone to heal, this is done in two ways: one way if you grasp the tail of the fracture in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another fracture which is greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And thus if you have various sizes of nails, some wide and others narrow, and be blunt or pointed, and of iron indeed; and over a light burden, that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through it, even though you administer nails with washers, do not pierce too deeply beyond the test of the bone; and must have under the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that if the nails come out in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have washers for all tests; and this is the form of the two manners of washers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the brittle bone is that you put one washer on the bone, and turn your two thumbs until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the washer back in another place a little after, and do everything around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more skillfully than you could, and lightly, as we have said, until you have moved the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have if you have nails, pincers; and keep that you do not touch the brain or the jaw.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated, if it is possible, rejoin the fractured part which is loosened from the bone to all other instruments resembling a chisel, but make it more tense and subtle than the other chisel; and if nothing remains of the small bones, do not neglect any scale, if the bone is slightly fractured by some instrument; then close the wound with stitches and bandages as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that of the Galenicians, which is more useful; and the liquid is very strong, and that is its word.</start_of_turn>
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either by fracture or by displacement of the muscle, so that when you have uncovered that part, put on gloves and hold the pointed end of this incisor lens, for this is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not split the bone in two, but let the fractured part rest against two costs; if the incision is towards the bone, then hold in place with a small mallet so as to press the bone gently inwards, and take care of the dressing that is below; if it is too close to the bone, if the bone is slightly fractured, for it is better to leave it whole in its place, rather than to damage it further.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks without piercing the skin, cut the bone as little as possible from above; there are small pieces. If you can, return the toughness and remove the scales of the whetstone that you must have in various quantities, to bring about in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you see before great raisers, and afterwards more subtle, and do not cease to do so until it is well.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In some other capillary and subtle fractures, it is convenient to bring about the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has put his study into this art.</start_of_turn>
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is discovered, it is commanded that you take a drapeil of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in oil roset, and put it on the wound; then take another drapeil doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and oil roset, and put it on the first drapeil; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not harm the wound further; then administer from above another linen, and do not bind it more tightly than is necessary to hold the wound only; and leave it in place for one or two days, until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer medicines as follows: radix of iris, flour of times, powder of incense, and ariste, and similar things; mix these things together and put them on the wound, and administer again the appropriate medicines in moderation; and keep the wound clean, that you do not leave it bloody, neither do you leave it gathered up, for when it is gathered up on the head of the brain, if it is crooked and stiff, it brings great harm to the patient; for when anything biting is put on the wound, if it does not desist from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	And keep that the wound is perfectly closed, that you do not open it further, nor leave it open, for when it is closed on the brain, if it is crooked and stays, it causes great harm to the patient; for when one puts on the face something biting, if it is not driven down by its base.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If black bile does not come forth violently except by the medicine we have placed upon it, that some virtue has, if you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drape, and put it upon the affected area; then you shall cure it in the manner of cures that it ought to be cured, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Then follow the manner of treatment that is suitable, as long as he is sane.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, if you must drink your little toe or pierce with needle that does not please you, and put equal pressure on that fracture within your index finger and on the heel, until it returns to its natural position; do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the arm, and it cannot come down naturally, you should know that you must put a strong splint on the forearm at the level of the elbow.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the fracture is of two parts, if you must do it again, and hurry to restore the first part if you wish; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, bathe the head of the toe where you attempted to bandage, if the fracture is in a part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you must bind up the limb another way, if the break is there; and make the bandage so strong that it fills the hole in the limb.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer shall move the tents in the burrow, and die each for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not seem to understand. But it seems to be right that they should be closed in the making of an egg-shell, and powdered mustard; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is much snow drape it round, and keep the brim steady, and blow the patient among them; or do as you will.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if there comes snow after the procedure while you are working, if you put some butter or cloth soaked in oil rose or some vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus does not come out, if you put on plaster by force, of flour of hemp, and of powdered incense, confected with an egg-shell, then put on thick stockings, and do not bind me low or high; and if the break is not great, and it is broken into small pieces, if the extractor has suitable instruments for this, then close the wound, and cure with dressings covering the wound, and soldering, as with plaster and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the high, if you cure the tents, and put on lead weights, until it is healed
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the root of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and there is no break of the skin, the fracture is often incomplete, not completely broken through, except for the fragments within, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the lower part, to bite down with the index finger of the opposite hand in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you take hold of the index finger of the right hand, and grasp the fracture lightly, and move it apart with the other hand by force, and hold it equal
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., it is necessary to administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth causes swelling, or if a tooth is strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a broken mandible cerote on and put on a pair of double drapes; and put on a large bandage well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and bind it on the tooth as you wish, and command the patient to rest, and eat lean meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the limb is deformed, if the bone is fractured at the third part, and then reset it in its place; put on a plaster cast with fine powder of beeswax with plenty of egg yolks or flour of alum, after you have broken the cerote; and put on a clean bandage, and if the plaster casts have dried, and the limb does not move, leave it as it is until it heals; many times it is healed in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if there is swelling in the apostemes, if we have already said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, award that no piece of the bone is left unboned; if subtle of the bone has instruments covering it to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, if the edge has burned according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have boned all these pieces, and there is no more movement, if the wound is wide, put on some covering over the wound, in order to prevent infection, as long as it is necessary.
de la forcele	because of its force.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forced fracture occurs often before, behind the shoulder, and if it is broken and loosened in two pieces, there are fragments, and it is the lightest to restore; or if there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the fracture is with a wound, if you have two assistants, let one hold the limb that feels the forced fracture; and the other extend the head towards the part; then put the fracture back in place, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you must extend more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of wax, or linen, and be large as you need; and extend and hold the forced fracture, and strain the ball at your hand, so that you can put the fracture back in place as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not manage to support the head of the humerus in its proper position, because it comes out of place, you must know that the patient lies supine on his back, and put the arm under the armpit, namely the middle armpit, and keep the minister there until the head of the humerus is raised up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find fragments, if you must, make an incision there; and force out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot reunite by any means, if the head has become fractured at one of the incisors that you have made; but that you put under the armpit the instrument which is called the forcele, to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not crooked, and should be as wide as it seems convenient, according to the size of the bone and the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large and the other is small, as is the course of the wound that you made when you treated the bone; and when you are assured of the apposition of the caulking, if the wound is large, or if you doubt the apposition of the caulking, if you employ the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the aftercare comes, if there is moisture, let oil rose, ale, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stripping of the bone, when it is sensitive to wounds and to the touch, is that you put on the bone powdered rosin and egg-white, and put on thick stockings, and put a sponge under the armpit if you need to; then take a very broad bandage of a palm width, and put on two layers of cloth over the stockings, and the rosin; then take a needle of three nails wide and long, and wrap around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is fixed; and put the needle on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the collar, and under the armpit; and leave the shoulder resting, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture steadily, and that you see clearly that the needle does not move from the fractured bone, if the fracture is slight, or if you doubt the setting of the caulking, if you employ the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and keep it still until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time to anyone.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the scapula is fractured or displaced from its normal position, it must not be forced out but must be gently released by touch. If the limb appears according to the fracture, and is reduced according to its natural shape, in every way possible; then pour the fracture with fine powder of mill with abundant eggs, and press firmly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and subtle splint, one wider than the scapula, and keep the splint firmly in place so that it does not move from its position. Watch carefully the limb’s every movement. Every time it becomes loose, if the splint is released, put the limb back in its place and keep the patient lying down; and the scapula will be restored in approximately twenty days or less. And when this number is reached, if the limb is free, and so be it, for it is not a bone that has become loose readily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of bone sticks out beforehand, and not a little, if it is on top, and the bone, do as we have said in the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess above.
de la brisure dou pis	If a piece of bone sticks out beforehand, and not a little, if it is on top, and the bone, do as we have said in the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess above.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks at the start. But it often breaks in fleeing.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and without any other reason, vomiting blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and all this together
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae and unite the edges of the ribs with your hands, and slightly force them equal in every way that you can, until the limb is as it should be; then put on dressings and stamp with the thumb a little salt or other soft matter, and cover with a bandage, and bind tightly to the bone, so that it does not move; and turn the limb round behind, and strain gently, and reward chest every hour the limb is loose, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you see that it will not hold, because of corrosion or purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, do not delay, but loosen and remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the way of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	And if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae and unite the edges of the ribs with your hands, and slightly force them equal in every way that you can, until the limb is as it should be; then put on dressings and stamp with the thumb a little salt or other soft matter, and cover with a bandage, and bind tightly to the bone, so that it does not move; and turn the limb round behind, and strain gently, and reward chest every hour the limb is loose, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you see that it will not hold, because of corrosion or purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, do not delay, but loosen and remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the way of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs only come from great blows to the back and the head, and they do not swell except for these things which are slippery; and one can well know at the inquiry how they are.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is if you put the break back in its place, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a support, and hold it with a bandage, if you have need of it
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is downward, if the patient feels great pain, and swelling, as with pleuracy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and there is swelling, and vomiting, and great loss of blood, which is a serious matter, and the former has put on great pain.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it is necessary to administer nourishing foods which cause the belly to swell, in order to break the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for those who are unconscious or dying.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if there is life in them, let them be conscious.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one should put on stockings over the limb, because of swelling; for this is similar to reason; however, there is doubt that the stocking will hold back the excess fluid from the limb due to weakness.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth soaked in oil, and put on tents between the ribs to make the girth even, then either cure the pleurisis, meat and medicine.</start_of_turn
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points towards the belly, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is necessary to cut above the fractured bone, and if it is necessary to place the dressing, then you must break the bone slightly, and drain the wound gently, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with supports, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If a wound bleeds profusely, put upon wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and lay upon the limb; and cure until the bleeding stops by itself on the edge of the wound, without adding anything else, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the rib, and there is doubt to the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the broken rib, and to put in dressings, namely instruments to hold the face; then it must be cut through the bone, and treated gently, and then the two layers of the wound must be sutured, if it is large, and it must be cured with sponges, until it is healed. And if pus comes from the wound, if you put on damp cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; and treat while the bone is being held in place, and if necessary above the rib, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fracture of the rib bone, and often it rains; and also at the shoulder blade.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When this happens to anyone, and you know whether it will heal or not, if you see his hands limp and limping and dying, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if there is no sensation in them
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	When it is deadly in multiple situations, and if you move them and feel well when you extract and prick them, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover, if we put treatment on it
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if anything similar comes to the spine at the waist, you must know whether there is blood or not; if there is, take care that the piece is softened, and if there is an accident which is in the hands or on the back, the wind and the evacuation will go upwards; and when it is softened on the belly, the evacuation will go upwards.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When it is softened on the back and he looks to sell, he cannot do it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	The pangs that cause death: if he does not work diligently in his wound
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these things do not occur, if the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the remedy is that if there is a wound at the base of the hair, put upon the spine oil of rose or oil of nutmeg of an egg, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comfortable and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if a bone is dislocated, if you can cover over the limb; and unite the two ends of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, then cure with oil that binds hair, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "fracture of the jaw", if it is on your left hand, and put it equal to the right hand at your waist, then put on the dressing and the bandage, if you must; then strain, and if there are broken bones, if you leave it like that, and unite the bones, cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	and the fracture of the thigh bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is no sign of improvement despite prolonged treatment, and if it is rejected by the flesh, it brings pain to the patient, swelling, and causes the fractured part to bulge out.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the fracture is high up, when you extend your hand over the fracture as long as you are over the break; and you mark what is fractured and how it is positioned; and if the fracture is only at the hip, if you make it even, as long as it is in its natural position.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is low down, or if it slopes outwards, make the patient lie on his belly, until the fracture is restored.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set them even, if you put on the shoulder, then put on a staff of wood or bone, and hold the arm steady, so that it does not move; and keep the limb still, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the swelling comes again, do not touch it, until the swelling has subsided; and put on what we have previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be held, if there is no further mishap; and that is the remedy.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	From the fracture of the shoulder
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And thus he makes two pulls of the arm, and holds the patient above a seat; then he grasps the broken bone in the wrist with his hand, as if he were making a handle of a bowl, and holds it up without any weight or the assistant extends it downward; then he puts the arm into its place, as well as he can manage, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one should support the patient on his chest, and tie his arm to his neck, and order the assistants that one holds what is on the fracture at his hands, and the other to hold below at all the bones, and to extend the thumbs outwards from his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, strain the blood from the wound, from the wound itself, and extend the thumbs of the attendants to their part
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, you must know that you must place the thumb of the sufferer over the elbow and the other towards the heel, of the wound; and if the wound is on the heel, you must put the thumb lightly, with force, as long as the wound is equal on the shoulder and the heel; then put the wound equal, as it should be, and strain, if the pieces do not come together by themselves
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If the fracture persists, do not strain it for more than thirteen days; put on a clean bandage in oil of roses until the fracture is calmed; then strain and put in place the support for the break; reassemble the arm on the shoulder or chest; put on the dressing and strain the bandage on the arm and shoulder, so that the arm is steady, without anything hindering it, or without moving the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints and put under the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and put between the splints two spaces equal in size; then strain on the splints, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the swelling of the limb, and the tightening, as we have said, in the morning when you restore the limb, and you doubt the wound, if you leave it closed until the seventh day, as we have said; then look for three days, that the swelling does not increase or arise in the limb, or that the discoloration does not arise in the limb because of that which is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the swelling persists, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such things happen, if not after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach; and put a cushion of wool an inch thick under the limb, and look for an hour or two, that the limb is not moving, or that the ligaments are not softened; if the swelling persists through the power of medicine, and you do the thing which we have set before you, in part as the meat must be at the first warmth; and when it starts to recover, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the limb must be restored within forty days of all; and then one must loosen and administer poultices and ointments to the limb to restore it to its proper position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is slight and bloody, if it does not move for a month or two, it must be loosened.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure du bras	...of the fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of three bones, which are called the "radius" and the "ulna". One is small and is like a nail which supports the pouch; the other is large and is like a weight, over the small thumb. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, or sometimes both; and sometimes the bones break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are fractured, the restoration is slight and the healing; but when the large bone is fractured, if the healing is poor, it is more painful than when they are fractured whole.</start_of_turn
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When only the small bone is fractured, if it is recommended to extend it slightly and make it even.</start_of_turn
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And when the large bone is fractured, if the limb must be drawn more strongly; and extend over one cushion, and hold the hand of the arm higher than the other, and the small hand must be lower than the other hand, and let the patient cross his arm over himself, and one cushion in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the limb from the elbow to the wrist, or from the elbow to the shoulder, and another limb from the shoulder to the elbow.</start_of_turn
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he sets the eye equal, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking [of a limb], if you put something in its place, and if there is none that will prick [it] now, and you cannot leave it there, if you leave it above and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if in the breaking of a limb, as I have spoken of in this chapter; if you take the cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	Then at the beginning of the restoration, if there are afterpains, if they are thick, I apply cerate made of rose oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I apply it superficially, until the afterpains have subsided.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then I put on the cerate and I put in place the powder of the mill with plenty of egg white, because I put in the nails, and let the nail of the bone be the strongest and a little wider than the others; and there should be six nails or arms in more or less positions: either that the nail is in one of the bones, or in two; and it is strained more on the nail than anywhere else, and it should be washed less often, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the covers that are on the nail be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and the tendon afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any other misfortune happens to the limb, if there is swelling that happens to the limb, then you must raise the limb high with warm water, until the swelling has subsided; and leave the limb still until it is relaxed.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the traction, and if the tendons are softened and the bones are loosened, and similar things, if the situation permits
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot be brought down in the limb, because it is too great, then shalt thou soften it somewhat, and leave it alone for a while, until the swelling subsides, and then stretch it again.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, keep it unbound for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or when the limb is healed, then he must keep his hands on his collar, and his collar even, and be careful not to move or eat, and sleep on his back; and keep the wound covered for thirty days or more, according to the composition and complexion of the patient.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	As at the back of the hand, we often find fractures, and they do not cease but to increase many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand is fractured or broken, if it is suspected that the patient is in great pain, let the patient sit still and straight before him equally; then put his hand on the extended towel, and extend the fractured bones, and put them even with the others; and put on the plaster and the bandages, if necessary; and put on a splint according to the extent of the wound; and if necessary, cover with a bandage of linen
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the elbow towards the belly of the limb, if you make a loop of bandage, and command the patient to strain his fractured limb; and then strain with a long bandage, and if necessary, put on a splint as large as the limb, and strain it as much as it is possible.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is lateral, order that you place a splint above and below the joint, so that the thumb is overextended and straight, then bind it all around the thumb, and keep it closed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture is neither above nor below, if it is a pouch, if it must be equal, as it should; and strain it with the thumb, and if you see that it does not move, if the fracture is elsewhere, as in the index or any other, if it must be equal, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or bind them all together, holding the wrist, or place a splint on it, as with a pouch; and take care in restoring and arranging the burn, and secure what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken limb.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often fractured, and it is seen when it bends forward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound with a thread above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs equally; and it is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, if either of the ligaments around the knee joint is torn, and the other is ruptured by the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If also it is close to the knee, and then either the ligament from the knee joint or the collateral ligament is torn; then put the hand on the bone equal to two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then put on the dressing and the bandage, for there comes no pain from there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is swelling around the incision, if you leave it calm and return to your work and cure; the knot is made in a hasty manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three, and to drain the surplus; then rotate the limb until the talons reach the root of the nail, and pass a thread long between the thigh and the limb from below the knee, and pass the thread over the top; then rotate on the limb and the thigh the bandage, and put on the dressing on the fracture, and put a pin on the bone of the limb; then put eight threads between the limb and the thigh of coarse cloth to bring about the same tension; and as you go up the fracture, and less you strain; then take out two threads that you passed between the limb and the thigh, and put three pins on top, which are below; and cover again to the level of the nail, until you see below the piece; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it be, and there will be no further swelling or pain or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is swelling, if it comes loose, and if the bone is pierced, if it is necessary; and if it cannot be moved, if it is necessary, to cut the thread and draw out the bone; and cure it as we have said, when it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the bone snapped in this case that one sets it, as in the shoulder and the arm; however, in the restoration that is made, it does not bring any pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And if the bone is set within a day, or less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin region.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hair that in the groin district has recently burst, but it rains often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If it breaks, if it is not just a tear, or a wound, and if there is pain, and feeling of pain, and this is felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus, if it be set right, do thou put them even which are round about their shoulders, so that they be well assembled together; then put the bandage on, and set a round cushion, if thou canst manage it, and strain it as it may be strained, and reward all the conditions that we have said before, as for instance chaut abscess and other like; if thou dost set each mishap that may happen, so that they be sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	And thus, if it be set right, do thou put them even which are round about their shoulders, so that they be well assembled together; then put the bandage on, and set a round cushion, if thou canst manage it, and strain it as it may be strained, and reward all the conditions that we have said before, as for instance chaut abscess and other like; if thou dost set each mishap that may happen, so that they be sound.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hair that in the groin has two bones, of which one is called the “muscle” and the other is called the “fossa”; and there is breaking in all parts as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, if the limb is twisted from every part
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a bone is fractured in two, the limb is twisted from front to back
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	If the big bone is broken, if there is great pain, and it is seen well; and it is twisted from its place.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When it is necessary to restore the dislocation, extend the limb fully and make it even, and bind the joints evenly; however, if the fracture is severe, there are many pieces, and the extension is less severe and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have completed your work, if you take two strips of coarse cloth that will embrace the limb from one side to the other, and are as long as the limb from the knee to the toes; then encircle in two places with bandage from under and over, and bind firmly in the middle, and to this binding do not allow the limb to bend either to the right or the left, and thus it is well; and no one should administer anything with a length greater than the limb, and if there are bones, that the extension should be less violent and more gentle; and align according to your ability.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones due to violence.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the limb there is no fracture at all, and there must be something else which causes it, for there is doubt only in many cases.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the limb, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put the limb so that it is almost suspended in the air, as if it were flying, and then put the limb back on the ground, where the bones were raised, then press the limb until it returns to its place; then put on the dressing and bandage, and put on a little bandage under the bone at about the distance of three fingers, and bind the limb steadily, and cover it with a cloth or other things as you deem necessary.</start_of_turn
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is not better, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there be two breaks, if you restore them as we have said, do two of the hands; then put at the end of each break a pin corresponding to the length of the break, and make a mark further on; then put the thumb that I have mentioned there, and strain immediately; and if there are three or four, break, and put on each break a pin corresponding to its quantity, enveloped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone; and keep it firm on the head of the thumb over the belly of the bone, if you keep it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember that you must not neglect the other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have mentioned; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the clavicle bone.</start_of_turn>
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the natural bone of the woman is broken, if she sits enlarged, then incline towards the lower back and hold her back; then fill the belly of the woman with wool, and put as much as I stop; then draw out the woman, and keep her back and front, and then pull out the wool, as long as it comes out of the nature, and bring back the bone with the stop; and when she sees the urine, if she has pulled out the wool, and when she has urinated, she will recover, and do this for seven days or until the fracture is restored. If this is done, take a bladder of barley and bind a string to the opening and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow through the string until the bladder is emptied. The nature will then restore the fracture; then fill with wool and leave it for a while until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or a woman is fractured, if it is reset as we have said concerning the thighbone; these fractures are not hidden from him who places his study and his habit on it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration: enter then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the groin, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put it in the groin; then wrap it with cloth and leave it for two days or until it is healed.
de brisure avec plaie	From break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with wound, even if it is large, as for example the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or the like, that he be sound now, as the testimonies we have mentioned bear witness.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, if the remaining vitriol is sufficient, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the break once more in the same hour, or at most two hours, if the swelling does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if swelling comes, if you leave the restoration until new night, as long as the swelling is appeased, and do not touch either a third or a fourth, for you will risk coming to a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if a bone breaks beneath the skin is appears uncovered, if it is known that you must place your hands lightly over the wound, slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the swelling does not appear to you to be able to place your hands equally on your hands, if the implement which is of iron, which has about .vij. or .viij. of length, and the large size is in accordance with the quantity of the wound; and because of this it is necessary that it should grasp .iii. or .iiij., as much as is necessary in a wound of fracture; and let it be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not pierce the compression on the limb at your work, and let it be before and behind, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palainche", because it is known that the curved bones should be placed over the head of the apparent bone; and the latter must once again be equal to the former
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well hold the bone, if you must copy the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you see that the head of a bone has slipped from its socket, or if it is necessary to pierce or cut, at your peril; then remove that which is loose from the bone, leaving only the rough and tough parts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the limb is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, the swelling that was not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it remains in its place, then I drape it in black vinegar, and properly keep it in this state; and do not put any cerate or other substance on the wound, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars after the limb has been restored, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area as much as necessary, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has been the cause of madness among fools, and has caused the patient to die or become paralyzed on many occasions; and let the stitches be finer and softer than the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the cause is not serious, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, if it is not possible to place it on supports; but cover around with strong cloth, and bind tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling at the wound, if the bone that you placed on all sides has become loose, and there is healing of wounds, as with the application of ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must bind the limb once a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And you must keep the limb immobilized in a moderate degree as when it is gently flexed backwards and forwards
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists, and cannot be healed but returns to its original position, with small pieces of bone displaced, because you must try to close the wound, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is fistula at the limb, or other kind of corruption, if it is possible to cure it, according to what is written in this chapter above
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and is open on the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other bones of the great limbs, if it is not treated, for many times death comes from this; but leave it until it has healed; by chance it will mend itself after twenty days or thirty, and then cure the wound if you wish; or if you do not wish, leave it alone
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Hair that comes out from the root.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Hair comes out from the root many times after the heat of the bath, even when it is near the joint; and the thing to be seen is the figure of the limb; and by chance one cannot make the limb do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care that the patient does not bleed: if you administer astringents, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and other things, ensure that you take neither of these things, or all of them together, and mix them with wine that is astringent or with plenty of egg or with oil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and strain them well, and do not remove them from the hands for days; and then remove the dislocation, and repeat the process until the nodulation is bony; or you tie it to a piece of lead that is well made; for the property of lead is that if it is bony all the swellings under the limb are overcome. And if the nodulation has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above is great, and to make the superabundance apparent; or you leave it without a drain, until it is bony, and cure it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb is weak after the dressing.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture is restored, and the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it: either because it was too tightly bound and was not properly loosened; or because there were too many bands, and it could not move freely; or because of many wounds; or because of too great a movement, not in its proper place; or because there is too much blood in the limb, if it is weak
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient move more gently, and to keep the limb firm, until the swelling is gone; and give him baths, and make him drink wine and eat; then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice absorbs the great swelling, and the blood flows smoothly, until the swelling returns to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the disease.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is fractured open, and the limb is deformed, although it retains its natural movement: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be fractured anew, and many have had this experience in our land; this treatment is blamed, and many evils result from it; and by chance the patient dies. Although, if the swelling and torture are fresh, if you believe they have arisen from warm water, or soft herbs such as rue, ivy, and meadowsweet, and similar things; then make an application of a soothing poultice, like good aquaintance, and take the nourishment of rue, and mix it with grease of gelatine or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice on; or take fat figs, and grind them with bran of colocynth, and similar medicines that mitigate the vomiting.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone fractured by continuous rubbing and length of time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Or else, do not move the limb during its fracture hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron, if it covers the bone, make an incision as slight as possible; and place cushions and a study in the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes about, if it can now be put back in its place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one waits too long, if the limb swells up, and by chance one should reset it, there will be pain at the root; for this reason one must not move it while it is swollen: many times this has caused swelling and other pains; however, when this has happened, if you make the patient comfortable again, then leave him alone, until the swelling has subsided; then raise the limb gently with oil, and massage it lightly, and cure each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have commanded the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the wrist.
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The jaws have become loose and clumsy, and the dislocation of both is as follows: either they are a little too rigid in their place, and soften somewhat; or they are completely loosened, and hang downwards, and cause the tongue to hang out of the mouth, unable to close it, and to swallow.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, if it returns by itself several times
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and accompanied, if you must necessarily reset it, do not grasp it; and in such a manner that the attendants hold the patient’s head firmly, and look towards the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two must be loosened, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his jaw, his teeth, and move them all around
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep his eyes fixed on the mark, until it returns to its place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns grasped, even though the two mandibles are together, if they arise from hot water and oil, as long as they remain lightly; do not attempt to force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is well clotted with soft material, put on moist cloths in a circle made of rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with linen; and let the patient rest on his back, with his arms resting between two cushions, so that he does not move either forward or backward, or strain himself, but take moderate nourishment, until the pains are gone, and keep the jawbone firmly closed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles do not return to their place at a moment, and are not converted at their leisure, fever and sweat will arise, and sometimes vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death follows in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be used for a long time without causing damage, and is of no use once the pain has increased, and one often feels it.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	If the patient lies perfectly still on his back, extend his arms; then press the limb towards his palm, and it will return. Then put on the support and bind it, and strain it; the limb that is towards the heel cannot be loosened. If this does not happen, and if it is loosened once, if you leave it alone, it will come loose again as we have said; then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way the limb will be brought back to its place when it is freed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Hair that grows on the shoulder is not disvalued except in three ways: one is that it is disvalued at the lower part of the shoulder towards the elbow; the second is at the upper part of the arm towards the shoulder; and by chance it is disvalued at the upper part, and this is common; do not disvalue it further at the shoulder, nor at the elbow; and often disvalue it downwards towards the shoulder, even among those who have little hair, for in these jumps it has become necessary; among those who have enough hair, it jumps at points and returns at points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there happens blows or fractures, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and care must be taken that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is certain therefore that you must be certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Dislocation is known when the limb moves towards the shoulder and makes a difference between the diseased and healthy shoulder; and you will find between their difference that the shoulder joint has a socket, and the elbow touches the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a fist. And the patient cannot move their hand back to its place, or move in any way; and if it is dislocated high up, if it is not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the touch. And this manner of dislocation is not sufficient to restore it, when it is new, or when the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the physician takes hold of the painful limb above, then places his thumbs under the shoulder-blade, and holds the joint forcibly upwards; and the physician takes hold of the limb and extends it upwards, because thereby it is put under tension.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said above, if you must know, the patient should be bathed in warm water; and you should administer a soft and soothing medicine, such as a decoction of fennel and melilot in water, or administer it directly; or you should support the patient on his back, and put under the seat a cushion of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the patient’s hand on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient; and another attendant will hold the chief of the patient’s shoulder, so that it does not move forward; the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it remains according to this method: that you make present a force that is greater than the patient; and that you place two fingers on the shoulder joint, and hold the shoulder up, so that the patient hangs down; and another attendant will treat the hand of the patient backward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak to bear any weight, if he can do nothing with his hand, the dislocation will come back immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And so we must do in another way: if the head of the shoulder is like a stone long in the earth, which is as if the arm were a nail, and is neither too thick nor too thin; then put some ointment on the patient, but let him have a bandage over his hand, and let the patient lie down with his hand long by the side; then extend his hand forward from the other side and the joint will return to its place at once; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, do this remedy: take two thumbs and three fingers of good size, which has the thumb resting on the base of the little finger, according to this fashion:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of the sufferer, draped in a cloth so that he does not see the physician, then put his hands on the patient’s ass; extend your arms on the patient’s back, and place the sufferer on the arm, and his arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on an angle of an elbow of a span, and either extend the hands downwards or leave the wrists hanging outwards: the joint is now recovered.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is recovered, in whatever way that may be, if you put his hands on the patient’s ass again a span of wool even, then put a cushion of powdered rye, with incense and an egg yolk, on the whole shoulder and around, then strain from the ass downwards, and turn the limb over the cushion, and embrace the hand to his collar, and either keep the hands down or let them hang loose.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And must keep him from moving, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then move more after five or six days, and the limb will be healed; and if it is stiff and is not softened, it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is forced out of place by moisture, or for any other reason, if you must administer cautery, apply it three times as a front or in the chapter of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this, and if it does not heal after seventeen days, and the limb still cannot be raised, then know that the nerves at the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and that the dislocation will never be healed in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is from front to back, and the arms, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the limbs, and if another bandage is administered; and it must be cured as long as it is painless.</start_of_turn>
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	If after healing the wound comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
de la dislocation dou coute	If after healing the wound comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	If after healing the wound comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the painful limb with the sound limb, if the wound appears open to view.</start_of_turn>
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot rest upon the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must keep it immobile even after it has been reset, because if you reset it again, if by chance it had come loose, it would be useless to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back at all, even when it is at the back.  It is better to leave it as it is than to reset it again, for it is more painful and by chance it brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if it is possible to restore it, when it is like this that you can bring it back, extend your hand with both hands; and extend your arms and hands as wide as the pain of the joint allows, from the thumb to the little finger, and hold the joint together with your thumbs and index fingers, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and pull from the root of the bone that is dry.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension; then twist the arm from its shoulder, and having enclosed a long and wide bandage; and when you have looked at the joint to the hand, if there is any oil on the joint to soften it, then put on a dry plaster and strain the arm, and leave the arm bound to the painful limb for some time, and then loosen it.</start_of_turn
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, if you notice that it does not move smoothly, repeat the displacement and rejoin the limb, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint has been reset, and it moves, bathe and massage thoroughly, and press until it is eased; or put on the joint a fatty mutton nail, leave it in for a day and a night, then extract the nail and the pus; and when it has sweated, gently massage the joint, then replace the nail, and then repeat once or twice, until it is healed. If you see that it returns to its place, put on a poultice of moist chaff filled with burr and press on it; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand: the joint of the hand is loosened, and its return is laborious, more so than any other joint in the body. It is necessary to restore it to its place immediately, even if it is loosened, and even if there is swelling or a wound.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put your hand on a table with your palm facing outwards, and extend your fingers, look at the hand so that you can put the palm on the joint, and press until it returns naturally; it is necessary that you watch to see if it is well placed. Then put your hand back on the table, palm downwards, from the extension to the reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and look put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back now, that is well. If not, if the strain of the soft tissues is appeased after the incisions, and you leave it in its place to recover.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you do not wish to put it back after a few days, it will stay dislocated; and do not do anything to the patient except soften the hand, and do not attempt to extract anything. If there is nothing else to extract except by cautery, do that in this case, and by chance there is no other remedy.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the plaster we mentioned before, then strain and leave it for three days, then take it off and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well, and if there is no pain, if the joint is swollen with warm moisture, then massage it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la dislocation des dois de la main	until the dislocation of the shoulder of the arm is healed.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never is the hand detached from the forearm, never from the back of the palm or the belly; therefore let the hand remain detached, and support the dislocation at your pouches until it returns, then sustain the head of the hand, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it for two days, and then put it back as before; and do not bind it, as we have said, and loosen the bandage, and move it, and bind it again; do this often, until it is narrow, and do the same if it is detached from the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is detached from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Because of the loosening of the scapula from the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the back or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosenings, if there is no remedy, for the patient is in danger.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the blood egestions flow in the opposite direction, do not hold it back, and many times the limb is softened, or the two knees or two arms or one leg; and many times the scapula moves to three parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbosite": it is cured if you can prove that the gilbosite originates from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or from impacts or from similar things, they say was formerly cured by great words; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the heel, there is no remedy; and the same with that which comes directly on two coasts, we can cure nothing but that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient’s face should be stretched out one inch equal, and should have strain from the toes; then put a cushion under the heel and another at the toes, and bind the patient’s ankles together, and another at the waist, and at the hips, and at the knees; and two assistants should know the ropes, one at the heel and the other at the toes, and they must be well secured, as we have said, and the patient should put his palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return with this treatment, take a spoonful of three hands’ length, and hold the thumb against the side, and let the patient lie on the side; then place the thumb under the scapula and put the middle of the thumb on the spinous process; and place the thumbs of the other hand on the other side of the thumb, and press firmly, until it returns to its place. If you see that it does not, do as the one who turns the hand does.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If you see two tendons at the shoulder of the patient of one hand, and on the pieces two others, and between each tendon there is a knot and a little space of the length of an almond; and in each tendon there is one perforation, or the bone is fractured, and the tendons are firmly fixed in the flesh, so that they do not move; and between two tendons there is one tendon turning, so that the tendon comes out of place; and there are two small tendons of the length of an almond alongside the turning tendon; then the turner must turn the hand until the tendon returns to its place. And the master must put the spinous process even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, if you put on a dry dressing with a lot of eggs, and then press them, and then support it with a tablet of three lengths, that will cause the limb to swell from the hipbone to the spine, and bind it with a thread as we have said, and use the patient some nourishment that is subtle; and if nothing comes to an end of the swelling, if you must administer soothing and calming medicines, with the support that we have said above; and never give a dose of lead, and never does it appear at the back of the spine, near the shoulder blade, and take care that this is not a dislocation; and that is the bone that is open, for we must not presume anything: by chance comes death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocation
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder never come loose except for simple dislocations, never if there are other joints; and the joint of the hip is damaged in three parts: front and back, and front and back; and the more front it is damaged, the more it is damaged in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is this: when you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient’s joints than before, and cannot double his knee at the fire; and that is the abscess which is left inflamed with cautery, for that is what causes the head of the humerus to come out of its place.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of this is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.</start_of_turn
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of this is that if the limb is well placed as it should be, although one may see him make a movement of his knee without pain; if this is seen, one must prevent it, and withdraw the urine, and swell the area, and when he walks, let him pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And the sign of that one who has behind him, if he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and his limb is shorter than the other, and his ankle is softened, and he has pain from the hip down to the toes
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three methods of dislocation, if you are hasty and turn the joint, and stretch outwards and downwards, and move forward and backward; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, know that you must apply one strong minister at the thigh, and at the foot of the limb with two hands, or one that is bound upon the knee; and another minister extends his hand downward as far as it can, while he grasps his hands with his heels; and another holds the head of the limb. Extend both up and down together, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in three out of four cases; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, if you must cure its semblance. When the dislocation is in the armpit, if you can place the patient on his chest, then place the limb on the root of the thigh, and the limb which is beside the groin, then extend the limb upwards towards the armpit, and downwards towards the forcele; then take another minister and grasp his arms, and embrace the great limb of the afflicted thigh, and extend it towards the front: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less harsh than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not tightly bind the limb as we have said, you must know that you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread on the two toes and on the two knees, and that the limb of the patient must be extended two fingers more than the others; then either suspend it on the head of a staff, or on the ground two arms long; then command one minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and another minister to hold the thigh, for the joint is now returning to its natural position.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation has been dislodged, if the patient is conscious, as we have said in the case of hiccuping, grasp the limb firmly above the knee and below the foot; then place two cushions, one at the hip and one at the knee, and insert one cushion between the thighs of the patient in the form of a triangle; then sprinkle damp cloths around, so that the patient does not bleed, and extend the hands of the ministers towards him, and the master places his hand equal to his own on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, it is well.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table and press on it as we have said in the previous discussion, and keep the patient lying on the stone bench.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if it is necessary to extend the limb greatly, do as I have said; and place your gaze upon the pain, which should be above the painful area, and press with the other hand, and extend from the wrist towards the elbow.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation has gone away, if it does not stay in place, do not raise the limb above the ground, but rather that it should be as if it had been loosened previously. As we said before, place the thumb and index finger on the joint; press on the joint with the table; and when the limb extends itself, restore the thighs and place the dressing. Apply a bandage to prevent movement of the limb. Leave for three days or four, then remove the dressing and put on the dressing once more. If you see that the limb is equal, if the bandage is still in place as before, leave for three days; then remove the dressing and leave the limb be until comfort returns to it.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation from the shoulder joint.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is emptied in two ways: that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards; and do not empty it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if you command the patient to bend his limb to his hip, and he does not stretch it to his hip, the hair that is dislodged will be dry; and when you restore him, if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your hand on his face, and put his heel on your toes; then take his knee to your palms, and draw between your thighs, then bend his two hips together; and another attendant extends his heel, as long as his knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well bent his limb lightly; and put on the plaster, and make the limb steady at the hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, and then take them off. Do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at a point, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the shoulder bone.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The bone is never whole, and never fully dislocated, but is always somewhat bent and fractured.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is dislocated, and try before to the part where it is loosened: bring it back if it is slight, and do it gently with your hands when it is slightly swollen only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dry, if you make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg below the ankle; then bring your thumb to your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, and extend the limb upwards, and keep it well supported; do this twice as we have said, pressing and pulling the limb; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it returns; and if it cannot return, make the patient lie on his back on the earth, and insert your thumbs firmly under his buttocks, and bind his legs together with a sheet, so that he does not move the patient; then hold the patient’s thigh, and another assistant extends the limb with his hands or at the joint, that it lies on the ankle joint; then extend the ankles of both assistants equally, and tie them either at the bottom between the patient’s thighs to retain the patient when it is extended; then put the thumbs equally on the dislocation at the hands, and another assistant holds the leg steady at the ankle, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches a point, if you place the dressing and bind above, and the strain forms, and you tie the limb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, if the strain; then remove the ligature at the third or fourth day, and tell the patient for three days. If it goes before this end, it is not certain that it will not damage further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he persists in this state, if you must restrain him, as we have said elsewhere, until he is well again.</start_of_turn>
des dois	until he is well again.</start_of_turn>
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if you can manage them well, it is a light matter.</start_of_turn
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the dislocation is not in any knot of the limb, then you must make the patient sit on one leg or on a chair quite straight, and put your limb on what is open of these joints, then press your limb firmly until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put on the sole of the limb a chair for two fingers, then the strain forms, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Together with wounds and dislocations.</start_of_turn>
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and it is seen restored, many times the patient has died: if you are not sufficiently presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, do not be bold; and at the beginning of things put on a soothing charm, and leave the patient in the hands of the Lord, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you now restore the limb in its place, even as the charm remains; and when the limb is restored, if you administer soothing charms, and cure the wound, as it should be, from dried pus; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and the bones are fractured, if the bones are fractured, do as we have said in simple illnesses; and beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for this is perilous according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your soul and body.
Amen	Amen.
