O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have finished this book which is the last of the science of medicine assembled from its precepts and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my mind that I must finish this treatise which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, surgery
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is rare throughout, if it is deprived of science and care, and only remains the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have performed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understanding and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I can bring it to life together the order of this treatment in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and the other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it befits him who enters this to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he has judged the bones, and the forms and the connections and the separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and limbs and the number of joints, and the movement of the veins and the rest, and of their issue.</start_of_turn>
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates said that the pain without the disease is like the work without the art; and the same in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say at the beginning of this book that he who is ignorant of the things that are before him, if he is rash and does not reflect, will often do more harm than good; as I have seen many times with these matters that are concerned with this science and if he neglects science and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who drank wine mixed with vinegar for scrofula or the swelling of a woman’s uterus, and cut the arteries of the neck; and as much blood flowed out as for a woman to die between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And thus another time a stone came out of a bladder of a sick man, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I heard it already called for the treatment, and saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and so I knew that if I cut it out he would die.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus another time a maid came to take care of our lord who had a broken limb, and with the splinter caused a wound; and the physician's knowledge was strained by the fracture above the wound as if by strong binding, and did not allow blood to flow from the wound, and left it until the end; and he commanded that it should not be moved again; and it happened that when the limb was finally freed and the splinter was taken out, it was lost.</start_of_turn>
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I beseech you to come here, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is without pain and without suffering.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb is unsound, and it will not recover; and the corruption will continue to rise in the limb as long as the limb is entirely lost.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another mire which effracts the abscess, encloses it, and then inflames it by the malice of its lordship.</start_of_turn
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the swelling, when it is full of melancholy humor, it does not suffice to touch it with fire except when it is in a part of the body where one can remove everything that is corrupted.</start_of_turn
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, take heed, for the work of hands has become divided into thirteen parts: that is to say, there is danger in many ways; and I shall show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must keep your arms close to your body, lest the fools speak badly of you. If you grasp your weapons tightly and undertake your patients calmly and firmly, and use the better way if by the grace of God you reach salvation; and leave the passing fancies of grief behind; and keep your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and hold fast to your soul that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Your glory departs in the face of your reproaches: “Do not take my cure for a bad disease, for you are not reminded of fools.”
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with the cautery of fire and dry medicine, and this chapter orders from the head downwards; and the forms of instruments, and the materials of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with the dressing and piercing of wounds, and the treatment of abscesses, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter orders the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and sprains, as well as other things; and it is ordered from the shoulder joint downwards, and from the form of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Neither do we recall from our work what is the quality of the aid and the great discomfort of a complexion like this.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and the discomfort, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the most secret response; and about this many have spoken, and they agree on this; and I am stifled by their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally for any complexion or where there is matter, for there are two kinds of complexions: that is to say a complexion that is hot in the sense of matter, and a complexion that is dry in the sense of matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion chaude et seche, assembled matter, some declare that cautery is of great aid; others declare that cautery is of no avail in disease except that which comes from heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be a remedy for hot diseases by heat, nor by drought; and thus those who say the opposite that cautery does great aid in dry and hot diseases that arise from the humors of the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, there is no other way for me to know of this matter except by experience, for I have long observed the chapter of cautery in the books, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and their issues and remedies; for other temperaments I have no knowledge, even in cold and wet diseases.</start_of_turn
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agree and are accustomed to the cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, lads, that fire cautery with secret cures is better than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery is simple, and brings no further pain than to the limb that is being treated, and harms no other part besides that.</start_of_turn>
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from one limb to another by contact, and cause diseases of grief to be banished; and by chance they cause the patient great pain. The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not make me do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And that which I have said to you I have found through experience and through the length of my service and study in this art, and it is confirmed by truth; and for this reason I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to conceal the secret which is reported or fiery, and the quality of work, as it demonstrates the cure of diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know this, child, that it is in what degree the cauteries must be made that they agree, and when they are pricked.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is useful in all degrees, for the harmful effects that arise from it are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot await the degree that is more harmful to the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, my son, that the foolish people are right; for the disease which is cured by cautery never returns; and he says so. But it is not so that they cure, for cautery is but a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its promptness of action, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And indeed, there is one thing that is certain: the disease never returns according to the complexion of the patient and the course of the disease and its power; and there are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and other things, except when cautery is administered in place of these or when there is little superfluity and moisture, for indeed, in such cases the pain does not return any more; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And indeed, many people do not understand that cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but they see; but they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, for indeed, cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we have administered other treatments in any disease and they have not been successful, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn>
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, though cautery is behind medicine, it does not accord with the intentions of the wise.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients say that gold cautery is more effective than iron, because of the quality of the gold and the excellence of its substance; and they say that the lead of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and have found that it is seen in many people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is charred by the color of the gold and when it has cooled down; and if you burn it too much, there is enough hindrance.</start_of_turn
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery as we have learned it to be useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from head to toe, because in this way the patient will find it easier to recover.</start_of_turn>
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Olive oil cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are many causes of this disease called "soda," and also from many humors that descend from the head as sweat, and from many dreams and pain of the teeth and throat, and even from many diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	If the patient is purged by medicine that softens the head of the bone, two or three times, according to what the physician deems useful, agreeable and customary for the patient, then make him cough up the head of the bone again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands over his head; after that place the root of your thumb on the root of his index finger between his two thumbs; and there where your two middle fingers will be, if it bleeds from the root then withdraw the cautery which is called "olive," for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put away the sign of ink; and make an incision and extract the hand a little and a little, and then fix your hand steadily, and repeat the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take one mouthful of silk and put on gauze, and take away the wound, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft dressing.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say the old folks, the more time the wound stays open, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say, none of these people say that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then we must close what is burnt of the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say others that we must leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that it breaks as wide as a woman’s girdle for this reason that the humors issue outwards; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; after that we must cure and bind.</start_of_turn>
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be very good in all cases, for some men or because of fear; and I believe that I ought to leave it alone; for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and soothing for me, and for this reason I shall do this in this case.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times, pain in the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the physician should use poultices, herbs called "cochie," and purges of head, oil, and plasters; and if we apply the cautery as we have said above, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's condition is serious and that it is not too painful; otherwise, cauterize only as much as we have said above.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have cauterized the area around the head bone as we have said, cauterize the vein which is called "vasselz"; and hold your hand over it so that you do not see blood until you reach the bone: the patient experiences more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to cauterize the edges than the middle of the wound.</start_of_turn
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the shoulder there comes sudden pain, and the disease extends up to the head, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that are modified, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this has not profited: then one must make cautery according to two methods, that is to say by means of medicine and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine cautery is like this: if you take an alder root, and rub the skin and cover with it. If there are two heads, do the temple or where the pain stays in its part as much as you can to reattach the alder root under the skin; and when it is reattached, if you bind it and stretch it well and leave it for fifteen hours; then take it out and treat the root with vinegar and leave the wound for one or two days; then put on a bandage that will cover the wound until it is healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound is cured while it is still sound; and if you see that you do nothing of those medicines which I have written or dose to treat with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hairs long and even on the patient.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "clos" because its head is made in the shape of a cauldron or pot with a little lip in the middle; grasp the painful area and hold the iron slightly lower than the thickness of the skin; and when half of the thickness of the hair has been burned, release your hand when the artery is not burnt, and there will be plenty of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on cotton wool, remove the flesh from the wound by two days; then put on moist cotton wool, and then cure the wound until it is healed; and if you are going to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery covered in this ulcer that is not ancient.
de emigraine	De Emigraine.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you have finished treating the emigration, as we have said in the sections on diseases, and you see that the cautery has not helped, and that the patient still suffers, then you must omit the cautery which is called the "cultellare" while it is blunt; and mark the skin with a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that the blood does not flow until the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when you move it, and that the patient does not have regret except for the spasm and the pain that comes from the spasm itself, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or from its cutting, for there is great danger and even for the one who does not know it, and who has not studied and is not experienced; and leave the work in peace; but I will tell you later how to retain the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is described.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that this is of no use, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of tweezers; this is a better cautery than the previous one and is more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the cold of winter the ears suffer pain.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear suffers from cold-induced pain, and medicines and other cures that we mentioned in the previous section have been administered, and the pain persists, then evacuate this cautery which is called the "points," for this is its shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cautery, smear the entire painful ear or the area around the ear with oil until the pain subsides, then pull out the plug from the root of the ear when you have marked the area with a mark; and there are ten cauteries around the ear; after treatment let the area rest until it is healed
de la torture de la bouche	from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is not other than those which move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make any cautery which has the appearance of those which come from drying and hardening of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture which moves from phlegm of hydras and evacuations of head and vomiting, and this is worth nothing, then you must cauterize the patient with three cautery instruments: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little below the temple, and the third between the two eyebrows; and put the cautery over the part which opens well, and make the cautery in the place where the head of the ear is below a little of the edge of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery there until half of the hair is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is like the little cutter which we have put before you, but it is a little more subtle and it is better that the knife be a little thicker; after curing like this as I have said, until it is well healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When epilepsy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it brings no profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place which is called "vasselz" as we have said before; and the fourth cauterization on the back of the stomach. And be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	When epilepsy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it brings no profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place which is called "vasselz" as we have said before; and the fourth cauterization on the back of the stomach. And be cured as we have said before.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	When this disease is given to the patient, large doses of herbs and medicines that modify the brain are prescribed; after which the patient is left with their head bound and placed on the occiput a plaster is put on the sinus which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane of soul, well is he; and if not, two cauteries are to be made upon his head from the crown to the collar, with an inch of space between each; and let him cure as the others. And if you see him adding, and the patient is suffering, make him a third cautery in the middle; and if he is a scoundrel, two others upon the two horns, and cure him until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	If he is sane of soul, well is he; and if not, two cauteries are to be made upon his head from the crown to the collar, with an inch of space between each; and let him cure as the others. And if you see him adding, and the patient is suffering, make him a third cautery in the middle; and if he is a scoundrel, two others upon the two horns, and cure him until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before. For from the coldness of the head...
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be stripped of hair and what we have said before; after which the patient's head is to be raised and then a cautery is to be made upon the head and upon the cheek, and one behind and two upon the nape of the neck; and if you do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the ailment is strong, make three cauteries upon the nape of the neck; and leave them in place until the pain has passed, and then cure as long as he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
de l’epilempsie	De l’epilempsie.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use fire cautery when it is suitable for the patient, and before that they must modify the brain by other means when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a young child who cannot endure suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with bones of meat; after that, let the patient breathe calmly and then perform the cautery as we have said before, on the veins and arteries; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or the olive cautery as we have mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make the cautery subtle as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, superfluous humors or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm arise, whereupon the cautery of certain cauteries is indicated as we have said for the paralytic.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if melancholy is the cause, excessive humors decline to melancholy, and the patient’s body is moist, then one should drink something which will temper the spirit, as is done when there is division before it.</start_of_turn>
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, take the patient’s head; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and keep the patient’s limbs crossed, and hold them firmly from all sides; then show the limb and let some old rue de berbis pour it; and burn it with moderate heat, so that it can endure; then take out the circle from the head and let it cool down; do this to the patient every week once with another good diet, until he is healed.</start_of_turn
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you prick at their base with the cautery, keep the eyes still until they grow anew
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery often causes bleeding of the brain; then put on a wet bandage and grease of gelatine on it
de l’awe des eulz	Or if you see the burn cauterized with making several points throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and grease with gelline.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the pain first appears, as signs indicate which I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink something that purifies the head, and keep him away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that you command him to rest his head, and make him cauterize the head, and make three cauterizations on each temple if the pain descends from the head and there are three pains together, or if the pain descends only in one place; and apply to the whole cautery all the veins and arteries that are around the head, and let them be as long as the width of the temple; and take care to prevent excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood spurt out, if it comes from a part that you have cauterized as well.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to extend the arteries in the extraction and how to cauterize it; and in no case shall you make the cautery or hatereil of bones behind the .ij.
dou cors des larmes	And I will teach you how to extend the arteries in the extraction and how to cauterize it; and in no case shall you make the cautery or hatereil of bones behind the joints of the tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or cut the arteries that are in the appearance of being of great strength; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumous superfluities, therefore it makes the cautery which I have said at the beginning of this book: to cauterize the head and the two cauteries on the two temples, and to cauterize or hatereil the bones; and if necessary, if there is swelling, make a slight cautery under the eyebrow at all times.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Pain de larmes par dedens les eulz
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have treated the patient according to what we have said in the previous section, and it has not helped, then give the patient two barley grog; after that, raise the head and do cautery or a mixture of cautery; make three cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the three hairs above the eyes, one at the root of the eyebrows; and take care not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the oil of the bone is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples themselves; do not leave your hand until a third part of the areola has burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples themselves; do not leave your hand until a third part of the areola has burned, as I have said.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never is it that the hairs of the nipples are converted to beards, and prick the oil, and thereby make cauteries in two ways: that is to say by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then command the patient to keep the hair long; after that mark upon the hair a figure that is as much like the fuel of a mouse as possible, or as the beginning of a sign beyond the hair; then put a soaked rag in butter and a little salve on the oil, and cover the cautery like this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked, and doing it several times, so that the burn is neither too deep nor too shallow; and the sign of the work is that the scab retreats, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then take your hand away, and leave for two or three days; then put a soaked rag in butter until the scab has hardened; after that treat with oil until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If thereafter these hairs reappear, and the burn is softened, repeat the cautery on the same limb as before; and if the hairs are scorched, burn until the burn returns to its natural state, and is even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cautery of medicine is that you command to the patient that he let the hairs grow long and even, then make a mark of the shape of a laurel leaf; then take French soap and live chaff, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hot, if it does not cool, and put it on the mark that you have made like a laurel leaf, and put the burn on the patient’s eyes; and if the disease persists with only oil, if you must open in oil, and if in both; and put cotton wool soaked in egg white on the wound. And the head of the patient must be in its place and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once or twice whenever the patient feels a biting sensation of the medicine, for he feels the biting sensation as well as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has reached your thumb.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting is passed, if you lift the limb up, and you see the bone lifted as much as it was lifted by the contraction of the fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you return to the doctor on your left or the doctor has not worked, as long as your works are even, and your eyes are fixed; then put on a moist cloth in the burrow until the hairs are gone, then cure the wound which is called "dyafenis" and others, as long as they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have diligently cared for your work with great care that it does not require any more medical attention, as your eyes do not prick at their base.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the swelling becomes softer after the oil has been applied, if you wish to resume the medicine on that limb which has become soft due to the swelling; then cure as long as it is healed. This is the form of the mustard seed poultice.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the souls of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that be their restrictions; and do not be afraid to take the right way to the one who is the student of this art.</start_of_turn>
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure for fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to hold his limb steady; and hold his limb between your hands in a firm manner so that it does not move, do not let it hang down; then put a moist cloth or paste of persicaria over the oil; then burn the cautery which is part burned: and it is held to the limb as if it were a pine cone, gather up what is split. If you see that any hair is pulled out from one end to the other, or if you see that there is any attempt; but all this is worth more than your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula until it is over, and in traction remove the pus, and dry; and if it is closed, if the work is done, and draw out the wound; then put the cautery on the burn and hold your hand to the cautery at the part where there is no nerve exposed only by oil, that your hands do not make a tremor; and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you approach the beginning of the fire cautery with the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this is not the case, if you begin the cautery once more, and you take it out once more, if you have lingered for three days, then put on a wet cloth in the burrow and let the healing of the desiccant ointment take effect until it is healed; and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then proceed as is customary in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula of which no ancient author has spoken
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fistula, and open the vessel; then put in the cleft one camel hair of saffron, which is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and do the quantity of a third of a plum; and hold your hand or palm firmly, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted wax has run out; and then it is convenient to put on the oil over the patient's cotton wool in abundance, on wax or on earth: the wax will thus adhere to the fistula and the patient will recover with great ease and delight.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if that does not suffice, if you must give an opening to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its proper place as it is fitting in its own limb.
des crevaices en levres	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it must be administered through the neck, and return the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it must be administered through the neck, and return the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections above, and the cure has not profited, then eschew.i. perform a small burn cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections above, and the cure has not profited, then eschew.i. perform a small burn cautery according to this form: and hold the burn close to the fracture until it is done; after the cure the limb until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the armpit.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the arm or in the elbow, or in the jaw, or there are roots of teeth, after doing so it becomes putrefied and rotten and is swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the sections above, and it does not profit: therefore you must have .i. a burn according to the quantity of the fistula; after the breaking or cutting of the fistula, and hold your hand until it is finished from front to back; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, as you would do in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
dou movement des dens	Pain de mouvement des dents
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have treated it with medicine but it is of no avail, then put the patient's hand in your own; afterwards remove the cautery whose form will arise later in this part as if you put a bandage over the tooth; and put the cautery into the tooth cavity thoroughly, and hold your hand as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; then fill the patient's mouth with salt and keep it closed for an hour and a quarter.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this part, if the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the soft tissue is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted, dry.
de la dolor des dens	Of toothache.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: burn cautery and fire cautery.</start_of_turn>
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Burn cautery: if it is like taking burr from a blister, and the end put in a spoon of iron or tin; after take cotton and wrap over the tip of a rag, and the blister boils, and put on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cold; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth.  And if you see if there is much pus and cotton in the burr, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery is held together like a blacksmith’s tongs or an iron, and be of large size so that the fire does not reach the patient’s mouth; then burn the cautery, so that when it is cold again put it on the tooth and hold your hand there as long as the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be great like that of the same or the next day
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you must make the patient fill his mouth with good burr in the haste of this cautery, and then pull back; this is the form of the cautery
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do the cautery as you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the pain.
des scrophules	And the size on the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because they are little of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture in them, and of those that are only abscesses that I have cured or heads of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a round stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if there has been no rupture, we must do as well for the wound as with a stone. In other abscesses that come from heads or chiefs, because they come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, we must open them every day if possible, to prevent the swelling; and treat them as seems fitting.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the lymph nodes are full of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery needle from this place afterward brings about the formation of pus; and there are two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and put the cautery hot upon the abscess once, or if it becomes mixed, until it reaches the front of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, if put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days; and put upon moist cotton in the burrow until the swelling is bony; afterward cure the wound of abscesses and sutures until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The formation of the abscess.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overcomes the veins in the armpits and the face, and this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines; after that, make the cautery at the root of the jaw, and keep that you do not go down any further than the jaw, and do not go too deep but just as much as necessary.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the head of the scapula, and the cautery which is called "claw" because of its shape; and cure the limb as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	De la toust.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and diseases of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and the disease is ancient, if you do him several cautceries on the forcele in his veins; and if there is another cautery between two nipples; or let the cautery which is called the "claw" according to its shape which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do a cautery by pricking at all the cautery which is called "toes" because of their shape in the ear disease; and let the toes be until XXX, or until they are bent.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the limb as we have said before, and let the cautery be done three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, the cautery is lighter, because you make it twice for the price of one.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	And for this reason, the cautery is lighter, because you make it twice for the price of one.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, soothe the patient on his back and his chest; then take hold of the elbow which is inside the armpit of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, if it is dislocated, grasp the cautery which has two notches, which is the shape of this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture done upon this vein because there are nine cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting on the cautery, broil the area with the needle; then rest the patient, and do not let the limb be too tense until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, do a cautery on the edge of the claw cautery, or do several pricks.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and moisture come into the stomach, as they expel it from its complexion, they multiply the vomiting to him, and are customary methods of treatment, but it does not help; therefore, it is recommended that the patient lie on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, make three cauteries: one on the navel and two on the ribs, as much as a barley; at every cautery, put the needle through the nail, and two cauteries on the two costae as long as the figure of the cauteries is at a right angle, and has a space between them as much as they will join together when they swell with pus; and let the cauteries be so thick that they cause the two parts of the kidney to swell, and let the figure of the cauteries be as described above
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterizing with a great fire in the stomach as described above; and he who has fear of this fire, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach. As much as you see of the hair; then cauterize with all the fire that is called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of cold and moisture and great swelling, as soon as it is forced out of its natural condition by the humors; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, if he is not given rest on his liver; and sign of hair three cauteries as described above, in this figure and this quantity on the liver, driving away the spleen, the liver or the kidneys of the man; and having between each cautery the thickness of two nails; and let the cautery be long and straight, and do not press too hard on the hand to the whole cautery; and let only half of the burn be left, and let the patient lie on his side; and if he cannot, if he is lying down, extend his legs, and keep his arms; and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you cauterize these hairs delicately, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn the whole thing, for you will burn all the body; and that it does not come to boiling, for the body is too subtle in that place, and the wounds will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is swelling in the liver, and you know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the flesh: if it is in the fat, the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the flesh, the pain is violent.</start_of_turn>
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is finished, if you think the patient is recovered from his head; then sign him up on his head or the swelling is gone, and then touch the limb or the swelling is there, and then burn the cautery which is like a needle, for in this way:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautere while the hair is thick and black, and come until the wound is full; after the cure as for wounds until it is healed; and do not dare to do this except for one who has studied long and well in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never occurred.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore one must be careful, and I seem to think that in this case it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	If it is dislocated downwards, something has happened therefore; then make cautery on the thick hair of the armpit, or several incisions in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is solidified, and the patient is healed.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The former said that we must make at pleasure cautery of iris root, and in this manner: take a long iris root, the greatest that you will find, and be dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs; and moisten with oil, and mark on fire, and cauterize. That is, cauterize between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cautery marks a little lower than the beard; and a cautery between the fifth rib and the hipbone, declining behind a little lower; and a cautery on the spleen, and one on the stomach, and one between the two scapulae, and two on the ribs below the cautery that is between the two scapulae; and do not press too much, but open just as much as when smelling.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say no old man has ever used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and has put the burn between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and there is great pain in this, as we have said in the abscess of the liver
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or there is fistula that cannot be healed.
de la mice	And they say no ancient man has ever used fire cautery resembling a razor, and they put it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and they leap from fear, as we have said in the previous statement about foie. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then there are two methods of cautery that you must try which are both good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you make three cauteries or four, as much as you like, bind them according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cautery over the liver as we have said before; do not press your hand on the whole cautery, but let the patient lie on his back; another way of cautery is if you are afraid of the cautery which has two hairs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; keep the nail which is at the base of the hair, or the curve of the patient comes from his left side, and keep the elevation to which you bind the nail according to the nail, according to the length of the hair, and the cautery according to the size of the hair.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, if there are two hairs remaining, flame them until the nail is perceived from the other side; then pull out the cautery, and there will be three left. And if you see that, if you cauterize at all the hairs at three, there will be three left.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has settled for a long time, and this is worth knowing as much as the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	And in the work, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, let the patient purge no more than once the black bile; then make him whole if he shows any fullness; then give him wine to make the work; then discharge his vomitings or sores, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb from your hand or from anything else, and if it comes loose from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much without it being stained; then treat him of another remedy until he is healed.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The fire cautery is not worth an ipecac, except for the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then you must make three cauteries around the buttock, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the shoulderblade on the spine, and one on the hip; and let the cauteries be very close to the skin like a burn
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	When you leave the burn open for too long to gather pus, and do not make the cure after the burn; and when healing hastens, and you bring together the .ij. wounds with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery for the belly is the staple which we have before showing; and for the back is olive-shaped, as it is here before mentioned.
de l’enfleure des piez	because of the swelling of the parts.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the pieces are inflamed with ipecac and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the hand between the thumb and the index finger; and hold your hand with the cautery towards that side
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the wound, for in such a case, fire might ignite the bowels, and let the cautery be performed as follows:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do so, make four cauteries in the crease of the limb at the base of the cubital process; and let the cautery be long, one going over the front of the elbow and the other behind, between the limb; and leave the cauteries over a long distance in order to let the bile rest; then cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	De la menoison.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When cold and moist urine comes from the belly, and the retaining and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great appetite, if you do not do.i. great cautery on the stomach as it has been said above or cautery of the stomach, with the circulation of the cautery; and .iiij. cauteries around the spleen all at once.i. cautery of the umbilical cord and .ij. cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do cautery on the navel and .i. one cautery on each side, and .ij. several small cauteries on the stomach below the great one; for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	De la cure des emorroydes.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And do not enter too deeply into the wound, for in such a case, fire might ignite the bowels, and let the cautery be performed as follows: When hemorrhoids are deep-seated or several, and have been present for a long time and are composed of thick cold and moist humors, they are cured as we have said in our divisions; it does no good to cauterize them: three on the spine of the back, which is sufficient to drive away all the pain up to the ankle and in triangulating, and one cautery on the flank two inches; and if you think that the stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then one should make a large cautery on the stomach as before said, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, with all the cautery nails. And leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the charnosite which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you touch the "thelul", if you see the burn appears to cut, and then put it all on fire over that "thelul" which is touched; and leave it as long as the burn comes out at the birth of the vein, without cutting; do this once or twice. If there is much "thelul", if you burn each one as we have said; after that treat the wounds that are useful as long as they are healed. And if you burn with a large burn on the fat, there will be more great help.
de plaie mal curee	of wound that is not well cured
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure large sizes or openings, as we have told you, if any disease comes to pass that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist purulent matter, if the doctor has done all that he can, and has kept it so that he has saved as much as he can, let him keep it so until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cautery has been drawn out which appears to have raised the wound, and the wound has been packed into the fistula as much as the attempt allows, and the cautery is begun again until the carrion parts become firm and corrupted; once, or twice, or thrice, as much as the amount of flesh requiring treatment; and beware of burning the nerves that are entangled, and the great veins.</start_of_turn
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes up to the bladder and intestines, if you are careful of these parts, do not make a fierce incision, but rather in the flesh; and know that it is not always certain that it will be successful; after treatment let the limb be sound, and if the parts are swollen and the matter is hard and tense, then you must know that the limb is completely healed; and if the matter is not hard, know that the limb is broken and corrupted, and that is as it is with one of these that we have mentioned above.</start_of_turn
de la maladie des reins	When no fistula comes, and it is filled with putrefying and corrupt moisture, if the physician has made every possible attempt, and continues to hold them, remove the cautery that appears to scratch, and insert it into the fistula according to the degree of its tension; and repeat the cautery until the diseased part is stiff and corrupt, once, twice, or thrice, according to the degree of the swelling; and beware of the nerves that are cramped and the large veins. If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestines, be wary of these parts and do not burn them except in charnut form. Think that it is not always necessary; after curing the disease as much as possible, if the parts are relaxed and the matter is hardened throughout, then remove the cautery entirely; but if the matter is not hardened, remove only the diseased part, corrupting the bone at the same time; and do so as one of us has said previously.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of fruit comes with heavy rains and strong wind, and does not yield to a woman's talent, then it is proper to cauterize the fruits on both sides with the needle cautery which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be two cauteries in a line, and it will be more effective.
de la vessie	When pain of fruit comes with heavy rains and strong wind, and does not yield to a woman's talent, then it is proper to cauterize the fruits on both sides with the needle cautery which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be two cauteries in a line, and it will be more effective.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak with fruit and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then it is proper to cauterize on the lower part of the bladder above the testicles, where the hairs usually begin, and from the right to the left, and make several cauteries as long as a spoonful; and do the same with the needle cautery behind the loin, or two if necessary; and make the needle cautery in the navel as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not leave me to do anything else, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if there is great pain: then it is necessary to make two cauteries around the bone, as we said before or a cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; or the cautery of the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
de la hainche	De la hainche.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the hip bone, and because of this the limb changes its position; the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the hip joint is displaced, if it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip bone at the circumference, and to mark in front of the limb around the hip if it is turning, so that the hip is within the circle; and if the cautery is made like that which we have cauterized the stomach.</start_of_turn
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these burnings are not present, make two olive-oil burnings, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others; and cure until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these burnings are not present, make two olive-oil burnings, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others; and cure until they are healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division; the cure is not worth it, and the disease is old: therefore it is expedient that you purge the patient of the humors of foul bile, or other pills that are similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cautery is done; and the doctor should remain watchful if the cautery is done in two ways: namely with herbs burned together, and with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	If the fire cautery is done according to two methods, as some say: you must cauterize three triangular incisions on the hip bone, making a good depth and great width, and put between each incision an amount of fat equal to the thickness of two nails. And let the cautery be olive oil; never make the cautery in the middle of the hip bone, for there will be three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	If you see that the burn, done with the cautery around the circle we mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it cautiously so that the circle contains the whole shoulder, and all the edges of the burn are firm.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method that is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes down to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, then make two cauteries here or there; and the patient says that the pain reaches two cubits below the ankle, on the left side one can do; or the cautery is blunt and the burn is superficial like a burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends two fingers or three fingers below the heel, burn there where the pain is most intense, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the limb is stiff, if you make more, and if he says that the pain is from the knee to the thigh, make a superficial burn with the cautery or a circular burn, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many people who have burned the heel of their foot and left it until the leg was completely limp, and the piece was also pierced and corrupted throughout the piece.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which death is imminent
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two equal parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say in the cautery of the hip, because this is the method, make I like this and be at the head as big as a grain of wheat, or less, and be between hooks and be from one between hooks to the other in space the amount of a nut of pepper; and let the hooks be over two parts, and be also like nails, and there be I inch of iron well made; and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be cauterized until it is all red and emits smoke, and then put it on the box of the painful thigh, and turn it on the outside rib cage; and cauterize once more. Leave it for two days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open long enough until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim saith that our physicians often use this cautery because of its fearsome aftereffects, and those who have used it; and indeed all of them are scarred bones, which can suffer from it and leave their mark.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery instruments are such that if you make between hooks in which descends the margin of the door, and be of linen or iron with a broad edge, and in the thickness have two nails, and have between each one the amount of the thickness of a chick; and let them be outward pushed and downward, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the heel of the shoulder against the patient's side, and pressing your hand against the heel of the shoulder; then insert between the two circles of the shoulder which are warmed by the fire, and leave it for an hour or so, and offer the patient the heat and the burning sensation of the fire.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is true biting like fire; and when the biting has passed, grasp your hand with the instrument and raise the shoulder bone gently, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment as long as the black of the scab is turned to bone; and leave it for three days that it may heal properly. This would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or as far as the leg, make an instrument that holds the shoulder bone as you have done in the shoulder above; and this is the method of the warm shoulder, and I have written or treated about the rectification of medicine.</start_of_turn>
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live broth, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if there is too much liquid and it is administered with medicines of other treatments and with other cauteries of other members. For it makes parts whole like fire, and if there are other medicines which we cauterize well the flesh in such a way that there is firmness and honey anacardi and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some were cured of pain in the groin and sciatic vein, and he recounts that they did nothing else, and that they were healed at one time when they had performed this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he adds in part that you take two pounds of fresh and dry green barley and grind it with some fat, and put on the groin and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter or bathe until the limb is slightly swollen, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away and be healed
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And such soaks must not be used with such medicines, except after the evacuation of bones.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And thus it is said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the tip of a needle, if there is any moisture there; it must be done in small parts.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and soak it in much oil, and put it on the pit which is between the thumb and the little finger, and the one which is called the fossicle
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry needles and heating them until they are charred, and then putting them on the lint, and letting it stay there until it is stained; and doing this again and again until you think by feeling that it has gone down to the hip, and the pain has ceased; this manner of cautery is called "needle cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Albucasim saith that our physicians often use this cautery because of its fearsome aftereffects, and those who have used it; and indeed all of them are scarred bones, which can suffer from it and leave their mark.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting, or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar spreading of cold matter, of all these signs none are worth cautery, save for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	If the patient is devoid of foul pills or other similar things, make three lines signed with a pinprick on his back, under the armpits where the pain persists; and burn as many cauteries as he can bear; or as many as seem necessary according to his strength. And let the cautery be performed according to the cautery that is called "poins"; and if you see that he needs it, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes with small inflammations, and signs of beginning are that they are stiff and painful when they happen, and fear; and you find it behind the lower spine on the back and on us it appears like that which comes after the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, if you cauterize at the center according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery touches any part of the spine, it will swell.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, if you cauterize around the spine at the place where the cautery is pricking two or three lines, and keep the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, take care that you do not move the cautery over nerves that are nearby
de la dolor des jointes	When the fire cautery burns some part of the spine, cauterize around the spine at the place where the cautery has pierced. The points should be close together. After the burn is complete, cure the wound until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery too close to the nerves.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the joints are affected by moisture that is spread throughout the limb and when the pain comes from inflammation, that is called "podagre." When the cause is cold and treatment with medicines does not suffice, it can be cured by cautery in part: make the burn around the joint at the painful spot, using olive oil in the following manner:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the jaw, if you are to cauterize with the whole cautery, say "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is pain that comes up to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, if you are to cauterize on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, with the whole olive-oil cautery; and if you must do more, do more, but do not keep your hand firm for longer than necessary.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pain is as far as the hands, if you prick at the base of the little finger two lines; and if there remains no pain at that point, if you prick above the wrist and below the thumb; and if the pain goes down to the buttocks or to the shoulder blades, if you cauterize some part of it, and make the patient drink something and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him drink something and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root to the surface of the skin
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the shoulder joint comes out of its socket, and the ball descends like a coon, this is new; if you see the cure for this, do not trust it; and if it uses things that leave the belly open, so that the worms descend from the belly; after that, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his arm stretched out as long as the ball is repaired, and hold it at your two sides, and mark the exit of the shoulder joint from the bony prominence, and as soon as there is any sign that it is like half of a circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as he is limp and drowsy.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then bind the belly to its place; and hold his hand above so that it does not return backwards; and give the patient good support to the wound, and put on for him I cushion and I bandage on the wound, and I put another on the hand which holds him; then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you have reached the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and beware cautiously that the belly does not swell when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil thing
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And so it is that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be known that the cautery of the small intestines should be subtle according to their measure, and of the great people also great according to their measure; after three days cure the body of the burn until the eschar becomes bony; after that cure other wounds until they are healed; and keep the patient lying for forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it must be known that their emissions must be prolonged, so that the feces do not spill when he goes to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be accompanied by a well-made servant, and let him rest for forty days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and take care to eat little and drink little, and to avoid excessive laughter; and when he has learned this he is entirely healed
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall speak of the treatment of the tail in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-formed scab, which will last for forty days; and he will have had good rest, so that he will work steadily and take care not to eat too much or drink too much, and not to smoke too much; and when he has followed this teaching, he will be entirely healed. And I will speak of the treatment of boils in this chapter.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When they come out in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, if you do not prick them at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. After the treatment, according to what we have said; and no one has ever said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the limb and make a line parallel to the belly of the routure, and another perpendicular, and hold your hand firmly with the entire cautery needle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	But first mark the place with a mark and make a line parallel to the breadth of the wound, and another perpendicular, and hold your hand firmly against the cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or to the hip or to the wound, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medical treatment is not worth it, then it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called “points,” and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb and the smallness and weakness and virtue and location of the twisting and the pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is sound after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the cautery upon that one, for it is customary that it must swell towards the adjacent limb, so that you may make the cauteries until the patient is sound.
de meselerie	From meselerie
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are never aided by the cautery, and often the disease which comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not stay or linger, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the entire sickness, then make five cauteries on the head: one on the new head, and the other towards the front towards the end of the beard; two on the two horns, and one behind on the back; and leave the hand as long as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out strong so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front of you
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the sickness is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, if you must cauterize from these cauteries which we have said or from the chief, and one cauterize in the neck, and two on the spine of the collarbone, and three on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one other in the groin, and two on the shoulders, and two on the tendons of the arms and legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, that you do not burn them; and never make the cautery on the bone of the heel, or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the wounds that when more fire cautery is done, the more aid it does, and it benefits them; and the wounds that the patients do not feel any pain from the fire as if they were feeling it, for the flesh is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the fire must be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you saw in dealing with these things
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure of the body from time to time with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then you must make incisions on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either the incisions are made in the flesh or in the bone; and then you must cure it with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never make cautery at the hand and the foot and the back, at the issue of nerves that move the limb, and thus if it is bony it swells; and in any case nothing hinders it unless one is familiar with the limbs and the issues of the moving nerves of the limb.
de albaras	De albaras.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and the physician's remedies are of no avail, then a cautery is to be performed once with a little burn, according to the quantity of the black bile which has come, until the blenchour is bony and its color is altered; then it is to be treated with flour of times, lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and saffron and alum, one part of each; mix them all together and bandage them with a cloth, and keep them until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for fistula by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil starts, and you see it stop, if you cauterize at the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all these people say that we should cauterize also in the middle of the boil; and all these people do not seem to me to be right, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already known several times that it must not be done; and the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, at the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said before.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	When there is an inflammation that cannot be measured...
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has an ailment which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing or because of the excessive heat it causes or because of the sickness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and there is much blood, or for any other reason; and you see that it is hastening to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the fire cautery burning at its full intensity, if the fire is too hot, the form of the cautery is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries perceive the cold, and be such cauteries as the patient feels heat in parts as they proceed towards corruption to be joyous.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards cure them as long as they are perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another symptom of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but the softening of a limb, for it softens the bones as fire softens wax.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can endure fire cautery, then shave the hairs closely and liberally, as much as the limb or the disease allows; after that, cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and leave nothing but sound bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limb a bandage soaked in oil until the burnings from the fire are ossified, and all corruption is gone
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of oily inflammations.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days the hair does not grow back, it is good; and if this does not happen, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This treatment is never cured by water medicine instead of fire cautery; but every time fire cautery is of greater help, as I have already said in the preceding section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Hair that comes out whole like nails.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that when pieces of flesh have departed, a disease called “clos” according to our understanding, and is a great burdensome thing that bleaches the spirit.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	If thou art scorched by fire, I order thee to cauterize the hair even as is a pine cone; make it of fine iron to the measure that it can penetrate all parts, and there must be a space between the nails; afterwards put all about the head of the nail, and keep thy hand round the nail until it comes to the front of the nail; and leave it for three days until it begins to ooze pus; then make an embolus of bruised wild mallow seeds with wool, and leave the embolus upon the whole night, and bind it firmly and it shall be plucked from its roots.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by boils of foul matter, and often happen in hands and feet, if you must bring a cautery of hot water; it is in part like this: take a flax or iron bowl, or a needle of gutta, and put on the thumb and the little finger, that is to say, burn the nails; and put the bowl on so that it covers everything around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the bowl comes to the root of the thumb, and you will find the hot water going deep down to the root; and give the patient a drop of the hot water an hour; then leave it alone, and it will spread throughout all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do another time, until you have scraped away all that is on the limb, and then cure the wounds which are left behind, which cause car.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for tremors.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or from another, if it is thought that you should make for them three or four cauteries upon the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades; and one cautery or pinch, and one upon the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them to tremble, the sickness will be cured from the cold.
des pustules puans	pusules full of pus.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do wounds appear by chance; or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at the outset when they appear, make cautery on each head of the boils: a subtle cautery of mustard seed, or so that the point is grasped by the fire, or by long aristologue root, or by lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never do the cauteries begin at the outset when they appear, according to this method, but the blood which is evacuated must be drained, and it is healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.</start_of_turn
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to extend the wound.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens, if you are hasty to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and you strain it out too much without soothing it down, and no blood flows from it; then take the olive cautery and make several small and large burns until they are all red; then touch it, that is to say, make it large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is passing, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your index finger, and hold the cautery as long as it is not fixed.</start_of_turn
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts violently when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hold of another cautery that is in the fire quickly.</start_of_turn
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the limb is extended; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is below, and that no other evil arises upon the patient; and that as soon as without drawing blood from an artery, you cannot properly fill himself up again even if the artery is large, except by one of the three methods that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to fill up blood. And let it be bound and strained afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever comes to restore the limb correctly will rest it tightly with bandages or put warm things upon it, or do other similar things, unless it proves of no benefit in that way.</start_of_turn>
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is no remedy or medicine present, he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it still as long as it is under the wound and under the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often that it may be cold as long as the limb is frozen and swollen and still. And make incisions before those which require cautery and medicines.</start_of_turn>
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ci encourag le second livre des cures de taille.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or to apply warming medicine, and to inquire into the lesions and their causes, and the instruments and forms of cautery; and in this chapter we will speak of the most legitimate way to proceed in this work, since we have found it to be lighter in this way than in any other way.</start_of_turn>
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	Moreover, as I have said at the beginning, it is necessary to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapters of the cautery, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.</start_of_turn
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to be rash.</start_of_turn>
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	For in many ways people come to cures. If they come from those who suffer greatly from their ailments and move lightly because of the discomfort of their disease, and from the greatness of their suffering; one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And concerning these things, some make sense and say: "Wait, I am going away"; and the disease is despicable
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	I must only tell you that those who come to your presence must be allowed to do so; but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not trust me foolishly more than prudently about what you are certain of, and what you have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation is either recovered or transformed; and this will help you to obtain good renown, glory, and long memory
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our Sirs, your do well to understand and judge, and if you are filled with the spirit of the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have ordered thee this chapter by chapters, according to what is before or after the cautery, that I have ordered thee from the head down to the toes, because thereby thou shalt find it more conveniently than what thou hast to do.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Saiches that this disease comes out many times at childbirth, and when the babe’s bail is strained too strong the head of the babe; and never comes from a known cause except that one does not know it.</start_of_turn>
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in the spring, and with all that I have heard, it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in parts for cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen many times in my childhood when the head of the shoulder was dislocated due to moisture, and the head grew so large that it could not support itself; and I believed so much moisture that it became blood, and this moisture if it is gathered between the bones above the scapula, between the shoulder blade and the arm; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the shoulder blade and the arm, and the incision is small, that you must make a wide incision; and be as long as .ij. we have seen, until the moisture has gone; and when this is done, the shape of the scapula will be like that of a spindle.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If moisture is excessive and swells the bone, and if you see the corners of the bone protrude in the lower part, and if it causes pain that increases when you press your hand inwards, and this does not subside: if you suspect that the bone is fractured, make two incisions as described in this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out all the moisture with force.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After that, drain out the blood clots and humours, and give wine and oil, and leave in place for five days; then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the head of the limb elevated, and give the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look or open the apex of the abscess, and gather the fluid; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.</start_of_turn>
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	When the shoulder joint is dislocated and the opening is wide, and the injection of liquid, and you do according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no known ailment that is called "cataract," and there are pus or white spots, and the disease is ancient, and the medical cure does not help, then the only remaining cure is to cauterize with that which covers the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary to do this quickly, for you cannot see the patient’s head covered; after that, rub the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then pull out the patient’s neck with all the strength; then look to see if the vein is open, and if the veins are below the ears, then restore them; then mark the veins, then ligate the one and the other with a needle of two parts, until the size of the vein reaches the bone, and this is done by the large hole of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see, hold the sponge under the artery and press above, cutting as much as two thumbs together to pierce through.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if the blood spurts continuously upwards, keep pressure on it without interruption.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open on examination, if you can, measure the amount of space of three fingers; then mark and stop just above the bone; and what is necessary put forth if there is six fingers, or a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the refill of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the bone where the sutures have come loose, if the skin covering the stitches has not healed, then strain the wound and tie it up, and keep it bound until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open on sensing it, if you think it is two fingerbreadths wide, mark its end and advance until bone is reached; what is to be done with blood that spurts out if it is more than two fingerbreadths, or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the edges of the incisions do not reunite, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with dressing until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient dropsy comes, and acute fever, because of tears and the heat in temples and old saliva forsened and similar things, it is treated by means of medical cures and everything that does not help, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And thus the manner of extracting them is that the patient should make the hair of his temples grow long; and he should understand the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating; and is much more easily restored than in some men who are too cold. And if it is restored, he should strain his neck the patient of some cloth, then wipe the area with no rough cloth, and raise the area with warm water until the artery opens openly; then take the sponge which is like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then pull the skin gently until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with hooks, and remove the cloths that are under the armpit; and if the artery is tense, if the nail has a point at the elbow, then clamp that part according to the quantity of two fingers.</start_of_turn>
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not well joined, if it does not leap without doubt in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then he should drain blood from the armpits, up to two inches; and if the artery is large, it is expedient to ligate it with two strong silk threads, so that no blood will be seen in front of the wound, and the blood will drain away; then cauterize the surplus that is between the two ligatures in that place, and then, if you see, burn the hair with a fine cautery until the hair is cut; and this is the best remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.</start_of_turn>
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful to finish off moisture: for this is more helpful with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is useful to extract the arteries that are full of fat and put on well-made stitches; and when you take them out, if you are cured of dry medicines that cause char and stitches, as long as you are sane; and if without support of the artery as you must do if you do this too quickly, or if you touch the vessel with the vitriol, it will stain your hand; and if you do not have this, you must take out the vessel until it is frozen, and rise the cold water until it stops, and strain as much as it is possible; and what is more limp and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery at a distance of .ij. inches, but the incision must be well spaced to prevent lasting too long its heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch; and when you have marked the area with a needle, you must let the fire burn until it reaches the bone, and then close the vein with one inch of leathers; and let the hair be plucked out between the needles, for it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
des larmes	The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch; and when you have marked the area with a needle, you must let the fire burn until it reaches the bone, and then close the vein with one inch of leather; and let the hair be plucked out between the needles, for it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the test of the chief of force, and it does no good to medicine what is done with it, and you see the face of the patient to be twisted, and feels or front of ambulation as if of a madman; and though they are tense and moist if the hair of paper is held close, and are scattered the papers, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For if it is not well joined, if it does not leap without doubt in all things. And it was formerly called "contusion," and you must make at the patient who has this disease grow the hair as long as it has front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front; and let one of the incisions be as if there were two teeth down from the front biting down as far as to the teeth; and let the other two be two costles by the papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are as two costles by the papers; and keep your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let the wound be as great as three teeth together at the joint; and teach a piece of sponge and a cloth to hold the blood, and then bind the dressing acutely in two parts of this shape.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the outer surface of the bone, then make the other half of the wound until the other second, and then pull out this clot.</start_of_turn>
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire," and is very well grooved on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply grooved, and that is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the knife handle towards the armpit at the shoulder, and the knife blade towards the bone, and hold it tight until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut away all the vessels that descend from the head as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the armpit, and then do the rest in the middle fissure until the other side; and then draw out the blood equally, and express the body for the blood taken; then insert in the wound a little piece of cotton, and cover with soaked cloths in wine and oil and herbs, and keep that there are no afterbleeds. And after three days remove the sutures, and put in great pain-killers of cold water, then treat the wound with basic ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	because of the return of the blood
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no acute cautery is used, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilate, and the papers burn; and the hair cries out, and where the chief has been pricked, there is great pain, and the patient coughs; then from these accidents arise matters and catarrh which do not come from many veins, but from many blood vessels.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And command the patient to return his face, then make a great incision from ear to ear, and another wide one at the eyebrow.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commence from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision down to the bone; and pull away your hand from the nerves of the temples that move downwards; and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, drain it out with a sponge, and then dry between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place; then cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it from moving about; when it is set, it is good to rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then cure with drying things that make it callous.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part: take .ij. parts of wheat flower and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to cause the hair to grow throughout.</start_of_turn>
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the swelling of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that causes pain in the ears is one of three things: grains, or boils, or stone or similar objects like iron; or seeds, like lice, beans, peas; or fluid things like vinegar and urine and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it happens in the ear lobe or any other way that does not fit with the ear, do not put it in the ear, but put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if no black speck of oil of violet or oil of chamomile appears, then order the extraction; and let him vomit forcefully, and stop his nose when he vomits, and put in his ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear down.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times comes forth with this treatment; and if it does not come forth, order the extraction of fine needles, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by these needles, it is well done; if not, seek extraction with fine needles of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this, make an incision of an inch and a half and cut off the chief of the incision or pierce the ear very deeply, and squeeze out what is around the incision mole if it comes out with the incision; then the pain will disappear, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out partly, take hold of the bone with your thumb and index finger and put under no instrument that has a point for this purpose, and put a patch of cotton around; then press the thumb on the bone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things do not suffice, if you are in a hurry to make an incision at the ear-lobe along with the abscess chalaz, and spasm, do this: first make the patient comfortable and loosen the hair of the head; then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty or glandular tissue; and let the incision be as wide as a crescent, as long as you live to the bone, and the bone according to your will; and evacuate the pus immediately from your mouth.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If grains are seen which are swollen and inflamed, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, administer sponge-rubber tightly according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order the incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with fine needles and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear is acutely affected, then the patient must use external pressure from the ear downwards, and fill the ear with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And if the pain is not on that ear alone, or if the acute pain is not there.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for that, that is good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not jump for that, if you take many stones according to the length of your desire, and hold them tight and limp, and cover it with fire; and put the patient one or two fingers in the ear, and pull out from the other side, and put another finger on the other side of the ear which is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until the pain is gone, and when it jumps it will go out completely; and if you see that, take hold of it, and pull out one of the bones in the ear, and the other bone press with fire as long as the bone is not as soft as before; then do the rest of the bones until the pain is gone, as we have said concerning the stone
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the ear, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, if we must extract teeth; and this is the easiest thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division and or performed distillations, and the cure does not help, if you must know if there are worms, look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms visible, if the treatment has produced subtle toothaches, and if there are none visible, take the tweezers which are like this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the hair be plucked out cleanly and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And hold the hair more subtle at the root according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then shortly afterward do all the hair; do this often until you see it all come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to pluck, if I stamp on the cotton ball as I have said at the root; and if they do not bleed as we have said, if you administer distillations which the former have proved in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let silver or gold be stripped out of eight petty losses, and over this let the distiller be put; and press down with this instrument of lead well made for this purpose. If you see a scraper and wrap around it with cotton from the point forward; then pour out your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cotton, and put the cotton in the ear; then press down the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or the ear is almost empty. And let the patient feel in the ear, and let the distillation be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the swelling of the ears.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same thing happens as adults with wounds or tumors that protrude into the ear, for these protrusions never come out of the ear unless they are seen; and never is there such a thing as perfectly formed ears.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Whenever they protrude into the ear without being seen, it is a sign of serious illness in many cases; and in this case it is clear that you put the diseased ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the swelling, if the swelling has filled the whole cavity as far as it can, then it is formed like this:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be it greasy or rough before and behind all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the swelling is of a tumor or cartilage of the ear, if you find subtle fractures, and the swelling is slight, as long as the tumor is completely bony
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the dislocations are inflamed in the ear, take a blunt scraper and burnish a little with fire, then put in or remove the earwax.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling that the patient feels at the ear, pierce slightly, and hold that you do not tear the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a plug according to the size of the hole, and the wax in the Egyptian fashion.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge and soak it in rose-water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you see the ear flee, you must remove the sponge and insert another sponge made of rue oil and wax, until the swelling is ossified; then treat it until it is healed
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If discharge of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cover it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which will solidify the discharge of blood which are to administer distillations.
de la char des papieres	De la char des papiers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	From the heap of papers
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without any decor, if the cautery of the lenticular lentil and the cautery after the incision is worth moving; and many times repair, can no longer remain from their root; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not return anymore.
de la gresle	From the bark of the tree.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come out of paper things that seem to bristle in their form and in their hardness, and because of this is this disease called "granule", and is an assembly of great moisture in the marrow of bones; the work is such: take warning when the granuloma moves from one side to the other, and that is a light thing to know; do then the large dose, then score the soft part lightly, then take as many pins as you please, and hold.</start_of_turn>
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not see the wound covered with hair, if you do not grieve the patient; and if the wound is large, if the collection has a curvature, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make force, for the swelling will restore itself soon and heal faster.</start_of_turn
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulinea descends downwards from the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the marrow, extend the granulinea with tweezers, grasp and press from one side and the other; and if the marrow is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulinea is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of that which causes harm until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the blood.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is enclosed in paper tissues, and this occurs more in those who have no nails, and grieve much for their eyes, and they come to tears at dawn, and cannot bear to see the sunlight because the tears hurry to their eyes; and because of this they lie with their faces down, and sleep on, and their paper tissues are soaked with moisture that swells and appears covered in exinach which bursts in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your chest and feel the exinach between the bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	When the patient puts his hand in his bosom; then take one cloth of linen, and make a circle with your thumb according to the quantity of wax in the chest; then put it on; then press with your thumbs from one side and the other, so that the wax is gathered into a circle; then make an incision about the width of a vein, without making it any larger than the wound made in the vein; and when you have finished, the wax comes out of the incision, according to the form of a white lump of fat.</start_of_turn>
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out the lump entirely with a sharp knife between your thumbs, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the edges, until you have reached the bottom; that you do not stain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the dislocation does not reappear at the start of the wound, if you expand the wound slightly until it opens; then draw out the foreign body as we have said, and moisten with wool and water, and place back in the limb, and strain the bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if in such homes they broil themselves and put on for to corrupt that moisture which is remaining
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure as long as it is sound
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the vein of the armpit, if the cure for embolism is applied while it is still sane.
des poilz des papieres	hair of papers</start_of_turn>
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like substances grow hair-like, adjust them from their natural state and they are enveloped; if they prick the eyes, they cause tears and produce various diseases like common weeping and softening of paper and mucus, up to the point of destroying the eyes; and the cure for this is in three ways: either by entire fire cautery, or by water-based medicine as it is before or alongside fire cautery, or by incision and stitching or by sutures, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient’s chief in your left hand, then draw out the paper from your right hand; if it is softened, it is well done; if not, if there is an awl with every thread of hair below; either cut the margin of the paper or the hair grows out below those hairs, and draw out one thread at the root of every hair; then press on the lower part of the paper, pressing out the hairs that have been adjusted, over the entire area up to the great tear until the small one; then draw out one thread and put a small patch of cotton and bandage on the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like a spurge, like the spurge of myrtle, and it is enough that the figure be according to the quantity you see raising the paper that is designed for you.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If it comes to the vein of the armpit, if the cure for embolism is applied while it is still sane, and if there is much blood in the middle, then take hold of the two lines that you have marked and stretch out all the flesh from the two armpits to the groin; then make a wound near the root of the hair, and bring the ointment to one of the two angles downwards, then pull out the hair; then gather the two layers together with a suture of fine thread, and wipe away the surplus of thread from the two edges, as you see me do; and if this does not suffice, do not hesitate to leave the suture and the thread for three days or four; then cure the wound with dry and constrictive things, for the blood returns to its place at the bottom of the wound and the gathering together of it, but the suture is useless (as they say the old ones), and this is a dangerous operation. And if there is another method: and it is that you mark the blood with a figure which is as big as the berry of a mistletoe flower, as we have been told, with three lines that are drawn according to this form.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then close what is above with small forces evenly according to the form that is here
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the teeth firmly, and the matter is not equal, take a needle or two, and pass one thread through the figure; and pass another thread loosely from the great loop, and the second thread loosely from the small loop, and join the two threads together equally; then keep your hand equally, and keep all the skin that you have marked, as we have told you, and join the two layers of the wound together with stitches, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and some soothing and absorbent dressings. And never again will there be any hair left on the wound: if you follow what we have said concerning the incision; but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for varicose veins is as follows: convert the armpit hair and fat according to what has been said, then make three veins by art, and two fine threads as long as the hair and as wide as a sparrow's foot; and take three hairs from three parts or hold the threads. Then assemble the one and the other securely above what rests on the oil of the hair, and strain the two veins from the two parts forward; and leave it like that for a few days. The leather which has been strained will rot and decay and will become loose, until it disappears by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the wound has strength, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and if the wound has risen, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is thus: take a subtle hook, and there is in it a thread of silken thread. Then join the hooks together and do not twist one with the other; and let the length of the threads be equal. Then order in the chase another thread of silken thread briefly, and do not twist them together. Then put the patient's thumb in its place. And let there be no shadow if the work is completed, for it is a subtle and small work. Then draw out the hook at the whole chase until it pierces in the root of the hairs with the natural position. Then withdraw the hair until there remain one or two or three or more. Then withdraw your hand until the vein is fully exposed at the whole chase with the natural position.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from its pierce and you see it by the light of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has healed in its place and the wound has closed.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the putrefaction of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction comes to the surface, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there is often the consequence of wound, or burn, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of working on this is that you make this suture, dry the flesh, put in some linen cloths, and leave it until it is healed; and do not do anything but use things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, if the disease comes back worse than before; but there are things that soften, such as rue herb, and vinegar or almond oil and poppy seed, which must be cooked, and dissolved in neither oil, and it covers a cloth, and treats this
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the way it was before; and this work that we have mentioned is not fierce except in addressing this ailment, that it does not return differently from the way it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	De la char qui vient en l’oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called by the swelling that really is known as "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and burn and things like these; and the way of the work in this is that if you take an awl, because it has two holes, and the handle in the flesh, and it makes the sensitive marrow split so that the vein is split into two at the tip of the bone; then the bone is fractured at the top of the awl, and the socket has one large splatter.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fracture returns according to what is convenient, it is good; if not, take a rasp and put it in the fracture, and twist the bone, and make two incisions or break two fragments inside the bone; and if there are two fractures from two angles of the incision that you have made, or if you make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as it is of a letter that has not "I griesche"; then fix that bone, according to the quantity that its cost is and the swelling, of that which teaches the bone, then join the two fractured parts with a thread of linen; then cure from what we have said of the medicines that soften, and of attempts, until it is healed
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the ailment comes from a fracture or sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a complete incision over the hair and cover with paper; then withdraw between the two books of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know well everything that pertains to making the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is proper in more diverse situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the ailment comes from a fracture or sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a complete incision over the hair and cover with paper; then withdraw between the two books of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know well everything that pertains to making the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is proper in more diverse situations.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this fracture has happened in the hand, at home in a partial manner that the limb of the patient is solidified with oil, and cannot move or do his natural works, if you must do so, then you must bite the edge of a scraper from the underside of the limb and leave it high up; and extend as tightly as necessary, until you have reached the point where you see the sprain, so that neither the patient can suffer too much pain nor too little, for the patient will not tolerate too little or too much; and your incision, which you should make carefully, must be just wide enough to reunite that which is broken, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and when that is done, reunite all that is broken, and do not wash in salt water, and lift out cold water, and vinegar; then put between the limb and the oil a bandage of linen, and put on top of the oil wool loosely bound in abundance; and after that put on a layer of vinegar and other things that are soothing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	De l’ungle de l’oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Of the oil of the unguel
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that if the patient puts his head in his right hand, then he will hold the eyes; and hold the instrument in your hand, then coil the unguel has small double curvature, and stretch it out; then take a needle, and put in it one hair of horse, or of ox, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and fix it firmly with the unguel, and pierce it through all the needle, and tie the unguel with a thread and stretch it out, and protect at all low the cost of the unguel which teaches the prunele and the hair to the oil, and leave the nature itself or the mucus, if in the incision there is not the crust of tears usually; and never stretch the unguel only by the incision and the thread, as we have said; then protect all the surrounding area with wool, and this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the cautery does not touch the thick cloth and breaks it, and that the needle does not pierce through; and after the incision, pour a little solder into the oil, and put a bandage over it, and leave it until the other side is reached; then cure what has happened as much as possible until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread will not go in, many times this semblance of a nail of medicine is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you can, pour oil over the patient, and take the cautery lighter in this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail slowly, and if you see that it has diminished a little and the edge is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil bandage made of alum, and red alum and solder, and stamp the oil until the other side is reached; then repeat the other work in the same way until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing hinders thee in oil, as with a postulation, then milk, and first cure the postulation by burning it while it is sound, then resume the work as before until it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	If it appears that fat has solidified in the oil overnight with great nausea, if you suspend it with alum, and take a part but not all of it out, that tears will not arise; then distill in the red oil of poppies which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes from the navel.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary to nourish the cure with a weak oil of natural origin; and in the work of iron; and do not be rash in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Des voines des eulz
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The hairs are red that are covered in oil, and endure the gaze of the physician and vanish the oil throughout the days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The master therefore commands at the outset that you look at the oil, for the hair is strong, and there is no other disease fierce than the hair; therefore one must do thus: instruct the patient to put his head in order, then suspend the veins all around according to his wisdom, and be double-handed according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	The veins of the eyes are two in number and are graduated by degree in one inch in this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	The veins of the eyes are two in number and are graduated by degree in one inch in this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
de la fistule de l’oil	If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the characteristics of this form, it is called "aspire chief," and is made of ivory, that is, a chief rent, or pointed as with a file when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And lay on the limb the fractured bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you sense that the corruption is gone; do this only once, then restore the limb to the exiccative medicine.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limb is stiff and does not move, and the hair has not yet begun to grow, and the root of the bow is stiff, and remains so for XL days, and does not recover or improve, even after dressing and repositioning, and the patient is well; if this is not the case, if there is no other remedy except to restore the fistula to its natural position, uncover the bone a second time by fire, and by sharp medicines. And when you have uncovered it take hold of the limb at its three angles, and the limb must be reduced to its normal position as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and withdraw your hand from the oil, and draw back your arm until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes out from under his arm if he holds his hand on his elbow; and when the bone breaks and becomes firm, if there is anything at the elbow; if it is lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Immediately, straighten your arm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through his hand which is resting on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine to its place, as I have taught you, and when the wound is healed and firm, if there is still any matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is open from all sides, and there is no danger of displacement of the bowels, no reduction, if you must bind the patient; then stretch the limb, and put on compresses or a dressing in the direction of the wound, then apply oil.i. with acaice and aloe and incense and ochre, then strain the oil and put it on pads and bandages; and keep the bandages if you take bandages thick enough, and double chescun in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of oil there is in the wound; then strain by pressing down on a stiff bandage. Repeat the compresses in the direction of the wound. Then support the compresses and leave the oil strained for a night, and if the limb is relaxed, if you remove it by mouth; then support the limb again after the night and morning, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, repeat the dressing and bandages and the limb and the compresses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the dislocation comes in the shoulder and is forced open, and there comes forth paper like barley grains; it is expected to see; then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the lower part until under that, and then insert another needle or there is a double thread of the lower part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle as it lies; then join the double thread and bind a part of the upper arm, and strain it well, then draw out the needle and put on oil cloth soaked in eggs; and leave it as long as the thread remains with the shoulder, and cure the oil of comfortable things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by the shoulder strap part of a circle of silk, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has great appearance, if you prick at the soft tissue which comes from behind the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and pull down the wound, and enter inside; then draw it out as long as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	The ailment called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is composed in oil, resembling descending ice, and it is not actually ice; and the manner in which it appears is that if you make the patient sit on the apparent and straight seat, and grasp the chief between your hands two parts, and move it as long as you see the swelling coming down towards your eyes; then either bind it, and do not let it descend, or break the light, and see the patient the things as he alone would see; and if it does not descend even after that, like ice, it appears as if we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the conjunctiva with the edge of the sponge against the conjunctiva and the crown, as long as the eye is closed; and when the eye opens, distillate into hot water mixed with honey, or into vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured of another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the bowl of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar things in the case of fever, and what it is necessary to know; if in this case one should follow the advice of the physician.</start_of_turn>
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, expose the eye to the sunlight, and apply the pure oil; then put the bandage on the thumb of your left hand if the eye is left, or on the thumb of your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called the almond, or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a finger in the amount of oil in the lower part of the tear, then push the instrument called the almond well, and restore your hand until it pierces in the amount of oil, and feel that the almond has come to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almond be equal to the measure of the space from the prune to the end of the black; and that is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that bandage by the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until it is flat or the water is there, and then press the oil out a way afterwards.</start_of_turn>
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it seems to him that the patient is awake now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if he seems awake again, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his oil, grasp the limb firmly with the instrument. When it is firmly fixed and does not move, if it is necessary, stretch the limb slightly by circling your hand around it from below and above; then reintroduce the water and remove the oil from the wound.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force the oil-soaked bandage or cloth in oil rose and in abundance of eggs, and bind with the clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Indeed, and those who are of our kind, put on coming broth with abundance of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda will not enter the oil because there are parts of flesh that have too thick hair, it is expedient that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva slightly, and do not make me move too much, but make him wink, then I will stretch, as we have said; and when the work is finished appears the patient to me sleeping on his back in a dark room; and let him have no movement, and give him soft foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until the seventh day; then take him out of this house into the open air, and uncover his face, and make him see nothing, and then put him back in his bed until the seventh day; and do not let me do anything else except in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you feed him, because he has suffered enough.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Leave the oil undone before the seventh hour, and apply it to that which soothes the abscess; and when it is settled, remove the bandage and put a little oil on the wound to cover any hole, and keep it closed in that dark place.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house slowly and gradually, and if necessary; let the maidservant stay away from this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iraq who said that in his land they used to make an almagda of oil every day, when the pain occurred, but we have never seen or read of it in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing for us
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for he who does not know them will not recognize them; and they are like spiders properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a goosefoot.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or come out various ointments, because there are some which seem like scorpions at the root of the teeth; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with dark fur and if there is hair of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those cases where these hairs are blunt and do not entangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and cover his nose and spit out the vomit onto those hairs, and drive out the urine; for it will support the delicate spleen from the sharp pain of the spur.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains to hold it, if the opening has reached its utmost extent, if nothing is left to hold; and if without being warned, or by incision, if any support fails, if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize as much as possible until the surrounding tissue is unstained and all the vessels are closed. Then withdraw or do not withdraw easily or with pain or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he does not work, and moisture comes up to his palate, saliva which is sane; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, saliva which is in the root of the teeth above, because the instruments do not come out whole: then it must be that you drink a large thread of linen, and hold it with your hands, and leave between each knot no space at all; and put the patient’s head over the thread at the front, and treat it by smelling until it comes out through the mouth; and often they do this to the children, and it is a light matter for one who has seen it done; then take the fist which comes through the mouth with one hand, and the other fist which comes through the nose with the other hand, and grasp one after the other while holding as we are or with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it may be of silver or of brass, resembling a broad lamp, like a cauldron; and you shall carry it thus; and if you see, make a closed loop, and the instrument will be flat for purging the head; and hold one hand at the head and the other at the mouth to hold when we burn the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises at the head of the neck a disease which is called "telul," and it grows and becomes great at once, so that it is visible; and for this reason it is necessary that you should begin to seize it at the outset, and break the bone thoroughly, then remove the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in seizing it when it is great, if you take hold of it with force, of foul colour, of bad omen: if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a fleshy swelling, for when you seize it once, there comes great harm to the patient; and if the swelling is of soft touch, not of foul colour, you can see that you can seize it all, if you evacuate the patient and seize it without fear, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and bound
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do not leave the wound open any longer than necessary; then draw out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and reinsert it as before; do this for three days or more, until the abscess has dissolved all that is remaining; and then put in or withdraw a sponge for a few days until it is healed, and if there is any need for sedative medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which oils and medicines or nois are distilled.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it has happened to anyone, if the wound is fresh throughout its entirety; then join the two levers to a bolster, and hold them until they are healed; and if the levers are already detached from one side and the other, if you can, support all the parts around their root until they bleed, then reassemble the two levers to a bolster, and strain, and sprinkle upon them powdered dragon's blood, and incense smoke; and place upon the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster that binds, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure it when it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the staple is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we said in the costure of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the edges of the wound.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home in the hands, there are from the thumbs to the little finger nails of varying sizes, some like grains of wheat, minor and greater; therefore when you turn the fingers, make incisions on each nail, and grasp with tweezers and hold in the palm of the hand; then employ the blood from the incision of a broken vein, until it is no longer bleeding; and then withdraw the tweezers easily, and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the ridge of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times appears on the gums a fleshy bulge which the ancients called "albulus"; if you support it, grasp the root and leave the swelling or bleeding to subside; then remove the broken vein or other powdery astringents and drying agents; and if that fleshy bulge recurs after the incision, and happens many times, if you grasp it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Once are gathered at the head of the teeth, between the gums, escorces which are soft and rough; and never are the teeth black and yellow and gray, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are biting; if it is that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulder bones be in their place, and open the gums or the escorces open, until there is nothing left; and thus make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are whole; and if one has what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, if it begins again to rise the second and third time, until you have done everything; and teeth that have met with various forms of instruments to redden, as it is shown by the work, for those who have scraped whose teeth have other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you apparent.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you stay quiet for a long time, because it must not make me do it; for it is a high-quality substance so we have no excuse for making excuses
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained due to pain, if you can, be certain that he will endure it.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient complains of pain, and cares either that it is acute or chronic, and makes him groan; and all this while he does not feel the pain for this, as long as the disease persists, for we have already wanted to do these things to these scoundrels; and when you are certain that he will endure it, if you can, support his teeth firmly to prevent any movement from front to back; then grasp his two thumbs or index fingers at the first joint and hold them firmly until they are well established, then firmly secure the nails; and let the patient's hand rest between your thighs, and hold it firmly so that it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, draw the tooth directly downwards towards the briser; and if it does not yield, take none of these instruments and press it inwards lightly, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and inflamed, if it is necessary, cover it with cloths, or take away the cause; and if the pressure is made too hard, it will break through the pressure; and it is necessary to keep the tooth moist around the gum with saliva.</start_of_turn>
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first.</start_of_turn>
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware that you do not act stupidly like the ignorant layman, who without haste and without courage break the limb many times without result, and do not bring about what we have said; but they bring about many times by the cause of that great illness from the roots that remain, or from the limb itself that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the blood of wine or vinegar and oil; and if there is bleeding, as often happens, apply the powder of vitriol burnt; and if that does not suffice, cauterize.</start_of_turn
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, indeed mute the hands at first, whether with long points and thick sleeves, that they do not double when you draw the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when drawing, and be of iron well made, and be toothy so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains fixed at the back, if you must put out the moist cotton swab, take out either the thumb or the index finger.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the limb is stiff, because there are teeth that are split and appear like bristles; and that they are made in the same way as with a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not suffice to endure these tensions, if you must uncover the bark throughout the root, and put the instrument which is called «althali», which is to say a palatine, since this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and bulky if it does not break me, and if the root leaps by this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the instruments, since these shapes will come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has .ij. rings, since this is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the rank of teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Or other instruments which are before in the rank of teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Or be great and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, if it is small, if the wound has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears does not follow the natural curve, and its shape is deformed, even in women of childbearing age, if it is dense enough to impede its eruption, it will not rise properly, and it cannot be remedied: therefore it must be extracted. And if it is associated with the tooth, if you take hold of this instrument which has the shape of a small beak, resembling a file, and grasp it with iron tongs, so be it.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the pain persists in the jaws and the hands for as long as the tooth lasts, and because of that you must not move the others, and if it appears, it can be limed, if you file a part of the lime like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is just like filing nails; and while you are filing the tooth slightly in the jaws and hands, if it does not move at all, when you finish the piece at the end there is no raiser, and if the cavity is too deep and it blisters the tongue, if you must file the rough spot so that it is even, so that it does not blister the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth comes loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press against what is painful, and you must cure them with restrictive medicines, this is of no use; if you can restrain them with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and corrupts, but the bone does not move; and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth leaning, if you take hold of the wire and double it between the two front teeth, then put the teeth between the middle teeth, if there is one or more of them, until you see them straight up to the other tooth; then finish the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, until it does not move; and let the bandage be bound to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the head of the arm with a pair of forceps, assemble and insert it between the teeth of the jaw, and hold it until it stops bleeding; and then leave it alone as much as it can remain in place, and if it slips or the thread breaks, strain it with another thread; if it persists and serves its purpose, that is the form of a tooth and the figure of the arrangement of the two front teeth, and the two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth aches, if you reset it anew, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not let anything interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the shape of a tooth of a whale bone; put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and keep it in place for a long time with firm pressure.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Under no circumstances does this happen because of infection of the tongue or the natural condition, that we are born without; or by accident of a deep wound; and the work is such that you must cause the patient to open their mouth wide, and touch their tongue, and hold the tongue; then grasp the large nerve that is beside the tongue, until the tongue is displaced from its dwelling place, and if there is delay or no improvement, and that is the sign of an infected wound, if it comes to the opening of the wound and grasp the large thread; and keep that the opening is not too deep, because of the artery that is beside; and when you have done this, if you lift the pale and easy blood, or cold blood, then put the tongue in a spasm of linen; and keep the patient quiet, so that the bleeding stops.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes from the wound, take out the glass vessel that is bleeding; and if it does not stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see red or black or hard pus coming from it, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a fistula; and if it is declining with moisture, if it is spitting blood, if you touch the wound, and deliver from a part and from the other; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a glass splinter until it is clean, and then come back to your work until you have finished everything; then lift the limb easily and gently, and cure with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes comes from the throat black tongues which are called "godath", and they are properly two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if they are abscesses of small size and colour of soot, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even though there is bleeding; but leave it until it has stopped bleeding, and then you can remove it, or it will break on its own; and if it is white in colour and the root is thin, if you have applied the instrument to cover, but first look to see if the abscess has settled and is calm
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fais seoir le patient devant le soleil, ses bras soient en position naturelle, il bouche la bouche et prend les serjans entre ses mains, et presse la langue doucement contre tous les instruments, car ainsi est la forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi comme une aiguille.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	... press his tongue down with all your might: this is the way. And let it be of silver or of gold like a needle. Can you press the tongue down with all of this instrument? And you see the clot: take the sponge and press it into the almond, and pull it out more forcefully than you can. And do not put anything on the cloth with it. Then remove the instrument from the clot, as this is the way it is done. The chief is bent in many places, and one part is over the other, and they are very acute, and is made of iron or gold.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with your thumbs, know that this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with your thumbs, know that this is its form: grasp the thumb and index finger together, and when you have grasped one of the thumbs, grasp the other in the same way, and then make an incision and gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and when the blood has drained out, if there are still blood clots, either break them up with nutmeg seeds or burn them with cloves of garlic, or fumigate with marjoram, and the like; until the wound is healed; and never again shall there be any further bleeding from the incision except for the two thumbs, if you grasp them just as before.</start_of_turn>
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, arms in their natural position, cover the mouth and grasp the thumbs between the hands, pressing the tongue gently against all the instruments, for this is the form; and be of silver or gold as fine as a needle.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had forced out two pints through the two holes that were not closed.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had done so much, and remained in one place, having incised it; then the fire went up, and took a great portion of my bow; then I repeated the operation in another place where I did not feel it, and I closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I repeated the incision in these abscesses, and closed a part of them, and only a little blood escaped; and the woman who was beside me loosened the cord of the throat, and now I began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to tear at this abscess for a long time; and the abscesses would rejoin together again, filling up my stomach as much as I could; and at that moment I engaged and cauterized it inside the throat: at that moment it seemed to turn back; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to me after that.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb hangs down, and it is fleeing and is long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is thick and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the previous section, and the wound does not benefit, and you see that the stitches are relaxed, and it is subtle, if it is thick and gathered and is not long; and if it is bloodstained or dark yellow or black, if you must avoid the incision of the vein.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.</start_of_turn>
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, as I have said, according to the manner that I have mentioned, that you make the patient sit in the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which I mentioned earlier; then put on the ointment on the limb, and draw out the wound, and close with two sutures that I mentioned in the incision of the two thumbs.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must know that you must not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, if it grieves the voice and the jaw; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amandres, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, you must know that you must use something to restrain the bleeding in the sense of the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery if it is acute is harsh.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And that the patient puts his head in his sound, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the chapter of cautery, and grasp with live hair, if it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as it is formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And sometimes there is hair or something put on the medicine, as for the hairs of a barleycorn, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the navel; and the patient should be kept still on his side, so that he salivates and mucus comes from his mouth onto the medicine within, if it does not reach the throat, and the barking; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the navel, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it is limp and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see it, take hold and cover it with any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and withdraw the instrument with all its thread from under the cotton, until the cotton is covered over the navel; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and wipe it away after three or five days. And if you have to repeat the cautery of the medicine, when you repeat it, and after the cautery wipe the medicine inside the navel with cotton wool, and cover what is around the medicine; and rise up from cold water, and be cured of hiccups as long as you are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this method. Take calamine and isope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs. Assemble all of these together in one pot and put in oil, and boil. And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot put one instrument that is pointed according to this method.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or gold, or be one of the bones bruised in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor mounts up to the eye by the scent, as long as the eye is mortified; after that, it begins to swell often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the commencement of the event of the burn, for many things happen; do not do this except in the decline of the burn.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a sponge and put in the mouth of the patient an eggcup, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the eggcup does not make the vapor irritate the mouth, and this is a good cure in general health
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened to the throat bone or a fish spine, or nothing; so it must be thought that you must do what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit the patient immediately as the meat is cooked in the stomach; for by chance if it is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to one thread, and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is expelled, and then draw it out; and if it does not come out of this, take one instrument of sponge according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all must live, neither push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for it is either loose or the thing is turned upside down; if the patient swallows, or he forces it with all the instrument equally, as much as he can.
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all must live, neither push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for it is either loose or the thing is turned upside down; if the patient swallows, or he forces it with all the instrument equally, as much as he can.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is medicine without sense, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you of.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the scapula, if it has at all a small inclination, or if there are underlying tensions that are worth as much as this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not enough, if you take a strong dose of aconite and put it in the patient’s throat, then give them either the emetic or make them vomit the aconite.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is suffering from acute pain at all times.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full view of the pain, cover the mouth, and give them something to swallow; move them to their hand frequently; and if they still feel pain, spit out the scapula
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit out, as we have said, if you smell out the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be of use to the patient
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And as for fumigation, if you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces visible, and put a covering over the head, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then you pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts their head in the can, closes their mouth, so that the fumes do not escape, but go up to the nostrils; and the nostrils will now sneeze, and if they do not sneeze, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, and eat dirty and salty things, and drink no water; and thus they will be forced to vomit by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument, as we have mentioned, is like tenailles corbes that are put into the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a thrush, and there is a roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and when this is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	it is the chapter on abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The signs of an abscess are, as it is remembered in this book, various in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which they appear, one of which is in their own likeness, and the other when moisture is held.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the limbs or if they are at the bones.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses at the head are different from those at the foundation, and the abscesses at the joints are different from those that occur at the juncture, and the thumbs have their own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if the abscesses must not be pierced, as long as the bone is dead according to its completion; but if there are some that must be pierced when they are hardened, and they do not die according to their completion, like an abscess that is in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from the joints, and it is left until it is softened, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the incision is from the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is medium, it will go to the principal limb; or it is from the root, if you perforate it not sooner but later than it is medium; and do not do anything else but perforate the abdomen with a wound in the direction of digestion, for only that which is from the root must not burst forth but remain buried, and be along, and there will be fistula; and it will not heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It must be known that you should wash the wound of the abscess that has died according to its completeness, when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the fading of the pain and redness, and the faintness and tingling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it must be known that you should make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it appeared. And let the perforation be of moderate length, and if the abscess is with hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all bones that are equal or there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the incision is in flesh, if you wait too long to perforate it until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you perforate it before this, if there is along the skin of the wound the venom of it, and is full of dirt; and by chance endure the wounds and deepen them from it
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no wound that can be seen according to the large wound mark, according to what the limb has suffered.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it must be known that you must bring in a few small wounds, small incisions; and in great wounds, great incisions, and many cuts according to the size of the wound; and if there are such wounds or it must be suspected that the bone is fractured, and covered; when it is almost healed as if by a bandage, and is softened, if it must be done as we do with abscesses: and if there are such wounds that are split into three angles, and such wounds of which we must cover as with ivy leaves, like angora wounds; and if there are such wounds of which we make a round size, and other sizes and similar coverages.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, if he has a superficial wound, must pierce directly; and it must be known when the wound is large, and there is great swelling, and he must pierce, if he does not remove all the swelling in that hour, but only a part; then stamp the wound until the swelling goes away, and leave nothing further. Do this many times, gradually, until the swelling is gone; even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or young children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For experience has never shown that any time the swelling goes down with the evacuation of the swelling, that by chance the patient does not die, and you will not be blamed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have recognized your wound, if it is small, and the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a large wound, and there is much pus, it is known that you must bite in two places so that one comes against the other; and if you have bitten through the abscess in a part of the skin, and you have closed it, it is known that you must fill it with much cotton or coarse lint from hemp in layers, and leave it until the bone is solid.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood spurts from your work, if you mix cold and easy water, and soak it with a cloth, draw out the offending part many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood continues to spurt from your work, if you mix management and cure, and the powders which I have said in this book, and if it is greasy or bloody, if you doubt that you can remove it, or if the limb or the abscess is sensitive, if you must do so, you must place on it supports and soak it with wet cloth in wine and oil; and if it is fat, if you must do so, you must place on it wet cloth in water and oil, or in wine and oil warmed, until the third part, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and dry and cure it, if possible, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
des soros	or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the head of the arm comes out slightly from its socket, and is managed like us that are in the sails, like the tremor of a goose, and there is resemblance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Or when the head of the arm comes out slightly from its socket, and is managed like us that are in the sails, like the tremor of a goose, and there is resemblance. There is fat and such things or there is moisture as well as poultry; and if there are such things that are tough and rough at the shoulder, and there is no doubt that the artery will not do the opposite.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the size is that if you expect all the instruments that are called "endoscopes", which come after, what thing does it contain?
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if you make it last a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	When moisture is evacuated, if you leave the skin containing that moisture, it returns immediately; then plunge cotton in Egyptian fashion, if present; if not, in vinegar and oil, and apply a compress, and leave it until the bleeding stops.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have finished plunging the cotton, as before, the second time, the third time, until you are certain that it is not bleeding; then close the wound according to what is appropriate, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the abscess persists without fat, if you cut it according to this shape, long; and you spill your oils, and the pus from all parts, and put all your care to draw out the clot or where the pus is; and if the artery opposes you, do what I have told you afterwards.</start_of_turn
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And in the same way, make an incision if it is painful, and cut and cure as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut on the painful incision and the moisture, if it is lighter, for it is from the blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are any of these incisions or heads or if there is no moisture, and if these incisions are made by a woman of mature age; and if you find the incision just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no bleeding, you must treat the wound as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other incisions coming from the armpit or head, because these come from the head of the shoulder and the root of the ear, it opens every day more than the preceding; and you must cure as it seems appropriate
des scrophules	And the size on the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because they are little of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture in them, and of those that are only abscesses that I have cured or heads of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a round stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if there has been no rupture, we must do as well for the wound as with a stone. In other abscesses that come from heads or chiefs, because they come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, we must open them every day if possible, to prevent the swelling; and treat them as seems fitting.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times it happens that this abscess bursts at the collarbone, and it lets out the boils, and it swells, and never comes out anywhere else or on any other part, and is spit out, and is enclosed with the other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And as for the carbuncle, it is usually inside its coat, if like the root and the abscess are deep; as we have said; and the signs of these carbuncles are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some people who contain moisture, and if they have malignancies that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case where you see a bone that is well positioned to the toucher, and that looks like the color of bone, and that does not move from the collarbone to the artery or to the vein, and that is not profound; if you must break it, and burn the outer part, and if two fingers are injured as a result of this, as we have said in carbuncles of the head; then you must hold the nerve and the vein still, and do not move too quickly, that you do not break anything else
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you cauterize the vein or artery and it will not permit you to work, put in the wound a piece of vitriol broth or any powders that remain without blood, and strain the wound; and leave it until the bleeding has ceased, and soften the wound, and begin to move again.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	When it is not stained, if you return to your work until you have completed it; then if there are any small scabs left, grasp them and remove them.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large swelling at the root of the vein, if you cannot do anything but grasp that swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging, as needed; then apply a patch of thick cotton soaked in Egyptian balsam, and cure it.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have plucked out all the hair, if you must now close the wound, and as there is no remaining superfluous hair because of the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	then you must understand to close the root of the wound, and to drain the pus, and close it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The pus that remains from the wound, pierce it or it will burst dead; and pierce as before said, depending. Then mix together with ointment and similar things, until it fills what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, if the ointment cure is applied diligently, until it is healed.
de squinance	And if thou dost cope the swelling, if thou canst gather together the three parts of the wound and bind them now, then there remaineth no surplus because of the greatness of the swelling. If thou canst understand to cope with the root and draw out, and bind as we have said. Those swellings which retain surplus, pierce them either that they open and die; and pierce them as before said, depending; and bring together tentes with ointment and similar things, so that thou overcome that which remaineth of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if thou apply an ointment dressing covering the whole, when it is healed.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient men spoke of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	Those who are squinting must understand that the epiglottis, which is the slit in the throat, must be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and arteries in the body are filled with evil at these points which are above the teeth in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils.</start_of_turn>
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss which comes from strangulation.</start_of_turn>
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when our wings break the epiglottis, to cut them from three circles or four slightly, between the two circles or to the extent of the fracture of the cartilage; and if the wings are coved to the section of the epiglottis, there is no hair, and the veins are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is hesitant, if you must, extend the skin of the throat to the earlobe; then cut the earlobe as far as it goes to the nape of the neck; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing; and then close the opening, as we have said; and demonstrate by sectioning the fumes of the nape of the neck that the spurting blood came from the broken vessel, and by the lack of speech; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound has passed when we doubt strangulation, gather the four limbs of the wound from the shoulder to the heel, and bind them all around with the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause new flesh to grow, as long as it is safe to do so.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The wound should not be opened until the swelling has subsided and the patient is no longer in pain; and if the patient dies or has become paralyzed, the default should be abandoned.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore close the epiglottis so that the patient does not suffocate, and he breathes through the wound; and thus is kept from death; and for this reason the old man orders that the wound be left open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And when it has passed, they order the wound to be sutured and healed, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a damsel who took a knife, plunged it into her throat, and cut part of her windpipe; and I fled called for help, and found her just like dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that it had not pierced any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the blood had come from the wound itself.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and dressed the wound, and cured her until she was healed; and the damsel did not suffer any more except that she lost her voice, and returned to her senses; for in the handling of the epiglottis I did not find any fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great gorge.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and are great abscesses in the colour of fat, and are very common among women; and there are two ways of them: natural, and accidental; or naturally there is no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways: one is like fat, and the other is like an abscess which comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not allowed to do any great work except for the little one, and the physician should look for it thoroughly: if you find it just like fat, and cannot move it from any vein, if you cut it as we cut meat, and take it out completely, if there is none left; and bind it well around, and cure it as it should be until it is completely healed
des nous	And encircle all around, and treat him as he deserves, until he is completely healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods are with us, of which I shall speak; and it behooves me to declare the great difference that exists between soundness and disease.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the origin of inflammation and fever that lasts, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by pain; then rest the fever and the inflammation.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With health there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains its own fat, which is its own sac and is like the color of gold, and begins like oil, and becomes great; and they are like wax, or fat, or moisture, and the color is like that which I said in the division.</start_of_turn>
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, that you first ask and inquire about the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to its form or chapter which follows.</start_of_turn
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of the inquiry of abscesses is that you take more moisture from the wound than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs and index fingers, until you know that the instruments have perceived the mark; then do the incision according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the pus and take care of the wound.</start_of_turn
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes suddenly, even if it is hot, if it is like other after-effects; and if afterwards the interosseous membrane does not come with moisture, the fat that is there should be scraped off with the fingers, and be taken away as small pieces, and be rubbed lightly from one side to the other, and keep the coat or the area where you are working free from injury with the thumb; and if you do not keep it free from injury, if you tear it by pieces, nothing will remain.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing remains, if it comes back many times; and if some remains, even if you grieve it, if you employ on the wound some corrosive powders which are sharp, hold the wound firmly and put on soothing things around the wound, and cure it in other ways until it is healed; and if it is great, if it costs two pounds of the wound, cure what is causing the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the vein beats contrary to you or another if you hurry and employ the broth of vitriol broken, and leave it lying for three days or two, as long as the wound bursts, and rest the inflammation of blood; then return to the covering that has departed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to embrace the fistulous abscesses; and they are like needles which one sews the wounds with, and are of saffron, iron, or silver, and must be of gold which are yellow, and are more proven for black blister to embrace the fistula cortices; and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the large wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the retractors are of various shapes, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and if the retractors have two cortices of three kinds each; and if the retractors have three cortices, and are of three kinds; and if the retractors have two cortices, and a single cortice only, and are of three kinds; all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus is fractured, and some have only rent the bone from one side, which we support with the hand, for in this way we do not split the vein or nerve; and from these interferences are the vessels restored in sleeves, so that the patient does not suffer at the opening of the abscess; and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see; and we use it only in cases of fracture, as in the case of limb, arm, and shoulder, and spleen, and in similar cases; and we never make use of any other instrument small, resembling the handles of forceps, according to this fashion, because in this way we staunch the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he must never be placed in the same place where he has previously grasped veins, arteries, and never again in the same way: for in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	We never see the swelling of the testicles of certain men when they begin to become corrupted, so that they seem like testicles of women; and they remain lame and limp, and who would believe them cured, if we did not cover them with silk according to this fashion from line b to line g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and use the medical salve with char, and assemble the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed; and if the mother is close to delivery, it is eased by her greatness, as with women, if the wound is in two ribs below, by two similar cuts; so that one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and insert what we have said of stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, that you fill the wound with soaked cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has eaten up the remnant and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of boils</start_of_turn
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from the buttocks are like hard carbuncles and often contain moisture.</start_of_turn>
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	If there is moisture contained, it is to be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling that is in the abscess is emptied, if the wound is of great size, leave the cotton in place until the other side is reached, then extract all the cotton, and cure the wound that has resulted from this until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess looks like small carbuncles, if it is as we said in the incisions of carbuncles, and if the wound has burst, if necessary apply cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de l’artere	From the root of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	If the artery is ruptured, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses in coming, and also blood is escaping from the vein incisions and abscesses; and if you know that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long and burst; and if you know that it is for the vein, if the blood flows too quickly from the incision. It is foolish to close this incision; and in the same way as when it is full of pus and boils, and boils on the heel and in the groin, and in other parts, and is great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to abandon the cautery treatment, and he who is in charge must also abandon; in that one in whom there is swelling of the artery under the skin must leave it uncovered until it is discovered; then remove the clot with a needle, and cause it to burst to the other side, and restrain the artery with two threads as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then pull the limb which is between the two links of the humerus until the marrow is seen to be completely empty; and tear away the clot; then join the wound that was made, as much as is necessary; and when the abscess is of the size of the vein, it must be held firmly with the hand that has the abscess, so that you can remove the clot from all the surrounding skin; then remove the needle from the limb that you held in your hand, and cause it to burst, and there should be two threads, so that you can handle it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, or bind two threads around two of its fingers; and if you doubt whether the thread will hold, you must stick another needle through all the threads from the beginning of the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and restrain the threads for three loops; then cut the abscess as much as is necessary, and cut away the surplus of blood and leave only what is bound; then put on a wet bandage soaked in wine and oil, and apply treatments of compresses and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also as with an incision, comes from an artery and a vein, comes from an incision as soon as it is formed, or by too great a work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And thus it often happens with attendants and those who are two or more in number that there are joints that are affected, and this is the cause of postmortemes, and its color resembles the color of honey, and is in many cases accompanied by pain; and when it is strained, if it causes pain to the patient, it is not in proportion to the honey color, but rather like lead; and it becomes dull from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither upwards nor downwards, and the one who is in the joints cannot be held fast by iron: by chance there will be contraction; and if the one who is at the head or the front touches or grasps the leather with his thumb.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the postmortem is small, if the thumb has a nail, hold it in its root; and if it is large, if it hangs in the flesh, and swells, then the bone must be broken and the wound sutured at the edge, and the cure must be continued until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	with great bleeding.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never has it been in the belly and nowhere else that I have seen such a thing that resembles a fungus; its root is subtle and its head is large. And in it are many small and large drops. I know of a home where two out of three bellies were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were full of water.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces and in the other VI and a third. And the work in the incision is if the patient is moist, and the color of the areole is pale and moist and has a thick root; if the tumor is large and you are present, apply the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the root comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you hurry, then indeed you must cauterize; and if you see the patient groaning and fainting from the incision of the flesh, take a good thread of silk and ligate the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then bind, and do not cease to drain the thread until it has stopped the bleeding; and when the root is black, if there is fear of contamination throughout, take hold of the same again for the belly, but take hold of half only, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep only the thread that is of firm color and little sense and milk-yellow.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is a hairy swelling, and I will come to the treatment of the swelling later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is fierce.</start_of_turn
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling appears by cautery of wound or fracture of bone, and is on the belly and there are some pus, as it often happens in other parts, or blood which clots from veins or arteries as it happens in front, or swelling; and if it is through the bone and by the issue of the bowel, if it is of the color of the spleen, it is a light matter concerning pain, and opens from diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is by the discharge of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed from its two sides, if it returns and comes back again, and by chance if it is tight, and causes swelling at the entrance of the bath and much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is by moisture, it is a light matter, and opens easily when you press on it with your hand; do not constrain me. If it is by blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to quantity. If it is by wind, if it is rough at the touch, and the work is that you see that it is by the blood of an artery or a vein, or the wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you suspect that it is by moisture, it is a light matter, and opens easily when you press on it with your hand; do not constrain me.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or as the chapter has said, concerning abscesses, of the artery and of the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If the intestine or the bowel appears, command the patient to hold his breath, and stretch it out straight, then mark around the circumference; then grasp it between your hands, then pull out the half of the abscess that extends below the great joint; then bind it firmly with a strong thread or strong silk cord tightly, and secure it; then bring half of the abscess that extends above the thread to your index finger and the intestine; if you find it grasped by the thread, if you loosen it, draw the intestine away from the belly; if you find the bowel, if you grasp it at the navel, and cut off the excess; if the artery opposes this, or the vein, if it goes limp, then go back to your work and take two needles, and take two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have done in the form of a cross that you make pierce; then strain the abscess for three days on the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the limb as long as it swells, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you can cut it when it is subtle and swollen, and cure the limb of what it comes to, and close the abscess as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what it comes to, and bandage the limb.
dou chancre	soothe the abscess.</start_of_turn>
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the preceding chapters the signs of an abscess, and how it should be treated by medicine and how it should be cauterized; and we say that an abscess is in the marrow, and that great caution should be used in its cure, and that the old people say that when an abscess is in the bone or can be scraped out as when an abscess is in marrow, and in the hip, and similar things, and that it must be removed as soon as it begins; and when it is large and old, if it cannot be cured but must be approached, for I know of no cure for it; none have ever cured it before me.</start_of_turn>
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the work, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, let the patient purge no more than once the black bile; then make him whole if he shows any fullness; then give him wine to make the work; then discharge his vomitings or sores, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb from your hand or from anything else, and if it comes loose from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much without it being stained; then treat him of another remedy until he is healed.
de ydropisie	And in the work, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, let the patient purge no more than once the black bile; then make him whole if he shows any fullness; then give him wine to make the work; then discharge his vomitings or sores, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb from your hand or from anything else, and if it comes loose from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much without it being stained; then treat him of another remedy until he is healed.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Nos avons dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et celle qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces deux semblances: c’est à savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines cette semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il y a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let two parts suffice.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let two parts suffice. When you insert the hook into the flesh, do not let it slip so that it comes out into the intestines; look whether the dropsy has descended towards the intestines: if so, if you make an incision three fingers broad on the left side of the belly button, and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side; and if it is due to bile, make your incision on the right side. Do not let the patient rest on the incision except for the small amount of blood that will flow out. Then pierce the skin with the instrument and grasp the hook, as you would grasp a nail or a thorn; then pierce the membrane until the hook comes out whole; that is the cause of the pain, then withdraw the instrument and leave the wound open.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of barley or barley chaff lighter, and has at the lower part a little hole; and where it costs one part, three holes; and two from another part, and one from another; and the head of the shoulder is cut off like a quill, and this is the form of the incision which the writer makes to cut off the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the marrow, so that when the instruments approach the apex, if they descend too much on the instruments; empty out half or a third part, for if you empty out more than that at this time, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he bleeds, or approaches death; but empty out according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue to the patient signify, and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the blood, which is retained now by the spur that I have mentioned, that you pierce according to this manner; then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of blood; do this for neither way, and be careful not to use it until it stops bleeding.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient and see him spitting out water, if the surgeon performs the cure for the sepulture or sand cautery, and by spitting out saliva or bath and sun, and if you keep drinking; and let the surgeon give desiccative medicines until he is sane, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the swelling of the limb.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not firmly in its place
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If he coves too much, so that he has not perceived for a long time at all the things that he has swallowed according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or perforate the belly of the plonc, and bind and hold it for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if you leave it closed, he will urinate and then you can put it back; and by chance it will not be able to close, because the urine that comes out will not leave it closed
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, if it is medicine with lead weights, as we have said, if it swells up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the opening does not reach the middle of the vessel, the hair is black, for no hair is born which has the root at the base of the beard, because it cannot urinate before it raises its beard up; and it cannot enter without that the matter can come down to the marrow, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus the work must be if the patient lies prone upon his back, for the head of the shoulder and the scapula are equal in size to a thumb; if the former breaks through the middle, if as it should be; and you must hold back the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if you can staunch the bleeding of that which bleeds blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	And thus the work must be if the patient lies prone upon his back, for the head of the shoulder and the scapula are equal in size to a thumb; if the former breaks through the middle, if as it should be; and you must hold back the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if you can staunch the bleeding of that which bleeds blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these white spots in the armpit, and are an appearance of bad blood; and there are both malignant and benign ones; if it is thought that you should take them out, that is to say, ligate them secretly, and cut off their heads and roots, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian fashion; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, of dark color and pus-filled, it is recommended that you bring cautery there.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the abscess is between the shoulder and the elbow, and has part inside the bone and part outside, it is recommended that you reduce the abscess which is inside first; and when it is loosened, if the wound is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure the whole thing together, if it is not firmly secured, the head of the shoulder will soon be perceived [as loose]; and will cause blackness and corruption in the bone and marrow; if you cover all that is black and corrupt, then lie upon the dressing of honey and flour which is made from the rind of pomegranates and sometimes, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes away, if you mix the lunar cautery with this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two positions together: that is, at the discharge of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, if you bathe or draw out the hair a fingerbreadth at a time, and urinate the patient among them; and when the hair has gone away from the root of the hair which have not been circumcised, or if there is wound or incision, if you must indeed burn them, until the ligament is untied, and deliver the head of the shoulder from all parts; and if it is necessary to divide this, if you must indeed burn it at the navel, without leaving a trace of hair or skin. Then sprinkle well between these two, and put a fine bandage of moist linen on it, cold water.
de la circoncision	De la circoncision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a matter of continuing treatment as with other wounds; however, when it is our work, we must do it with all our will, and promptly, if necessary, for our patients' well-being is more important than our reputation.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not teach us about circumcision, for they did not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I would say that the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcision were fools. Indeed, there were forces and hurdles, and for all their learning, if the patient ran away because of the discomfort of the two towels, or if by chance the surgeon happened to cut too deep and left the wound open.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, and the pain is doubled, and at the loosening which is done too carelessly, the point of the limb is not firmly secured; and at the loosening of the ligament by chance escapes the spur, and repairs the work, and many times it happens that they grow without any loosening, and I desire it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	As for the loosening which is done too carelessly, I have often observed that it causes the weakening of the entire thread of hair; for the forces tear just as well from above as from below.</start_of_turn>
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is equal all around in its entirety, but that the thread is well stretched around the skin; and that the manner of the first work be that you make the child think that you are doing nothing, if he understands, that you do not make him force the thread around the limb only lightly, but that you do it joyously in all the ways that you can; then you do it straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or take hold of your fingers so that the child does not see them, neither any instruments; then bring your hand to the limb and breathe or cough, and draw it up as high as the head of the limb; then fix it well with the dirt that is gathered, then bind the limb with a double thread, and bind it from one end to the other with another thread; and hold two fingers by the second loop to the pouch and the must index, and press between the two threads, then release the cough gently and draw the chief of the limb; then leave the blood to flow out naturally, because that is the cure; and put powder on and over the powder I drape a bandage glued with a piece of egg white soaked in rosewater, confirmed with rose oil and vinegar, and leave it on until the other side is healed, and cure from the other side until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at the juncture is like this: the two thumbs should be tense and bent, and the fingers as long as the thumb equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundane if it is when the nails are forced at the incision; therefore it is fitting that you extend your nail, even though it makes an incision; and grasp it equally, and if you do not wish to keep your nail, if you hold it, and then grasp it.</p>
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they trespass two days, and that which is beside the edge is swollen, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and scorch it gently; if you grasp it as you wish, and hold on to the edge of the verge, it will do you neither good nor harm.</p
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the limb of things soured with wound of powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if we grasp too tightly, it will go down, if it does not already; cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.</p
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retenement de l’urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is if there is an obstruction of the stone, or blood clot, or bowel, or bladder stone, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not freed, and you see that the obstruction is caused by the stone which is in the kidney or the outlet of the bladder, if it is possible, let the patient bend his knees; and let him put his feet on the back, extend his abdomen from the part below his back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; and then constrain the outlet of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is freed; and if it does not come, as we have mentioned, and the patient feels great pain, if it is possible, let you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called “syringes”; and this is the form: either of hammered silver legier weight like a goose feather; or the caine of a long palm half, or legier.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus it is done with a double thread, and one end is bound to the head of the bladder or to a wad, and the other end is put into the syringe; and the excess of the thread is cut off at the head of the syringe, then the syringe is closed with oil or grease and egg-white, and the patient is made to sit on the edge of the chair; and the bladder is raised up and the belly and the thighs are oiled with olive oil and tepid water; then the syringe is gently introduced into the belly as far as it reaches the root of the belly, and the belly is doubled up from under the buttocks; then the syringe is slowly withdrawn from the belly, and the patient feels the urine coming out until it reaches the empty state; and this is not done in any other order than that which leads or follows, because of that which is in front or behind. And when the urine has been drawn out, the thread is drawn out entirely, and the urine follows the thread, and the syringe is again introduced into the belly until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are bladder stones or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see urine and medicines distilling, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», and this is the shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if there are three holes: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped so that the medicine can be held firmly in place, if we can manage to remove the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see the medicines slipping in the bladder, put the head of the sufferer in the moisture, and pull from the one who is ensnared; if you pull out the moisture from the sufferer, and then push strongly from the one who is ensnared; if the moisture enters the sufferer, and comes to the bladder now, if the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from the armpit to the elbow, there are one or two holes; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you see clustering the bladder inside, and tie between the two armpits with a double thread, and burn one half of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the cluster back in the arm, and strain your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has drained out, as long as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, if you take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it round; then tie the thread firmly through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; and do as you would if you were making a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	de la piere
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the previous section the methods of extracting stones, and the medicines used for this; and we mentioned the difference between a stone that has been embedded for a long time and one that is new, and the signs of each; and when a stone of what size must be opened in the bladder, in the uterus, and in the testicles; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that a stone that is embedded in the bladder is often associated with an increase in urine, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as if from its subtlety; and there is frequent hazing, and the patient complains of severe pain in his loin, and he urinates many times, and then becomes pale; and with these spasms the foundation is loosened; and it is light to cure the spasms until they have been going on for three years, and is more difficult in old people, and is like for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first purify the patient with a laxative to drive out all the evil from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never happens that we can examine the stone without causing damage.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the limbs, loosen and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and let it go without force at any height; then make him sit between your hands as if in prayer, and let his hands rest on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely empty; then inquire and touch within; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten to cut above the stone immediately
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not yield to the toucher, take a little oil from the left hand, if the patient is elderly, or from the middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; and put it on the foundation, inquire about the stone, and when you feel it in your middle finger, if the bladder is full; then press on your middle finger, and the stone will come out or you will see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand the testicles upwards, and his left hand to grasp the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the size is taken; then insert the sponge covering, as it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between these two that are between the shoulder blades and the foundation, do not put it in the middle but at the cost of the left armpit; and be right above the bone, and two below either the bone or foundation, and be the size that will traverse if it is wide by default, and within narrow, according to the quantity of the bone, do not make it too large; for by chance the press if it must be on the bone or foundation, that it leaps forward in the work; and that there are incisions that are part of the bone or that have angles, and margins: if it is gripped to tighten; and if there is part that is swollen, it is like a gland, rounded, from which is issue is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And thus if there are angles and margins, make the size greater; and if it does not leap, it is certain that you must pull on the tendons which are just like a file at the head, for the muscle is to pull the bone if it does not escape; or you can grasp with the instrument that is curved at the head; and if you do not manage to engage it, if it is too wide, or if the bone is not decorticated, if the straining of the vitriol; and if there are several bones, pull out the greatest at the neck of the bladder first, then follow above, then the big one, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is large, if you cover it with silk, it makes a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And if it is large, if you cover it with silk, it makes a greater wound. For in this case two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes to an end because his legs cannot support him; but whatever you do to stop this, or to remove the nails, as long as you tear it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, if you apply incense and aloe and dragon’s blood, and bind it, and put upon it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn; then raise the patient up on his chest and do not loosen the ligature until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have pulled it out, if there is much blood oozing from the wound, then treat with lard of olive oil and vinegar, and with lard of beeswax, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if blood clots come into the wound and corruptions, and congestion of blood in the bladder, and either because of that the urine is retained, which is known in part as without jumping with the urine: drink therefore your dose in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and bring it forth; then raise the wound with water and ease and oil, and support it in all the ways you know, until it is healed; and know that all the times you cure it, tie the two edges together, and unite the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the stone is small, and it is at the end of the bone, and it is fixed, and the urine cannot pass; if the doctor of this whom I have said does not listen, then you must hear of the size for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this to be true
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one fourth of an iron bar according to this form and make two angles fixed in one handle.</start_of_turn>
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the bone below the stone, so that it does not come out into the bladder; then pull the thread gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the thread around the stone and the bone, as much as you can until you can see the stone from the other side; if the urine comes out then, press your hand on what is remaining of the stone which is inside the bone
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken, and spurts with the urine, and is stained with the patient’s blood; and if you do not know how to do this by any means, then take a thread from below the stone and another above, and pull the bone straight over the stone between the two lines, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the thread, and apply cold to the wound; and the doctor until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the bone at one end and another at the top; then bend the limb so that the bone is between the two joints, and pull it out forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.</p
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the bone is loosened in women, and this does not happen often, it is a good sign, and is defended by two things: the first is that the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in matters of love, even among the most learned.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	If by chance one cannot find a woman who is well learned in this art of hands; and if the woman's thumb is thicker than the man's thumb, for it can make a deeper cut, and greater fear has it. And if necessary, since this is the case, if one takes a small needle knowing well where to pierce, and with the thumb one grasps the root, and if one does not find it, not even with the most subtle inquiry; and she presents a fool in life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what one commands of her by inquiry of the thumb; and look well if the woman is a virgin: for then she must push out her navel or foundation and question the thumb; and if she finds it, if she constrain her navel with her left hand, and recommends that she hold her navel or with the patient, and wants and presses her left hand on her belly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the stone lies within the belly from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, then grasp the stone in the root of the thigh and find the navel which is usually hidden there, and feel the stone in that place. Do not move the stone up or down, but keep it at a small size. Then gradually enlarge it, until you feel the stone so tighten the wound as much as the stone can bear, and discharge the stones in various ways: small, large, sharp, smooth, long, and round, which are many times the cause of death.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if the stones resemble each other in appearance, it is known that they are discharged.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not go away, if you put vinegar broth in, and keep it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is discharged, and have the instruments that I have told you about for extracting the stone as a helper in your work; and if it does not go away, and it is the artery that is cut, if you put powder on the wound and strain with bands and pins, and do not do it again, and leave the stone alone, only by chance will the patient die; then cure the wound
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the colour of blood is calmed and the limbs are relaxed, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is open.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as dense as lead and as hard as stones, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and never is it truly in the belly of the egg, if we take care that this is not another exercise; and it is the skin of the stone between the white fat that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramus is of weakness that comes from the stones, and is spread throughout that matter
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if percussion comes upon the bones, and this moisture has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without redness, or it is black, or aquous blank, and this is more; and these are the signs of corruption of this assembly, for if it is white or yellow as we have said, if there is swelling, the bones are long as if in the figure of an owl, and they do not open, because there is moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh, if there is swelling with a part of the bone, and because of this it is thought that it is another owl; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white substance, if you feel well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it shows throughout the whole surrounding area, that is how it appears.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, therefore, which comes after the introduction, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we draw out the wound by fire, if it be known that the patient is well according to his power and the swelling of his body; then we place the hand above his shoulder on something high, and put on him a cloth of drape; then we sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and stretch out his arm to the second rib below the nipples; then we take the sponge and burn the skin of the nipples among those of the navel, and cut the skin of the nipples straight down to the white line; and we burn it subtly as he pleases; then we pierce the white line with a needle at one large hole, and drain out all the liquid, and then put in our sponges, and stretch out the white line; and do not touch the nipples, but only the white line; burn all or in pieces immediately the cost of him subtly, for if you do not burn it well it will return the liquid; and if the urine spurts out from your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work of the white line. Then assemble the two leaves of the shoulder at a suture, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the liquid corrupted by another disease, if you must tie the veins that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then grasp the bone throughout the suspension, drain the liquid, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if it is acute and assembled into two parts together, its quernions are two roots; if it swells the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a layer of soft linen soaked in rose oil; and put over it another layer of wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two nails, and put under doubled cloths, and bind it up as it is said above.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool yarn as described above and sew them together at the groin; and one of the nails grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the painful part; and the other two nails on the two angles, and when they are all assembled, the restriction is in the loop of the groin; and never is medicine permitted in this burn except for the size of a nail; and take one burn from the cultella, and prick the skin of the nails, and if it is as we have said, if the white spot that contains the blood is discovered; if you take the burn as described above, and pierce that spot as we have uncoined, and burn it with this subtle burn.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And so be attentive in all ways that you can, until you have plucked them out entirely; and keep that fire away from the egg; and pluck that it is more salve; and make sure that you keep the wound clean, and more merciful than the work of size; and if anything hinders you, or if there is suspicion of suppuration or other thing, if you can cure what hinders you, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you fear perforation, as I have said, and when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is limpid, if you make the patient sit on a low stool; for pierce the abscess at the lowest part with a large needle, and make the perforation long and deep; and let the blood flow freely; then put a sponge on the wound and bind it, and leave to drain the remaining blood, and cure until the wound is healed; and if the white bile does not leave the wound, if you can drink a penny or the instrument with which the hydropic humor is treated, as it is said before; and widen the wound and make sure the blood returns, and reassemble after six months or when the wound has healed, and when it is reassembled as before, the patient will recover his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the bites of the coccyx
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	The hairs that are on the root of this limb are in doubt and fear in many places, for it seems to me that it is better to leave them alone; and I shall tell you the work and the signs of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that in the case of abscesses, both come from the bone, and I have seen many cases.</start_of_turn
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive swelling and pain, which is spread over the joints, or by percussion; and the colour of the abscess is like that of old cheese; and there is no pain, but it is painful; and sometimes there is one abscess that is rough and bloody, and yellow in colour, and does not come from any artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from an artery, if it is known by the disposition of the abscess above, when you touch it; and it must not be touched by you
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition to express with a touch of the two thumbs, and may well make the size above this semblance, and above the other parts; and that you must take courage like a coion, then the egg is high, and the thread is white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soiled with these hairs, if you must indeed treat the egg, and you must take courage; and if it is near the syfac, or in what is within the vessels, if you must deliver all that is within, and round the cope.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the marrow is coming out from the bone or the heel, if you must cover it all, remove the yolk, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the work is done, if you are treating a wound, smear the wound with coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme des coions	from the bites of the coccyx
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering resembling a bladder, with the softening of the coions, and the patient groans when it goes; and the cure for this disease is well near as poor as this one we have just mentioned, and all these things that we have said about it, according to what the ancients have done
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, then suspend the gown from the hooks at your two shoulders, at all the vessels that are protruding from the waist, and grasp the master of them, and extend them forth; then cut through the tough membrane wide through to pierce the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then pull back cautiously, as we have said in the extraction of arteries from the temples; then insert a needle or there is double thread, and bind it to the first root or the place where the vein has come away, and bind it loosely to the other root; then cut close to the middle directly, according to the length of the bone, and in passing the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as with the others or apply a bandage, so that no vessel is left that does not nourish one of the hooks; for by that there will be no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is enough to pull out the hooks to all the vessels; if the patient does not lose his nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and if they dry and do not swell.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root to the surface of the skin
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	When the fruit of this radix appears by section from the navel or from the extension on the belly in the flank of the spleen, because the intestine descends from that passage to one of the ribs; and this passage is either by incision of the navel or by the extension of the spleen, and these two methods of occurrence are caused by: percussion, or jumping, or pulling, or pushing, or the elevation of grief. And in like manner. And the sign that this is an extension of the spleen is that there is some pain and some pushing in the loin, and it does not come immediately; and the spleen is equal in size up to the navel, because the spleen presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the scapula is fractured, that it immediately causes severe pain, and the scapula is displaced, from the stretching of the skin and the bursting of the bowels.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never does the marrow go out with the intestines, and is retained as it is, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of fire with fear, for it is known to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	When you are commanded or the patient orders that the intestine be returned to its place in the wound if it can reenter; then either sew on his collar between your hands, and hold the flanks; then turn the thumb upwards, and cut all the skin of the ribs along; then go inwards from the liver, as large as a bean, according to what you must do to open the wound. And do as much as you must. Then pull out the spleen that is beyond the skin of the ribs, until the white spleen is discovered from all sides; then put your index finger into that which teaches the rib, in that which is between the white spleen which is beyond the skin of the egg, and between the second spleen, and withdraw that which is behind the egg, and between the second spleen; and thus move the thumb of the right hand inwards towards the ribs, and place the white spleen at the top of your left hand, and keep the egg towards all the spleens; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and unhook that which is behind the ligament; and ask if there is any intestine or white spleen left around, and if you find nothing, if the wound is at the bottom; then take a needle or make a large thread of X threads, and pass it in the back part of the spleen, which is after the skin of the ribs; after the size, then cut the threads that appear from the needle, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the spleen, of which we have said that it is beyond the skin of the ribs, with a strong thread of two parts; then cover the threads with the skin, and tie them in two parts, so that no blood vessels that are nourishing it can enter, except for the vein that comes from the navel; and remove the thread according to the first thread along two fingers of that which is at the beginning; and after these two threads leave the spleen that is beyond the thumb of the ribs with the greatest part of a finger; and after all the rest according to the roundness of the egg; then cut in the part that is beyond the skin of the ribs, as much as without error, and bow as we have said before; then apply a dressing of fine wool in oil, and put it in the wound, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the fat cauterized beyond what we have said, after the incision, due to the fear of bloodletting.</start_of_turn>
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For in this work, there is often the evacuation of blood, and the leaving of the limb as long as it bleeds; and if it lingers too long, if it is raised from hot water, put on that which we have said, until it bleeds; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancient ones said that it is done like the bark of a tree that binds the screw, in such a manner that you tie the veins, after the size above lightly downwards; then hold firm, and cure the abscess of what causes it, until the veins cease to bleed; and cure as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes blood comes out violently, as we have said, and opens the wound; and do not take out any intestines as companions, and if there are any, that is bad, and repair them at once; and all the while if it stays too long in this place, if the wound or swelling is believed, until the intestines are taken out; and this happens from the stretching of the sinew which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is taut, then it is softened and loosened the wound and open; and it is cured as we have said before. And never is it cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies groaning on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the dislocation and enfold it widely according to the quantity of three fingers; and then draw out the sinew which is from the skin that covers it, and take out the nail and put out the limb appearing from the sinew; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut out the two nails appearing from the sinew on the top of the nail; and cut one and the other; then draw out the nail from the nail, and do not cover the sinew or stretch out the heel or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the sinew of the intestines; and then cure by the cure of the wound.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you have closed the wound, if the swelling subsides and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surface is contracted, and shows no mark in the course of treatment, and the cautery is useless in this location, and the surrounding parts are more susceptible to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the nails
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the nails of the house are softened in lukewarm water, for the nails that are within are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one sees it being cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to scrape off the softened leather on the natural leather; then assemble the layers one over the other with a seam, and if you see that, close the first excess of softened leather with two or three stitches firmly; then scrape between the stitches and cure as the other wounds, until they are healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The wounds that are scraped off in our law, and for this reason I would not speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to force them except in two cases: one is that the witness of the wound testifies when required, and the other, because we often see the companion of beasts of burden for our assistants, as with oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts.</start_of_turn>
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that scrapes are made in two ways: by traction or by incision.</start_of_turn>
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the traction method, make the patient sit in warm water, until the wound is softened and painless; then grasp the hair with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel it.</start_of_turn
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the armpit: command that you keep the best hand steady, and press the skin of the armpits towards your left hand, then bind the bandage, and hold each stitch at I stitch, when you have well secured them; and leave no trace of blood or superfluous blood that is outside the vessels; and this method of cautery is milder than that which is done by traction, because by traction the hair remains fixed by chance; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Saiches that chastening is commanded in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to do so for two reasons: the first is that the patient will respond when asked in the saige; and the second, because we have often had to cauterise beasts for our attendants, as with oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say therefore that chastening is done in two ways: by traction or by incision.  In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the hairs are softened and pliant; then we grasp them with our hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.  Of the size of the chastening: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the hairs with your left hand, then bind the suspenders, and grasp each heel with one hand, as when you have well supported them; and leave no wound or any secret wound that is outside the vessels; and this method of chastening is milder than that which is done by traction, because at traction remains by chance no part of the hairs, by which the beast desires to loosen.  Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is in two ways like these: one if between the two testicles there appears as much as the figure of nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in childbirth it lets out urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has on the genitals as much as a penis and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And as for the treatment of wounds and burns, if you manage to cauter all the boils that arise, and treat them like other wounds; in the second method, for those who urinate through the navel, if there is no other remedy.
de la tentigene	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as in homes: one if between the two testicles opens as with the figure of the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the court it urinates. And the other manner if it is in women, and has upon the navel as a beard and two testicles. And the cure of the womb and fame if it is that you cut out all the seminal vessels, and the cure if like other wounds; in the second manner, of homes whose urine leaps through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The fire cautery is applied above the natural parts, as long as it is too painful to see; and many women have as much with their hand as with a man, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to hold the excessive movement of the hand or wrist and cauterize gently; and do not push too deeply, for blood will flow out, then the wound must be treated as any other wound until it is healed; and there is another burn that arises from the root of the tooth, and the pulp, and by chance it breaks through, and this is called the ancient "coward's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are certain that you have set it, as we have said, then hold it until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If the woman's nature is not fully understood, or if the rupture is slight; or if it comes from birth or by disease; or by a sudden injury, or by thick mucus or spittle, or by worms, or by injury in the marrow, or on the coasts, or in the bowels, or in the face; and if the conception is delayed, and the birth is difficult, or if there is an abundance of flowers, then knowledge of this is by experience of the dance.</start_of_turn>
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is close to the surface, whether on the thumb or the little finger.</start_of_turn
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is thick mucus and is close to two fingers, if you are in a hurry, take two fingers together and hold the woman behind her, spreading out her legs; then pull the two fingers forward as long as the thick mucus is round, and as it is over the swelling; then take hold, and pour oil over it, and put it on the limb, and lie the woman down with her chest against each shoulder, so that it does not swell again.</start_of_turn
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	If the scapula is hard and thick, it is best that you seize it with the thumb resembling a holly leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If stiffness is caused by bone marrow, if you suspend it at the hip and grasp; and have medicines that harden blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of egg whites; then mix in a large dose of lard, so that the wound does not stick; and let it be long, and mix in some lint; then be cured of other cures until healed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when marrow comes into the marrow space, if you cover it according to this manner, do not perform an incision.</start_of_turn>
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed abscess in the marrow space, do not touch fire.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	of emboli.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	Emoroids are openings of veins which, without treatment, are usually harmless; however, when they become old, they become swollen. As we have already mentioned in the previous chapter, the signs and symptoms of abscesses are similar to those of boils, and I shall now tell you of those which resolve with treatment. I say that abscesses and swellings, when they are pressed into the flesh without causing pain, can only be cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the root of the flesh can be felt, are those which can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary therefore that you place the patient in a cold house, then support the limb with your thumbs and index fingers, and press into its root, then sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then leave it for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make it sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give it barley meal, and mix it with honey and ale, and make a poultice of it on his back
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it swells, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if that does not happen, if it causes a wound at the back and swelling; then take linen and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elderberry with old wine, and apply it to the wound.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the abscess is resting, if you see that the wound is healing; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is like a dark hair, if you cover it as I have said above; then keep the wound healing.</start_of_turn
des apostemes de la marris	Emoroids are openings of veins which without restraint usually happen; and when they are old, they become tough. As we have said before in the division, the signs and symptoms are these which announce healing. I say that emboldened veins and those which are full in the marrow do not feel pain, except when they are cured by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the thumb and hold the index finger at its root, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood, and incense, and the like; then close her up an hour later, and put her in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and the like, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and anise, and make a paste of it. And if it has clotted, that is good. If not, make her cough up phlegm at the back and put on a plaster. Then take linen and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her cough up. And when the abscess is quiet, if it is cured, the limb will regain its natural position as long as it is healthy; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a severe wound, if you cover it as I have said the tough one; and then it will be cured as long as it is healthy.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many methods of abscess come into the market, such as chancre and prickly abscess, herpes, stasis, fistula, hemorrhoids and burnt abscess, and other diseases that I mentioned in the division.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is fitting that I should depart in this treatment of the hot carbuncle that arises in the groin, which is not a common ailment but which resembles a boil; and if you are skilled in the art of healing, observe whether the carbuncle is already forming at the commencement of its emergence, and whether it is filled with heat and fever, and if it turns red when you see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not be in a hurry to pierce; but let the patient rest until the pain has subsided; then seat the patient on the edge of the seat, and place two small stools or a cushion under his hips, and support him on his back and join his limbs so that his thighs are spread out, and put his hands down by his knees, and bind them firmly with a bandage; then draw out the abscess towards the lower costal cartilage, and bring in the instrument from which we remove the root of the abscess; and it is fitting that when you bring in this instrument, that you should first feel the depth of the abscess, so that what enters with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is too large, it is fitting to cover the depth of the abscess with a cloth, so that the instrument does not grieve; and it is fitting to put the horn of the instrument at the bottom, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess bursts, and we wash the hand with water, if the covering coves the head, at the navel; and when the belly is emptied, if you wish, put in the wound some soft rags soaked in rose oil, or in dry green oil; put the rag firmly at the bottom of the wound, and put over it a layer of coarse cloth and a layer of fine linen soaked in water or mallow which have been boiled; then cure after two days of washing following that, until it is healed; and never remove the dressing and the wound by clinking with water and honey, and then with water or angelica roots and alum.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is stitched in the belly, if you wish, that you take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	De l’enfantement.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The master first teaches at the play that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down on the navel, and desire to smell the afterbirth; then the child hastens to emerge immediately; then the afterbirth follows according to the natural figure, and comes out with the head, and the other hand follows her; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on her belly, so that the child comes out stretched; for when he descends on his head, if the other hand follows him, and the master is overcome by the madness of his excesses. And this is not otherwise but comes from an unnatural cause.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes from his feet, or comes from the ribs or shoulders, or the hands, or comes on his belly, or even from the throat; and is converted by chance from his collar, and by other wicked figures; if the master is at the play that she is wise and discreet in these things, and avoids error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures that help her
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes out head first by natural birth, and the woman is groaning, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise her nature from oil or rue or fennel seed, and then bring her between her two legs the little cushion from which this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and hold its nail as long as the moisture which is inside comes out; and take the woman's belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with a clenching of fennel seeds with sesame oil; then make her swallow and vomit violently, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now expelled.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If the two hands come out violently, if you must, hold them lightly and gently; and if they will not go in, put the woman on a chair, and support her feet high; then pull out the chair under the earth, and hold her firmly, that she does not cry out; and if the hands will not go in, and the fetus is dead, if you grasp the hands at the shoulder which is above, you will deliver the child, and restore her equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child upon his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon his feet, if you can push him up high; then twist him to and fro, until he is even; then take hold of his feet and stretch them to and fro.</start_of_turn>
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he cannot jump up to his knees, if the command is to grasp and make him cough, and he expels sperm; if he jumps up, God willing.</start_of_turn
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	If it is not forced too much, as we have said, if the bone is slightly bent and twisted, as long as it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For indeed it is easily broken.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump up as we have seen, say that you take muscle powder of elderberry, oil of poppy seed, gum mastic, and bruised everything in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and remove this discharge, then let her sit in hot water until the ribs are numb; and when she is softened from the heat, make her drink a decoction of marigold, and give her some, and leave her for an hour; then let her sit on the seat, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and take hold of her belly lightly, for the child is now jumping.</start_of_turn
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the issue of the child on his knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands under his chin and under his jaw; then either he is overcome with sleep on his collar and his tongue hangs out, or he is senseless and rigid. He folds his hands under his chin and under his jaw, and then he grasps his hands under his belly, and he twists the cushion downwards until it appears in his throat; and if the child does not cough, he takes his tongue and moves it, then he moves his belly upwards, and he lets go of his hands. And the child is unconscious and limp; and command the woman to stay until the child comes to his senses.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	And thus the child cries and cries; and instructs the woman to hold her attention until the children are done.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you how to rejoin the limb: if it cannot be rejoined, if you make the woman rise up, and call for help; if she cannot call for help, if you make her sit on his lap, and she bites his legs; then mix in the muscle that I have told you of. And if she does not deliver, if you make her sit on the seat, then study to rejoin the limb; and when the limb is rejoined naturally, make her spit out, and command her to stay until the child comes to his senses.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child upon his neck, and his hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command that you grasp her hand firmly, then turn it back and forth; and when it is even, put upon the oily muscular substance of elevation and oil, as we have said, and then command her to move back and forth; and when you have done this, make her sit on the edge of the bed, and command her to brace herself; and she will vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same measure at all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this method at all times, if the second toe touches your nail, while the moisture is expelled; if it swells up on her face and neck, if you press on the swelling, that it should not be retained, and the child will die; then pull the child out, as you have done, and command the woman not to touch her again: thus it will be gentle.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue des gemelz	When the dislocation is slightly loosened.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	When the swelling of the shoulder dislocates repeatedly, it is not strange, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is an unknown thing, and it does not live alone, if its name be known; I know that it is multiplied, and is dispersed by the substance which nourishes it, which is linked to the belly; and it never escapes as naturally as all the others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if it escapes cruelly, if the cure is as we have said, and if there is a subtle dance, and makes broth and makes lighter what it does; and make so that it is as if it were worth more to be saved than to be lost.
de plusors enfans	Furthermore.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the marsh I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV; and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of their glorious head, and it is fitting that the glorious dance should do everything, because by chance some things happen; do as it is fitting.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfant mort	From childhood until death.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, if as I have said in the division, and she does not come forth, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; if you believe that the woman is of sound mind and has no accident or fears of death; if you believe that the woman is lying on her back, and her shoulders are flexed forward and her legs raised; and you place your thumb on the second phalanx of her thumb or bind her to the bed if she is not being treated with the descending limb of the child; then wipe the mouth of the woman with a mixture of oil, alum, and fennel seeds and flaxseed; then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures; then bind them loosely in the basin; then want her to lie or make her lie down if she lies on her face; if she vomits in her eyes or in her nose or in her mouth or on her beard or in her hair or on her chest or on her feet, and if she vomits on her toes or on her heel or has loose bowels; and it is believed that she must hold the ointment at her dominant hand, and put her elbow between her two hands of the left hand, and hold her firmly with both hands, and put the ointment on none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the thing that is empty; and that is the form of the ointment.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the doctor finds another ointment, or the third time he has to intervene, if the extraction is equal; and then extend them equally by moving from side to side, for movement itself, or by loosening the nails, if that is the way.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains stuck, if one feels some of his two nails slipping, and holds them in that part, and treats the other part; and if there is still some remaining, if you put this ointment or even higher up again, and do this until it is all gone.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be pulled back by the stretching, then you must cover over the drape, until it is whole; then pull at the toe or heel, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and have two thumbs.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the head of the shoulder is large and swollen at the junction, or if there is an accumulation of pain there, it is recommended to insert the thumb between the two bones and press down on the painful area; or to grasp it with the instrument called “almidach,” which is like the instruments or bandages which follow this; and in this way make the swelling naturally subside. Then force the bones apart, and if the dislocation does not yield, grasp it with force, whether it be fractured or not, until the moisture that is causing the swelling subsides. If it does not subside, break the bone into pieces at the fracture line.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if the swelling is on its side, if the attraction is slight, and the approach to the mouth of the marrow is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is swollen in the belly or the arm, grasp the swelling with a cloth wrapped around the limb; and press the belly or the arm until the moisture that is causing the swelling subsides. And if the other limb is rigid and the shoulder is dislocated, if the patient bites his hand with his teeth, treat it until the jaw is brought back to its normal position; then apply an ointment or two, and force them out; and if the jaw is retracted by a suture that has come loose, if it is not possible to pull it through, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty things; and administer poultices, and anoint with soft and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on the cost, put it even, if necessary remind what we said of the living child; and if it does not go, draw it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if necessary remind what we said above about the armpits that come up in the marrow; and if blood comes, if put in water to restrain, and remind other cures.</start_of_turn>
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom a child was born dead, then consulted with another concerning it, and refuted death in the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly, and it burst open, and began to swell greatly.</start_of_turn>
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went for help, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.</start_of_turn>
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong compresses, and out came a bone, and after a few days another.</start_of_turn
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at mouth, for this belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I saw the wound, and with trembling hands, while the woman was well; and I saw the woman long tense and soft, and this was already a sign of weakness; and I have never read in this chapter anything other than that when the master finds a strange thing, he must ask for help.</start_of_turn
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of the pressure, which is to keep the book closed; and there are two returns as two fingers of two hands.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Whatever be the horns more subtle in their restriction, or made of ivory or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist I must open wide, and the margin of the teeth I must lengthen, and a palm and a half; and in between the two limbs there must be two cushions of this same fist, which must be closed in one and the other, half a palm long or more; and these two cushions must be placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when we turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ivory or boxwood, as much as the nails; and has two thumbs two cushions, as you see, a palm long, and two wide; and when you see the marrow open with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit down and keep her knees bent and her legs over, then put the two cushions together in the marrow and hold the handle of the instrument between her thighs; then grasp the instrument with your hand as if you had made the nails even, according to the quantity you see the mouth of the marrow open, until the jaw makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very sharp, and their resemblance multiplies their danger; and when you behold them appear, the work hastens, and the higher you are in your home the greater is your quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not covet the instrument when you do not see it, for its necessity is not to be excused
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second toe is retained at birth, if you command the patient to retain its nail, and then make her expel it with force, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, if you take a pot and make a perforation or cut, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the patient, like calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are boiled or roasted in water over the fire; then put a caine or perforation in the pot, and the other end in the patient's mouth, and hold it until steam comes out of the patient's mouth; then make her expel, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is sprained,
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains after this treatment and there is no other force, command her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesam or in almond paste, and then put it back in its place, and wish for the second time; and when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it forward and backward, so that the marrow does not splinter; but it must move slightly to and fro, and then treat her. If she comes and it disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the marrow of the bone is loose, we have said the cure of extracting it, and fumigating with herbs; and if it is not of all that we have said, if you do not follow the treatment; but it must be known that what is at the mouth of the marrow, that you bind to the hip of the woman, then clip it with lard tetrafarmaçon; if she will go and return, and will come with force; but nevertheless, when she comes there will be a bad smell in the stomach and the head, and she will vomit the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is deemed necessary, then appropriate fumigations are useful in this case: neither of the ancients have proven the effectiveness of fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which we fumigate the woman at the retention of urine and the secondine if it is necessary is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is seen like a dog, and put the head under the earth, and the large bones on the fire; and either the fumigations on the charcoal, and the soot until it is consumed, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the solid foundation perceived, for they are stifled by a subtle stiffness: if you must force them to dance, and do not allow them to pluck even a sharp splinter, and keep the wound closed that they do not touch; then put on a coat of wine and oil, and then cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, put or draw in a weight of lead, and leave hands clasped, and be still until the swelling subsides.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Never again will this wound or abscess come to mind; if it covers itself: if it is cured, as we have said concerning the weight of lead.</start_of_turn>
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula from its foundation.</start_of_turn>
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodulations, and those that arise from below the foundation deviate, or in the space of two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when the nodulation is old, if it persists, and is accompanied by moisture, white blainch or subtle swelling, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that they cause vomiting or flatulence when the patient makes an egestion, and by chance in a leap.</start_of_turn
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the thigh; and reach up to the joint of the hip, and up to the navel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows of the fistula which persists at the root and does not pass: and it is only when you bite your thumb or root that a fine needle of spider or iron is introduced into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, if you attempt to drain with a fine needle, or I pull at a horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the pulling at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and there is no bleeding, no swelling, no wind, as we have said: such wounds that do not perforate; do not linger in curing.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is formed up to the bladder or the urethra, if in leaping the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, if the attempt of the vein is up to the limb; if there is no twisting and the invention of pain, if it is that it has become adherent below, and there is no need for medicine or dressing with ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except toil, and the vanity of fools who intercede.</start_of_turn
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is neither new nor old, hope of health comes by fire, as I have learned; and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and keep the legs stretched out until his knees are bent towards his belly; then make an attempt to draw, or to plunge if there is twisting, until you have grasped or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it at the root of his foot, if you must bite your thumb, if you feel that the attempt has been perceived; or if there is swelling or you feel between your thumb and the great toe the flesh or bone, then grasp that it is natural; if not, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One cannot well heal any wound, but this is what happens often; and the help that is given for it is this: if the cautery is too subtle according to the size of the fistula, as it is said beforehand; and one should cover all around in the fistula, until it comes out from the root; and do this twice or three times, until you are certain that these worms that must be cauterized are burned, which are like a penne of oil; and then cure with soft compresses filling the wound, until the worms are expelled, and then cure with oiling the wound closed and bound
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is still sane, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is still sane, that is well; for if he attempts between [treatments], and does not pierce until he reaches the root which is or underlies, and between your thumb and your index finger put on a thick covering of hair or lint, and you will see the fistula at that which the covering will wrinkle; if you grasp the start of the fistula, and hold it firm before the attempt, and then burn with the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the attempt; and the attempt will be delivered, and will be cured. Then remove the hair or lint which seemed like a sparrow's feather, and there will be nothing left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he will not move, and the surgeon is between him and the work, if the fire cautery or the medicine is hot.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning of these hairs that grow, and the coagulation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of soft swellings covered in burr or broken pieces, until the bones creak and the hair is burnt in the creaking; then cure the wound of oozing pus with a hard scab, and these are the dry medicines
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula arises up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the bone or root is grasped or questioned concerning this.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If thou feel the urge, and between two thou art in the web of cloth or silk or hair, or it is near to pierce, if there be no other way but to go forward and hope, by the administration of one of these three methods: or thou cauterize it as we have said, or thou apply pressure until the blood stops, or if thou wilt thou make trial and cure as first; and do not go too far in your haste, that thou cover only that which holds the foundation, and let the blood drain in its natural course; then cure as we have said; by chance if thou art healed, or thou loosen that covering and the surrounding matter then that it is coped from the foundation, or by trial or by some pointed instrument; then confirm that hair which is in the wound, as thou wilt; then study to restore the wound and to close the fistula in the posterior part of the foundation: if it be a less grievous thing to the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs or tears out from the foundation of the leather beneath, if you take a bite pierced at the head in this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And indeed, if there is a thread of hair torn in two, and you bite through the attempt at the head throughout the fistula until it is at the root.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs or tears out from the foundation of the leather beneath, if you take a bite pierced at the head in this form: if it is grasped in the margin of the foundation downwards, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you bite your head or foundation; and draw out the head of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and restrain one to the other, and leave it one or two; and do not restrain it any more, until the thread copes these hairs that are between the two, and which cause pain; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, if you force it to burst in all the ways you can, it will not be too much harm.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not be worthwhile making it burst by force if it is too deeply embedded, and then you must cure it as we have said, while it is still sound.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of a spatumile thorn whose fistula is made if it is moist and of one part and trenchant; and from the other part no, forasmuch as we must not cope with this, as you see here.
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Morbid swellings are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like grains of resin, and are small and large, and adhere to the surrounding healthy tissue; or if they are large, there are one or more of them, and they push out the foundation and the top of the foundation; but those which are pushed out have much moisture, and adhere to the surrounding tissue or to yellow bile or blood, and have a yellow color; and the cure for those which are deep in the foundation is for the patient to groan and strain to push them out as long as the foundation is flexible; and the thread will appear. If you are hasty and grasp them by the nail or hold them with your finger, then take hold of them at their roots; and if they are unable to hold them because of their moisture, if you tear them with a drapeil or cotton or a piece of chamoly, and draw them out, then cauterize them with the cautery as it is said or as the physician instructs; for the cure of other wounds as long as they are healthy. And if the foundation cannot recover, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough astringent plaster to uncover what is deep or the foundation, if it can recover openly; that is if the patient does not resist. And if the threads are flexible, if you grasp them by the nail or hold them with your finger, and then take hold of them, and cure them as we have said, as long as they are healthy, and that they fear the incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you wish to secure the suture according to this method: take one thread and pierce it through a needle, then pass the thread through from below and pierce the needle through from the other side. Then draw up two threads from the needle, and if it is thick, strain the thread firmly. Then knot the thread, withdraw the needle, and secure all the others. Leave one loop to correct the excess blood; then put on the foundation a moist drape in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation. Command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it contracts. When it has contracted, if the wound is healed and other treatments have been completed, while it is still sane.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	when it is dry or firm.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is advanced and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you notice that a scab has formed at the edge of a nail or at the root of your nail, which does not allow it to dry; then treat it until it is healed if it is possible. If it does not heal, if you must continue to scrape it more vigorously than before, until it is raw, and is bleeding; then treat it until it is healed
dou fremit	completely.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small creature that appears before the body, and goes out from the mouth; and never does it bite the true, and one feels as though it is dead from fear, and comes to all parts of the body, and more so than in other places.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And if you wish to cure it, take a goose quill or a strong vulture quill, and put that quill on the bite, until it circles the bite all around; then pull your hand back with all your might until you have caught the bite all around, and pull it out from the root, and scrape the bite from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that he does this with a needle or iron as it is said above, and be subtle and restrain his limbs:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that he does this with a needle or iron as it is said above, and be subtle and restrain his limbs, do not make it obvious, for it must be kept secret, and press firmly.  And if you see that he does this, if it is before or during the cautery procedure.</start_of_turn>
de la forme dou clistere	de the form of a blister.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a blister with silver or gold, or with melted lead or mercury; and never make a blister with these small and large instruments, as they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are feeble and painful in their children and infants are puny.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	Their form is small and great if it is excessive, or the belly is tied up in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is swelling or the belly is bound, if you see, and the shoulder is wrenched either pierced or cut; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one there is one; and either the belly or the owner puts medicines inside a bladder or parchment, and either cut around all the holes, and put between each hole one must leave a space, then put in these holes one strong thread of thread twisted in the shape of an X or around; and assemble the belly as if it were a nail; and when the medicine is inside, if it has the instrument before a strong thread, then tighten; and this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let neither the medicine be too hot nor too cold; anoint the head with ointment of oil or egg yolk, or something similar; then bind it loosely. Then seize the hand of the minister with both hands together, until it is quite still, then draw out the ointment, and leave the patient with his legs exposed, and if the medicine sees that it suffices, if the patient sleeps all night, it is better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he has put it on in a state of sickness of swelling of the belly, and the physician wishes to depart, if he begins as soon as he is well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is swelling or bruising, or an abscess, if the ointment is as subtle as for a young child; and this is the form of subtle ointment that is applied when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather, the treatment of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what causes them, and depending on the limbs or parts of the body that are wounded, and how they are made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are by biting of stone, and size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or sickle, or similar things; or that are made according to the custom of the land, as for example a wound that bites on the neck, or on the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for a wound of the head and will begin with simple wounds, for the memory will come back to you in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a bone is fractured, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that there is no spitting of stones or other things, and the skin is thoroughly ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the wound itself: if you do it too soon after injury to the head, even if there is blood from the wound itself, or let the blood flow in the opposite direction to the part affected; and listen to the patient's complaints of swelling of the head and neck.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does not recover, if he is apathetic to meat and does not drink wine, does not eat cheese; and remove the wound, if there is spitting from the wound, cover with moist lint in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no spitting from the wound, if the wound is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, or anything else, I will tell you about that later; and if it has been moved, put on some external dressing, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a nail and some, and the layers do not gather together by tension, if you gather them together by stitches, as I shall say for wounds in the belly, of stitching
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed by bone, and is raw, and only held by a little flesh, if the bone is grasped; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hair firmly in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat plenty of solid food, such as meat and bread, and fish, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you find or split skin that does not touch the bone, if you grasp the wound tightly, and tear out the pus, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support cannot be staunched by medicines, if it is an artery, and if you find it dislocated, if you can join it with a thread; and if this does not help, if you cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a minor cure: then put on this powder which solidifies as soon as it has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them all together; and apply them to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, until it heals well and joins together all its blood; and then bind it well and leave it to dry, if it does not swell; for we do not burn medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we do this chalice solely, when we have neither incense nor blood of dragons, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has moved from its place, even if it is still in its position, if no other remedy has been applied; put on some oily unguents or poultices made of flour of barley boiled in water and honey, until it has sweated profusely; then apply other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If a fracture accompanies the wound and is small, if the edges are slightly chipped; I will tell you about this later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If the nerves are involved, if there is no other remedy than to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, because it hinders the nerves and causes them to retract; do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of blood is with the brain, which is the most important limb; but if the medicine is strong, like chalice wine diluted in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and poppy seeds washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this method, and oily unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, and the edges are bent inwards, then hold it together until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and filled with pus, if the artery is cut, and blood flows freely; if the bone is fractured, and the marrow and the cautery mingle, if the wisdom tooth is cut out, or the tonsils, and the tongue is held back, because the meat will go down, if the tonsil lies upon the jaw, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural position; then strain it immediately, and leave it untouched for some days, then cure the wound with oil until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if the fragments are numerous, do not take out what you cannot; and leave as much as the wound will bear, and be freed and aligned at the issue. And if the wound is fresh, if powder is put on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure must be made as I have said in the chapter.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of from a wound of a lance or a knife</start_of_turn
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound is open to the wind, do not allow the patient to move; for the wound is mortal. If the wound is not deep and is fresh throughout, do not put powder in it at the first hour, but leave it open, and cover the patient. But put an atractive dressing on it, and bind it twice. If there is no bleeding, put in the wound some cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four or more; if there is no spasm, do not move the patient unnecessarily or cause him any distress. When you see the bones in their place, if the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tension of the tendons and other cures, as long as it is sane; and if it cannot be cured, and if it persists, remove the diseased parts that there is fistula; if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut or knife, and is simple, or worse on the front or back, if the cure of that which is before; if it is large, suture; and if it is small, powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has broken pieces, if you want the wound to heal, and the edges to retract if they are loosened; and if they are not loosened, if you leave it to itself, if it aligns the extractions; and for other wounds, the judge will know as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Pain of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; of a great wound never the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intestines are introduced; and the suture is more painful, and never is worth as little as the small wound as the great, because it brings back the intestines more to the point than if they are not brought back bit by bit; for the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if they are brought back more to the point, and for this reason is better the smaller wound, for this reason we will recommend that the intestine be returned to its place as it was before the other two.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines is pushing forward, and if anything is grasped, it is to put it back in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, soak the area somewhat: moisten a sponge or apply a wet drape only, or you may bathe in boiling water squinting and spitting and spiking, and raise the intestines as long as they are swollen; and do not make this movement restrictive, and be quiet that you do not cause them to burst.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestines are moistened with water or are cooked and bad, because by this is the entrance to things made; and if it cannot enter, if make an opening the wound at the instrument to cope the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to make it quiet that the size, that we must not cut without great necessity, and this is the instrument for cutting: if it reaches the hipbone and comes out, get out of the way; and if this is done, make the shape.</start_of_turn
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude, if you stop the bleeding in accordance with its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if you order the patient to sit up and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and shoulders higher than the lower parts, and also if the umbilical cord is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand over that which is higher. And thus you must order that which I have said concerning great and small wounds.</start_of_turn>
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, put between your hands I minister soft which holds all the wound together; and gather the layers. This is the common way of stitching, and take a needle or more according to the quantity of the wound; and leave a space at the head of the wound I should say at a distance, and pierce the two holes of the leather with the two holes of the siphac, which is from the inside of the leather, as much as you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of the siphac together; then strain a double thread around the needle at two parts, and gather the two holes of the wound together again, and then leave a space, and pierce another needle; and bind the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not cease doing this until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles cop up all the flesh, and the too coarse if they do not penetrate well: for this reason they must be moderate; and do not force the needles too far from the flesh and leather, that they do not cop up and open the wound before the suture; and then gather the holes of the needles, that they do not bleed the patient at night, and put patches or bandages to the holes of the needles for the most part to keep them in place, and leave them as long as the wound is sutured; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for there is only one needle or two of the second kind that is common, and that you gather the two holes of the leather and the two holes of the siphac together with one needle or there is one strong thread in the middle. And when you have pierced these things together three times together, remember the needle at the part or where you began, in the manner that you cut the threads; and leave a space between each suture the thickness of a little finger. This stitch is useful for a wound that has a horn or belly, which was injured by a knife, and was more than a palm of great, and was from intestines well two palms of great, and was in the middle of the belly.</start_of_turn>
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will restore the intestines when they have been gone for twenty-four hours, and the wound has been closed for fifteen days; and the patient recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	Then the patient thought he was going to die, and that was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in Italy where there was no medicine, no ointments; and I only put a compress on the wound twice a day, and I poured honey over it until it healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pass it from the underside up to the point where the right corner meets the left; when it has grasped the right corner, if the needle goes too deep or is pulled too tight or if you have passed the needle, and you make it pierce from the other side of the underside up to the point; and you understand this stitching if you stitch just like a leatherworker and leave once the hair has passed over once, and take it back again from the other side, until the stitching is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galiens does with great care, if it is so, that it is done without any other, which assemble the two parts naturally, and apply one chief to the other chief, in this manner: pierce a needle or chief of the neighbouring bone, and pierce only that limb alone, and leave the two chief of the bone; then withdraw the needle, and pierce from the lower part until it reaches the centre, with two chief of the bone; then pierce each one from the lower part until it reaches the centre, with two other chief of the bone that are on the other side; and this is the perfect method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens does this by word alone, and no one testifies to it; we must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in the flesh; and we must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and it is said that when the gut has turned inwards, the stitching is more painful than other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is thus like the judge of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestines and the cost, then put on the dressing powder, and if it has moved, do not put on any covering except what is present, until the wound has healed; then tighten the thread, and join the edges, and the edges of the wound; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed. If you have no medicine, put on nothing but a piece of cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You need no other medicine in many situations where wounds are simple. If you doubt that the wound does not cause common suffering to the principal members, you must cover it with coarse linen soaked in warm oil of poppy or rose oil, and put it on the wound, and drain the abscesses. If there is pain or pus in the belly and this happens many times, if the clusters of black vomit appear, and even if the pus comes up to the intestines; pierce the abdomen and drain, and extract what is in the large intestines, for it is lighter to heal than the small intestines.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot recover when they are swollen, for this is due to the swelling of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and for the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the cartilage leaps from the wound, if you reset it backward just as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is yellowed and becomes black, if you know that you must ligate the black part, because there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the layers, and suspend the two heads of the shoulder from the part below the wound until the cartilage is extracted, and the wound is healed.
de la routure dou boueil	From the root of the bone.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore them in their places among the bones, because I have seen that one bone was swollen or pierced by a lance; and the wound was at the stomach and became filled and turned into an fistula, and in this it caused vomiting and diarrhea; I cured it as I could, and I did not cease to soften until it was healed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	When I see it soldered, I doubt that the patient has any harm in his belly; and there is no point of harm, but there is delay in many arrangements, meals and drinks; and they say that whenever there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated in parts: take tweezers and grasp the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have passed over the mouth, if you put two fingers over the mouth, if it stretches its mouth over; and then pull the tooth, and this is kept if it cannot be loosened, and put another tweezers afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully closed; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief tears in the intestine, and there is no other nuisance to the patient, and it can be ligated with a fine silk thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast, in parts: take the chief of this thread of intestine that is quite white, and then tie at the chief of this thread one thread of fine silk twisted, and pass the thread through the needle, and close the intestine, and retain it in its place; and this method of ligation with tweezers is not fierce except in the case of an old wound and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even if it is in one of the large intestines, if there is no danger or discomfort, except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	From fistula or whatever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds that open on any wound or abscess, when they burst, if called universally 'fistula', and even when they are shut and bound.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	When a wound bursts, if it is universally called 'fistula', and is shut and bound, even if shut and bound, it is as if a bird's quill has been broken; sometimes clear and low, sometimes thick and high; sometimes little, sometimes much; sometimes not at all, sometimes a little; and I have already spoken of this concerning the treatment of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no swelling, is due to one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or its hardness; or by its malice; or because there is a hard swelling within and on the lips, which does not allow new swelling to arise; or there is too much binding; or the flesh is relaxed, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in treating; or because corruption proceeds from pestilence; or because the property of the area is late in digestion and in healing, and flees by nature; or there is a vein or bone involved. And I have already mentioned these causes, their signs, and their treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you must know that I will tell you the cure of fistula which is made by the sweat of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Hairs that have become inflamed have occurred in all limbs with pain; for there are fistulas which arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the jaw, or intestines, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine, or at any joint of the hands or feet; and if they arise from the principal part of the limb, and there are similar symptoms.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All the fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is no fistula which does not reach its source except as I have said, you must give up hope of cure, and know that it will not go away; and if the fistula is straight, if you can reach the source with a needle or iron, and if the fistula is twisted, if you can make a small incision at the root of the twisting, because the tissue there becomes soft; and if the fistula is wide open and you do not know how to close it by stitching, if you can bind it up with one of the edges, because the moisture is short from one edge to the other, and it softens.  Then if you know truly the source of the fistula, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any other part which I have mentioned, if you must amputate the diseased limb according to what I have said, and remove the corrupt bones and tissues that are inside; and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply rooted in the right place, if you can amputate as I have said, then put in stitches of fine thread up to the root of the fistula, until the medicine has eaten away the superfluous matter which remains at the bottom; and then put on dressings that will absorb the discharge until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as I have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, if you must amputate.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or principal nerves are swollen or bruised, or if the bone is fractured, and there is corruption and blackness, if the latter extends as long as the corruption embraces the whole bone, then hold the limb steady until the corruption is gone; and if it is not gone, and the swelling persists as before, remove the nails that hold you back until you reach the marrow; uncover and twist as much as you can until the corruption is gone, then restore the limb; and if it is finally sane, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If that is not the case, remove the nails too deeply; do not attempt to do anything further; if there is no other remedy but to leave it to its natural course; and if there is a small bone that is corrupt, and you wish to remove it, grasp it with tenacles, if the instrument is appropriate for that; and if there is a large bone, grasp it firmly, do not leave a splinter; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no risk of danger or fear, combine and support and release the bones.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you do not remove them at an opportune hour, if you place something on the wound that decays, and leave it until the wound is swollen around the bones, then it will become easier to move the bones. And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, withdraw the swelling so much that the marrow is entirely exposed; then restore the wound. And if there is a great part of the bone that has decayed, and blood comes up to the bone; if you cover it with a bandage and cover everything up to the decay, and then treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There once was a young man about thirty years of age who had a pain in his leg due to something within the bone, until the matter came to the leg, and he fled from a large abscess that appeared without any cause; but he grew mad with fear of opening it. However, when they opened it, they found that there was a great deal of matter in the abscess that became a fistula, and there was a great discharge of blood and moisture from the bone; and they continued to treat it for two years, but there was no healing in the art of medicine, as I was told, until I left. And when I went back to see the limb and the medicines that were being used, I saw that what was causing the pain was the large abscess. The bone became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound a thread in one of these holes, and then circled around all the holes, and found that one followed the other from all parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I thereupon bound one of the holes and found a part of the bone; it was corrupted and putrefied, and the corruption spread to the marrow; I removed that which appeared to be corrupted bone, and I thought there was no further corruption, except for what I had seen; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not stop the bleeding; and then I began again, and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I soothed it, and then I stopped, and I mended the wound as well as I could. But as I bound round a palm of the bone, the marrow bled profusely, and I had to take away all but a little, and I restored it with medicines; and it healed and was bound up soundly, and there was no further risk of recurrence, except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear the pain, and for the fear of death which I had avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is blood evacuated with this, but the patient remained entirely well; and thereupon, in place of the bone, there sprouted a hard scale, and it was in a good state and caused neither hindrance nor discomfort in any way, neither to the spirit nor to the body.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no place of pain, if you wish to sew it in this manner: take I thread, and strain it at the head of the bone that breaks, and command no one to extend it upwards; and put I another thread of linen thicker than the first, and bind it above the scale which is now departing from the bone, and stretch the head, if you tear the corrupt scale away, and uncover the scale above the place where you see it is sewn, that the thread does not break the scale; and put I a sponge or a piece of lead below the bone to cover the corrupt scale; and sew as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and sew again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it reveals the marrow throughout; then put on a pair of gloves and with the forceps take out the corruption from one end to the other; and if the corruption is at the joint, if you break the corrupted joint, take out the bone which contains the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other opening than that of the cover; and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the heel, if it is strong in that thing, but whatever it is, you must inquire about that corruption, how it opened; and soften it in every way you can, but that the vein or nerve does not prevent you; and that the incision and the sutures cover these bones many times, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of pus, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to appear somewhat familiar with the work of this instrument; and that the work will show you the instrument which you must use, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases.
dou feu	according to what it is commanded, fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder may be dislocated by violence or by a sudden movement; and when you have treated that corrosion with medicines, it is of no use, if you do not cover that limb until the corrosion has ceased, for if the patient escapes by this means of death, or by the greater malice of the defect of the limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it had been burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness, for that corruption of the limb spreads throughout the limb and grasps all the bones; if you delay in covering it, and if that is caused by the percussion of venomous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and the like, if the corrosion is at the root of the tooth, if you do not stop it, it will not give the patient any rest until it reaches the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it reaches the hand, if the cope is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the forearm; and if it reaches the forearm, if the cope is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and all that is done when the corrosion comes or goes. If it comes in the first joint, if the cope afterwards comes in the second joint; and if it comes or goes, if the cope takes all the flesh; and if it comes up to the thigh, if the cope is at the knee; and if it comes from the knee, there is nothing else that can save the patient but to amputate the limb. And you must bind the limb above and below, and stretch one minister over the lower link and another minister over the upper link, and you must uncover the flesh between the two links for one palm's width, until the bone is exposed; then you must cope or amputate, and put a bandage on the part that is bare, so that the bandage does not touch the sound flesh, and cause the patient further damage and incision.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the limb too much, or if you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete. Then bind the limb securely with a strong ligature and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a case that happened to me: there was a black spot that seemed like fire on the bone, and that corrosion came first in the middle of the bone, until it consumed the whole bone; and when we saw the corrosion, if we covered the bone, it healed. But when the corrosion returned or came back to the hand, it happened again; I put on countermeasures after the softening of the abscess, but I could not stop the corrosion. Finally, I had to cut off the hand, and I did not dare hope to save the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off the hand, it would die, because the vital force of the body was weak. And he awoke and returned to his home, and when he covered his hand, it healed. And I have told you this case except for this one, in which we had to do something similar.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes an abscess in the limb that does not stay long; it makes great swelling. Then it breaks and bursts, and the swelling goes up like a vessel. The skin that is under is just as thin as a flag and does not reach the bone or the nerve, and such an ailment is called "sain," not "fistula"; but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone marrow, it is called "fistula." If the skin is split through to the very bottom, just as it is thin, like a flag, and is not corrupted.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you suspect that the skin is corrupted, but the swelling has not burst, and the skin is thick like hair, if the surgeon suspects a boil: look if the abscess is large and has a foul odor, then make a plaster of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take beeswax, oil, and alum, equally, and mix them with the plaster until it is as thick as honey. Then take some of this plaster as needed, mix with water and alum, strain the abscess; leave the plaster in place for two hours, then remove it cautiously. Repeat this several times until the abscess is completely drained, and the pain is gone. Never use plain water for the abscess, only mix it with vinegar or wine vinegar. When you have done this, and you suspect the abscess is healed, if there is pus left in the cavity, take powdered diaphnet and mix it with oil of rose and wine; or mix it with other medicines or unguents, of which I have spoken before. If the hole of the abscess is small, and the cannula will not pass through, make a small incision with a needle, and put in a sponge of Egyptian cotton or basilicon, until it is enlarged. If the wound is too wide, if the thumb and index finger are left too tight, or if the hole of the abscess is below the level of the wound, leave only a little skin around the opening of the abscess.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the arm is broken, if you do not leave space for the bone to mend, and if you do not cover its bones as you see, if it appears in such a manner that the bone goes down lower than it is, for when the arm is broken, if you do not leave space for the bone to mend and if you do not cover its bones as you see, if it appears in part: that the bone goes gently forward, and does not leave anything of the bone; and take consolidating medicines to put out the fracture, and lay upon a cloth that covers the whole fracture; then put forces in the place where the bone was most broken, for there are often soft substances upon the other cloth according to the quantity of the break, and put the bone back onto the fracture line up with the bone, and do not tighten the great cloth too much until after once; and that which is outside the fracture, often breaks to put the bone back in place, and its marrow comes out from the bone, if it is venomous or putrid or enough, or digested or indigested; take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine has partially healed and you see the nature that jumps upon the fracture, if the marrow has already escaped, and approach the health; and then take off the dressing in the morning, or the third day, and when you take off the dressing, if there is any change in the swelling.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the wound bleeds profusely afterwards every day, soak the wound that the blood does not flow excessively.</start_of_turn
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes in small doses after a long stay, if you do not arouse me from my sleep, for the sickness is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes in small doses after a long stay, if you do not arouse me from my sleep, for the sickness is approaching. For there are some who delay their meals in their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if they lie improperly in bed after eating, their wounds do not heal. And if they lie too long without air, and are swollen, if there is too much moisture in their medicine and little in their food, as is often the case, because there is a great part of vitriol in it; take diaphinit and make it with rose oil and vinegar of wine equal in quantity; then confirm and use. This will cause honey to swell, when diaphinit is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, broil them, and sprinkle on honey when it is taken off the fire; and then put on a bandage. Never administer an aristologist for a long time, or celestial roots, which is as if sometimes flour and sometimes hundredweight; and use simple or compound preparations: grind them and make powder, and sprinkle on honey as I have said.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the armpit.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of a pouch of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other two; and when it is inflamed, and care is not taken, if it comes to a boil, it swells and bursts as much as it swells the root of the abscess, and by chance it swells all the way; and comes the corruption right up to the bone, so that there is sharp pain, and the head of the abscess is large, and the color is dark brown.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have cured it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, if you must, you must perform all the superfluous things that are remaining from the abscess, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the abscess is healthy; and if the abscess presses on the sinew, and it starts to prick, and the flesh, if you must, put on the root of the abscess all that remains of the sinew that is not already blistered, and leave the rest exposed; then apply medicines that are warming and corrosive to the bone to remove all; then cure the wound until it is healed
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded, if it breaks, and if there is force, for as much as the corrupted bone is, it cannot be healed; and if you see the thumb corrupt, if it breaks from the base as it is said above, then cure it until it is healed. And if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it causes great pain, it is likely that it must be treated first; then break the bone at the point of the spur and keep the cut from going beyond the nail of the thumb, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, put something on it that will ease the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	If it happens, put something over which brings peace.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two thumbs that arise in the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some part where there is bone, and never is there a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, or their birth is in our nails from those two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He that is born without any new wound does not move; and he that is born at the joint of the wound, by chance does move; the size of him that is fleshed is slight, in part like this: size like the root of a large sponge.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even at their root. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.</start_of_turn>
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He that is born or must at the rear without a wound, if you must, cover first the round flesh until the bone, then cover the bone with a certain distance from this one, then heal until it is sound
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pain that comes from two together comes by birth, or from the coming of an injury, or from the application of fire, or from other things like these.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you must cover that wound, so that it must recover naturally; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in oil of rose, that they do not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft sponge, as long as it is soldered, if it is necessary
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When swelling comes to neither of his two hands with the palm, if the thumb is stiff like it ought to be.
des vils	des vils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large vessels enclosed with thick, melancholic fluid, which cause swelling in many limbs; more so in the legs of those who are prone to walking and working than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is appropriate to administer neither purge nor oil to the patient immediately, then the rest of the treatment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	There are two methods for treating inflammation: the first is to apply pressure with a bandage and extract the black blood; the other method is to tie the vein and force it outwards.</start_of_turn>
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first raise the affected limb high and warm for a moment, until the swelling subsides; then strain the limb of the patient from under the hip joint down to the knee; then cut the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size, and clamp and extract the black blood from the hand, from the tip to the wrist, as much as the patient can tolerate; and then tie off the vein and order him to eat nourishing foods that will restore the black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.</start_of_turn
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The ailment of the limb is as follows: open the limb of the patient, if there is hair, then pluck or burn it out; and raise the limb high until it turns red, and swell the veins. And if you have no bath, if the limb is burnt with fire, then cover the part of the limb from the elbow to the knee, or from the ankle to the heel; then draw the skin taut, and loosen the limb from the socket, as much as it will open when you feel it; and you will see it red and black, and when it comes out or the skin seems like a white thread. Then draw out the hair from the root, as much as it will come out, and then put it back in lightly, and do it again in another place; and so on until you have done it three times. Then draw out the hair once more, or several times if you must; and leave it, and draw out the hair from the root, and do it once more on the other side; and draw out another size, or several if you must; and leave it, and draw out the hair from the root, and do it once more; and so on until it comes out whole. And if you do not draw it out and lift it, if there is a splinter at the root, bind it and draw it out, and there will be blood at the root. Keep your hand over the wound until it has healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and taut and surrounded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, do not cover it; and draw it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron from which the eye is bound is curved, and do not pierce it, but only bind the vein; and it is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would pierce the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the shape.</start_of_turn>
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.</start_of_turn>
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is situated in the limb, in hot places or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it is born elsewhere than in the limb, and this comes from corruption that comes from the decaying of the skin, as it comes from inside the serpent's body and outwards, and is enclosed between the skin and flesh.</start_of_turn
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there is a sign of swelling at the commencement of this vein, that there is a great inflammation in the limb, then it is bound to swell, and the vein becomes taut as a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, if it is suspected that there is a clot within a space of one and a half inches from the nail, and the nail, and the surrounding area is left covered with a pad, each time that there is a point of pain, if the pad is removed from the nail and the nail, if it is too long, a portion should be cut off, and the remainder should be covered, without covering the root, until it is fully expelled; for if it is covered, it returns to the clot and causes embolism or necrosis or death. Therefore it is necessary to treat the vein promptly and continuously until it is healed and no trace of the clot remains. This vein has often been treated with five or ten fingers of lead, and in one instance, when it was treated with ten fingers of lead, one nail or perforation occurred, and the hole was made through to the end; and all the matter that was inside was evacuated, and healing medicines were administered without causing any further damage, and the wound was cured like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes out blood spurting; cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes out blood spurting; cure it as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," for it often causes the patient to spit blood, and is a small vein that arises between leather and flesh, and runs throughout the body, ascending and descending, and the patient feels it well in every limb as long as it breaks the skin or moves, and spurts blood; and is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as bile, worms, and blood clots or tumors. And it is doubted of its malice, for when it runs through the body and reaches the head, it sometimes returns and destroys the marrow; and this often occurs.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away until it has gone: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature well tightly; then press above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire above, until it dies; and the greater the mischief it makes, if it turns the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, strain from it the hair that grows, then press above, and pull down; and use the patient of diverse applications of resolving medicines for the bad humors carried, and feed him nourishing foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away until it has gone: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature well tightly; then press above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire above, until it dies; and the greater the mischief it makes, if it turns the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, strain from it the hair that grows, then press above, and pull down; and use the patient of diverse applications of resolving medicines for the bad humors carried, and feed him nourishing foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in several members, and as it moves from member to member; and I saw that which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I went to see a sick woman, and discovered her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the pit of her arm; and after a while, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, more swollen than anything, like living silver when it breaks from the bone; the pain left that limb and settled in the shoulder, and then after a while corrected throughout the limb, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it repeated itself every time she moved.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvel how it moves from limb to limb, because I have never known of such a disease like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I do not want to say that because of the pain of the limb that moves from one place to another, I do not want to move it; but I do not want to leave it like that either, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had dry bones and exposed veins, and because of that appeared that constraint; and I do not see it except for this reason in those who delight in food and have moist bones and veins filled with blood.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the cure for this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if the joint above and below is inflamed, then hold the limb firmly as that constraint hinders the movement; and cauterize the limb. If you do not see improvement in your eyes, if he heals the cause of the constraint, like foul pills or serpin pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	And when you see the cure for this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if the joint above and below is inflamed, then hold the limb firmly as that constraint hinders the movement; and cauterize the limb. If you do not see improvement in your eyes, if he heals the cause of the constraint, like foul pills or serpin pills, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	If the physician who dispenses these anti-inflammatory remedies, like foul pills and pilules of serapin, and similar things.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that some have large points, small, pointed, and flat; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and that which tears in no limb tears in two ways: either in the main limb like the skull, arm, liver, breast, loin, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the limb breaks, indeed, in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you later, will teach you: if you hesitate to extract this arrow, for death will follow in many ways; and when this sign is bad, do not hesitate, do not delay, for if you delay, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the limb breaks, indeed, in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you later, will teach you: if you hesitate to extract this arrow, for death will follow in many ways; and when this sign is bad, do not hesitate, do not delay, for if you delay, and cure the wound. And the sign of the brain when the arrow breaks the bone and tears the dura mater, which is above the brain, is when there is scooping, swelling, vomiting, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes without a nose or ears; and sometimes the speech and voice are lost; and a white moist discharge resembling pus, and also blood-stained discharge; and if this sign teaches you, do not delay treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not firmly embedded
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When a tooth aches or hurts, a sign that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, it does not move; and by chance the tooth moves as well as worms do, in dark blood, and comes with cold sweat and cold chills, and fainting: it is certain that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the scapula which never departs from the wound is that there is no swelling of the wound, the throat swells, the patient’s face turns pale, and he sighs loudly and stops eating.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the scapula breaks through the covering of the pit, if there are little bones there; there is great pain, great swelling and great pain, and he sighs; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the spleen or stomach bursts open by chance, nothing of the indigestible meat escapes from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the spleen or stomach bursts open by chance, and by leaping out of the intestines nothing escapes from the wound, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the spleen.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the spleen bursts open in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out in flow, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.</start_of_turn>
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	As for the other limb, if like the face and the throat and the chest and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine and the backbone and the thigh and the calf and the ankle, the limb mentioned above is subject to many conditions.</start_of_turn
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the splinter is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, because of this the patient makes another thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was once a pin that I pulled out of the root of a tooth: I grasped it, and it slipped from my hand the next moment, leaving the fat of the ear, and it was cured without any further treatment.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out a thorn from the fat of the oil from the marrow of the bone, and the thorn was replaced, and did not touch anything except the tip towards the ear; the thorn was as large as a Turkish bow, all in all quite painless; the game was cured, and there was no further mishap
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take out an arrow from the throat to a cresting, and the arrow was Arabian: I grasped the bristles, and pulled it out as long as I could, and the cresting was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And took out an arrow from the throat, which was hanging or swollen, and thought it would die; and when it had not passed for XXX days, and it did not mend; I cut on the arrow, and bound it, and pulled it out, without any mishap.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if the limb has an arrow stuck or lying inside, and the wound is deep; and left the arrow inside, and did not change its natural position, did not cause any discomfort in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And another man had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was closed; and he continued to suffer great pain; and others said something similar
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And carry out an arrow at home of the king, that was stuck in mud near the knee, and was a declining inclination to the right side; and the arrow was entirely recovered. I came to the cure afterwards that it was stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very inflamed
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I would try to stretch it out entirely, and I did not feel it; and there was no swelling or pain on the right ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on a wet compress that was astringent and digestive, so that the wound would not swell; and I saw the wound of the arrow come out
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the compress for many days, and I loosened the wound, and I kept the patient long tense, until he felt the arrow was gone from his knee; and he told me so
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put upon the wound the corrosive medicine by hand, while it was still raw, and held it, and felt the head of the arrow that had to depart from its place; then I closed the wound by that medicine, while the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly; and it healed well in the end of the second month, and then it grew so large that I could not keep my nails from being broken; and so I did not stop applying various methods of treatment, until I had made the nails well, as it is said at the end of this chapter, until I had finished with it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I restored it nevertheless, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or tell me of the quality of the extraction of arrows, if you place your cure upon that which I do not say, for the books do not teach me all; but you know masters better than me about many great things, and about that which is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, descending from the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not arise from limbs or that they are fictious for it is not in this way: either by looseness or that they enter; or by another way. And that which leaps forth by pain or enters, is an arrow transfixed in the flesh, and leaps never again now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not leap now, if you leave it until the flesh is carried around, and is gladden the issue; and even if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot slip, if you leave it in for some days, and it moves every day; and then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if you pierce around at all that is subtle, until the flesh is swollen, and then you draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the splinter is lodged in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and there are no other accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but leave it until it is even again afterwards for several days, for if the splinter comes as far as the surface of the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the splinter is only lodged in the bone alone and does not go as far as the surface, and remains in the patient for several days without any other mishap, if the cause of removal is not known.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is not firmly fixed and cannot be extracted, if it has been embedded too deeply, as I have said; then treat the limb until it is healed
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is embedded in the bone so that it cannot be seen, if you attempt to remove it with all your might; and if you see it, if you attempt to remove it without any appropriate instrument; and if you are unable because of the wound or the depth of the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the opening is large; then remove the splinter if you can, and if there is anything in the splinter that holds it in place, if there is bone that is attached to two parts of the muscle that you must break or split, and break or split the ears of the splinter as much as you can until you can remove it; and take great care that you do not break the splinter, that you remove it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not do it once, if the limb remains bent even after you have pulled, then draw it out once more, for extraction is joyful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If blood flow contradicts the wound, if necessary, do what has been said in this chapter concerning its treatment; and guard against cutting the nerve or vein, and put in place as you would move the arrow without risk of further damage, either towards the head or the heel; and keep the patient still in the position in which the arrow was embedded, because that is the greatest aid. If you are unable to do this, follow the signs that it shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if there is no wound, or the skin is swollen in that place if we see it or feel it: then stretch it out until the teeth can grasp, and then extract it: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, if you round your hand around it as much as it enters the bone, and dilate the bone, then extract it.</start_of_turn
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be grasped, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it comes out; if there is a lot of blood in the wound, if the bleeding continues, if the wound is deep, and you see that the arrow is bent, if it is grasped by the instrument, so that the tip of the arrow is between the teeth of the instrument; and then pull out the arrow, and if the arrow is grasped, if the instrument has a pointed handle entering the wound, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the bandage is surrounded, then you must grasp all the surrounding tissue or the venom is there; if so, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the bandage tears or breaks at the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and is close, and you must cover over it, if so; and hold the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shapes of the nails from which we treat the wounds are similar to the beak of an oyster, and thus is this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are various kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the wound
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the shoulder is like that of a bird’s wing, to push the point of the bandage forward, as it is like this.</start_of_turn
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	its shape like pliers to grasp and pull out if it is thus shaped.
des voinnes dou cors communes	it is common.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins that one must know are about sixteen in number: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called "herbaces"; and two arteries that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the armpits, which are called "aspires"; and a vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the back of the neck; and two tendons that are in the collarbone; and two veins that are in the cheeks, which are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.</start_of_turn
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins of the arm are four in number: one is the cephalic, and it runs on the inner side of the elbow; it is called the “chief vein.” The second is called the “fast,” and is made up of the cephalic and brachial veins; it is called the “brachial vein.” The third is either the right or left brachial, and it runs on the outer side of the elbow; it is called the “belly vein” and lies above the olecranon process.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The ulnar vein is between the radial and the ring finger; if there are two of them. In the leg and the foot there are three veins: one that runs along the inner side of the popliteal fossa, the second that runs along the outer side of the ankle; and the third that is called the “internal,” which is in the ankle on the outer side; there are three veins like these in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old catheter and to evacuate; and the quality of the physician, as I have said, is that he raises the head of the patient and rubs the arm or the veins are rough; then he tightens the patient's neck with a screw, while the two veins behind the ears depend on the head: when the thumb and index finger press on the side of the head, if there is swelling, then take the lancet and pierce the vein up to the bone, then keep the hand over the whole vein, and pull and stretch the skin and vein well together, and make the bleeding stop as much as you see; then strain and tie, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth an ancient emigration, soda, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears there are drops; and the quality of the physician is such as I have said: and that the patient strains his neck, as the two veins open widely; and he feels the pulse below his thumb, then he signs with his index finger; then he places his hand on the vein at the top of his thumb, and grasps the lancet below, and grasps the vein above, and the cope, as he has done in two other veins, and makes correction of the blood according to his need; then he releases the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts on a bandage; and then the swelling forms, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this in relation to its swelling and extraction, or its beginning in the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood of the front vein is worth as much as that of the cephalic vein for ancient fevers, for migraine, and for redness; and the quality is such that if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as the vein bursts, take the instrument which is called the "burr," which is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood of the front vein is worth as much as that of the cephalic vein for ancient fevers, for migraine, and for redness; and the quality is such that if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as the vein bursts, take the instrument which is called the "burr," which is like this. Place the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let blood issue according to the quantity you see; then deliver to the patient the neck, and tie the vein until it is whole and never let it be opened by a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Whatever, let the flames be too strong; and the same through, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are two fingers wide helps with the swelling, and with the tremor, and with the redness, and with the yellowness in the oil, and with ancient fevers; and the quality of their blood is such that if the patient strains his neck by twisting from any side, as before; then do the same, and either let the blood flow, for a long flame a wide flame, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make a drain of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind it up, and hold it firmly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	When the blood of the vein is dark brown, and has a strong smell, and is caused by diseases of the face, as with measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient stretches his neck, then strains his jaw to his left hand, and takes a long flame, and puts it on the liver between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily, and it is necessary to begin to correct it; do not go too quickly, but correct the blood according to your need, and leave it for one night, for it is usually restored by then; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two veins helps to loosen swelling, and to commence mixing, and to cure diseases, and to stop bleeding, and to dissolve tumors, and to remove herpes, and to stop stomach cramps; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient strains his neck from both sides, as we have said; and let the master be above the patient’s head, and the patient sit on one seat, then close the vein long enough, and take out the blood gently, or as much as is necessary; then do the same in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and remove any blood clots from the middle, so that the patient does not suffocate; and leave it like that until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the blood of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the limbs above helps to cause collection in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and ulcers of the tongue, and pain and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And when you are to take the blood of the liver, you must hold the patient’s head forward towards you, and restrain his collar as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at two veins, one on the right side of the liver and the other on the left side, and know them by their black colour, and that they have small black veins running into them: therefore close one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if you see the greatest of the two parts from the back, and also do the two veins which are under and above, for this is a mean way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And of the blood of the veins of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The blood of the veins of the tongue helps after the cephalic blood, and it is at the widening of the throat, and there are diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and holds the tongue, and looks under each rib towards the costal margin of a black vein: close both of them, and do not take too much at a time, for there are arteries there.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins which we commonly use are usually healthy in two ways: either by puncturing with a sharp flame which is large and fierce, or by using an olive-twig which is subtle as cuts to trenches; this is called an 'anesil'. They are large and subtle according to the size and distance of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame of the fire cautery is known to be mild and wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is a kind of surgeon who cuts open the large veins that are filled with obvious blood, which contain much blood and trouble; and this is the form of the olive-twig flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for safer veins, or where there is clear yellow blood.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basal vein, which is one of these veins, helps to cause diseases such as hoarseness, cough, pain in the throat, and swelling of the belly; and it is useful to know that it is accompanied by the artery that is beside it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If he grasps the flesh and blood flows, if it is to be held, as I have said; and do not be afraid of the flame, but cut as if with needles.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the vein does not open visibly, if you must extract it, and bind another; or you wish no blood to flow, or you leave the vein open at the arm: it will open visibly; and grasp the flame as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the blood vessel break, if you must therefore extract the limb, touch the part until you know its pulse; then sign the limb, and then bind the limb, grasp the vein with the flame; and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the limb swell, for that is the artery: stop immediately.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see blood spurting upwards like the urine of a child, and it is pale and transparent, know that it is without an artery: hasten then, put your hand over the wound, and press your hand firmly until the bleeding stops; for this often happens. If the bleeding persists, bind the limb and leave it still, do not move the patient; and be cautious, do not move until the bleeding has ceased.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If it is not stained, and it is painful, and the doctor is not present, if the artery bursts, because the head of the bone is pulled back; then hold it still without touching it.</start_of_turn>
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a bandage of physicicians, and make a loop, and take hold of one end and bind it well to the other; if it stops bleeding, that is enough; if not, if the wound persists, apply powders that stop bleeding; for the bleeding will not be greatly stained in many places by the little movement of the wound, and the power of the hand itself.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood clots at the root of the head and at the root of the limbs, because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the patient to be aware of the nerve which is at the root of the limbs, and if it is not too deeply damaged, and if he finds the nerve, he inflates it and the blood is either clotted, and by chance cannot be cured; and this nerve is often torn many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, it is necessary to take the blood from the anesthetic instrument and withdraw the nerve from its root.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it is too long.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein helps to treat blood clots at the root of the head and aids in the evacuation of the eyes; and it is necessary to cauterize with the olive or mirtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is prudent to ask for the least painful method, and do not grieve if it does not work the first time; we start again. And by chance, it swells up for some people, which we cannot do the first time, but it does not grieve us.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thinking.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healing is that if blood is drawn only for the purpose of preserving health and avoiding future illnesses; and let the blood be drawn from one of the three veins that are or should be: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the brachial; and it must be drawn at the commencement of prayer before meals, and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it must be drawn at the beginning or at the third hour, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The blood that is administered for illnesses has no fixed dose, but that whenever there is a need for blood or nourishment, in all hours and in all conditions; and it must not be drawn from children until they are twelve years old, nor from women for more than four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Must not be treated those who are older than sixty.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When anyone seems well, in whatever way, if it comes to guarding the intestines from a light distension, if there is much wind retained, so that the veins do not draw out the humors that are useful for the principal members; do not let him eat too much flesh or too many onions, neither too many fruits, as much as there is force in them; and if he becomes well again after a colic fit, vomiting and abdominal discomfort, and many times of belching, of going to the toilet, of sleeping and of lying down, and all that is good, or by some weapon or poison; then subtilize the humors, if they are not great, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you can; then put in or bathe, if nothing else hinders, to subtilize the blood, and keep him for a third from the vein of the wrist or the elbow, as we have said; and keep him engaged in work, in eating and in luxury, and in similar things; and bind and join, and make the patient sit higher than he was before, and wipe his arms twice or thrice, then pull out the thread from the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not be able to correct it without; then wipe the wound with the hands, until the veins swell up, and are felt; then moisten the patient with a little oil, then place his left hand over that vein below the wound, and keep it there until he seems well again, that the vein does not swell and become painful.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins which flee like strings to the healer, and if there are some which are filled with windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it shrinks from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is this; and if it opens the vein, it is the wound which is too wide, for because of this one must advise the healer in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein bursts the first time, it is good; if not, if it recurs again, do another scar there or in the neighborhood, if the wound is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the limb is swollen and the patient groans, and leaves one or two fingers unmoving, do not enter or bathe, but restart the bleeding when it stops; if it has bled too much, or without due care and you doubt that there will be enough blood left to do what you see, if you are confident in that bleeding alone, with the flame quite upright; and the work is finished, even if the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb inflamed, do not immediately renew the bleeding, and apply a pad of lint soaked in oil, for it softens the flesh of blood; and apply the oiled lint firmly to the wound to staunch the bleeding. This will cause a tingling and swelling of the limb when it is placed upon it; if it is too subtle, it will escape when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, even if it is not dangerous except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are hasty, and put a wet sponge on the wound and a little charcoal powder, and hold it for an hour; and believe that you will have done enough after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in the limb after a few days no black or green mark appears, do not worry; and if you see it, do not put anything else on it, such as aloe or mastic gum, mustard, or the like.</start_of_turn>
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times there is swelling and discharge at the root of the arm: put your hand there, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of your hand, that is an evil sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Listen well that you put nothing on it of what we have said, for by chance in court without an artery; but it makes it swell dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.</start_of_turn
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If it is black without, leave it black as long as it is red; if you see it large, leave it until it is slight; if it is too thick, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is advised for the one who is calm and strong, and has the mastery of bloodletting, to make the wound larger; let the flame be large; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and keep him safe and sound, and must keep him safe by cutting across, do not prick him. And this method of bleeding is useful for stopping excessive bleeding and preserving nerves, and is better than letting blood from a long distance rather than a large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one who has a cold complexion, it is advised to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is faint, give him blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, give him soft bread soaked in honey, or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pricks at the blood after the evacuation of blood, if it comes to light that he burps up bile, and a fragrant vapor, and uses other things as we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swelling up again, and gets better once, if it is swollen by a great amount of blood, he must rise up and rise up immediately, in proportion to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swelling up again after the first bleeding, and it has become stiff, if he rises up three hours after the first bleeding, or after the twelfth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If he sees his arm is better on the other side, if he must get better slowly over several days or weeks.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the belly which is already evacuated, and causes fever; if one can draw out a great quantity, and expand the opening as much as it bleeds; then that all the blood be evacuated, and put your hand over the pulse when it is well, that no more blood comes out in place of the vomit, and this often happens; and it is not good to draw out too much, for you may see the arm slip, and make the blood vomit again the second time, and the opening is closed, you must press firmly; if it is crooked, extend the arm as much as possible, for that would be bad; but leave it as it is until the second time; or you may touch the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the opening of the vein has bled out all the blood in the vein, and put some water over it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not bind it tightly, as long as the incision is calm.</start_of_turn>
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary is to draw out blood the second time, if the same is in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.</start_of_turn
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The arm vein is bloody at the root because it is made up of many small veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And if the patient’s hand is grasped in warm water, until the blood vessel is red; then it must be bound moderately, so that the wound opens well; and then draw it out without great width or length; or make a large opening, and bring the blood vessel close to the wrist joint, and if it cannot be removed, grasp the hand in warm water again and leave the blood in the wound until enough; and if it is in this state, do not again grasp the hand in warm water, for more is put into it than in this state; and the blood of this vein is more useful than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salivary vein of the right hand is useful for all the diseases of the liver. This method is: strain the hand and immerse it in warm water, until the vein escapes if it is seen; and if it does not escape, and if you pull it out, and if you press it in every way, do not grieve; and do not press too much, for the nerves are all loosened from their sheath, and then grasp the hand in warm water again, if it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and lint on the wound to stop bleeding, and then make a dressing.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have said concerning the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is worth for all the maladies which are caused by the poison of the body, as well as maladies of the marrow, retention of flowers, disease of the spleen, and of the ulcers and the ancient legs, and similar maladies.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its blood is that if the patient has suffered with acute pain, and has rubbed over the belly until it swells, and has lain upon the joint of the limb; and if the belly is at the ankle, and from above the limb come out drops of urine; the blood is like that of a large rain, or more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you see the limb pale under the foot, if you are aware of nerves that are swollen, and the limb travels as if grasping; and let the flame be extinguished.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be cured, if you reset the limb in water, and let the vein discharge well.</start_of_turn
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If the blood of the sophene must be drawn for the first time, if it is repeated a second time from below a little space, because the blood is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do take the sophene of the other limb equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth as much as the pain of the hip, when it is for blood that is clotted.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient is between the heel and the knee, it pulls downwards from the ankle three fingers breadth; for otherwise it will not open the vein. And if it does open, do everything in every way you can, and through and through; it is better to leave it closed than to rupture it, for its bleeding is copious, and it is more likely to heal at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find that it has burst, if some drop of blood escapes or two, and towards the lesser side, and take care of the nerves; and do as much for the blood as you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	of bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horns, or hair, or leather; and the application of the ventouse should be done in the following manner: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting alone.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this bloodletting which is done by cutting has two methods: or it is with great heat, or with heat; and the bloodletting which is done by cutting and by extracting blood is done in twelve wounds of the flesh, of which one is at the top of the head; and the other is at the base of the neck; and two others in the two costal cartilages of the neck; and the bloodletting from the chin; and the bloodletting from the two shoulders; and the bloodletting on the hips; and the bloodletting from the two arms; and the bloodletting from the two legs; and the bloodletting from the two ankles; and the bloodletting does not treat any blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not harm anyone, as we do when we do bloodletting; and it should only be administered, neither with great heat nor with cold, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as all the flesh is emptied.</start_of_turn>
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of disease commands it, or by custom, if the physician suspects a wound at the commencement of the month, or at its end, he must take his pulse and examine every tendon; for there are some who, when compelled to vomit, suffer great distress; and some who find swelling and redness in their face, in their head, and at the collarbone; and some who vomit blood in their mouth and have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and some who think they see blood and vomit and faint and die.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is covered in moisture like blood and sweat, we command them to be exposed for two hours after sunrise.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	When the physician has given the patient medicine, if it is of benefit for the headache … that comes from the vomiting, and it will not be of use before the evacuation of all the humors; and this vomiting is useful in place of cephalic blood, and is only of benefit to those who are pale in complexion or who have a cold sweat, because this causes them great discomfort; and for this reason it is not of use to them unless they have a cold disease.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And if anyone suspects that they are becoming unwell, it is better to put on the suction cup a little lower down due to the risk of complications.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wind coming from the head is in lieu of blood from the chief and bile, and for this reason it is worth at the expense of the stomach, and splitting of the channel of the windpipe, and all, and swelling; and it is necessary to push it out, because if it stays too firmly, it will obstruct the belly or the spleen or the liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind coming from the head is worth as much as the pains of the chief, and swelling and vomiting, and strangulation, and pain as the root of the teeth; and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand to put it there, that he does not compress the artery, and does not see blood flow outwards.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, and by corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by heat and swelling
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind from the armpits is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it pulls blood from these large veins; and command the patient not to fill them up too much, because they are liable to burst, and knows of thorns and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	If there is a wound on the buttocks, it causes swelling at the root of the bone, and diseases of bones and nerves, and it is necessary that the dressing be large and firm, and that it adhere well; for if it is too loose, it will break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The wounds of the legs swell widely, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of the rains, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and swell the flowers; and are in place of the two buttocks, and the two ankles, and all of them gradually consume the body after a long time, and cause vomiting in various positions
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the suction cup is as follows: if you apply it at first glance, and with steady pressure, and place it firmly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see blood tinged with flesh and the redness of blood; then rejoice, and remove the suction cup, and take care of the body, for there are many who have suffered from excessive tension and clear pores: if you only cut once, you will make large wounds and a deep wound; do so gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If it is not large, if you must cut once, do so cautiously at first to dilate the blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If it is very thick, if you must cut three times; and when our wings draw blood, even a little, if we only cut once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If our veins bleed excessively, if we rejoin them often; if their base is not firm, if we persevere too long, they will tear if the cause is not perceived immediately, and it will fall to those who have tough skin and hard bones, who have wide pores, that you must remove the stasis of the oily aperients and dissolvents: if it is in this case, violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of watermelon seed; and if it is in hay, fennel oil, or thyme, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the superfluous moisture is great and cold, take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of ivy, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If the skin is tender and there are wide pores, oil must not be put on, but it is allowed to wash after the evacuation of rosewater, or cold water, or black bile, or watermelon juice, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it easily rises, or of elderberry and sumac, and the like.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive discharges should rise from wine old, or from sea water, or from decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or from other similar things; and must not keep their ventouse before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and must not sleep after the venting, but must get up when it is time to vent and when it is vented.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And keep those who are cold shivering warm; if they do not, they are too cold and inflamed; if it is possible, let them take cold things, such as pomegranate seeds and radish and lettuce easily, and other things; and eat marrow, broth of barley, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, let them take honey syrup and scented wine middle, which is between old and new, and eat barley broth and fennel and small seeds and saffron; and when they have vented, they must drink more than eat; and it must be given to no one before or after the venting, in order to comfort the principal members; and be discreet about it, but do not let them drink anything else
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made to bleed are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and under the kidney, and upon the belly and the buttocks and the groin and the heel, for in these parts the member does not suffer from any wound save for the purpose of drawing blood from one member to another, as we do when we place them upon the nipples when they do not bleed; to overcome the viscosity which is in the member, as we do when we place the sponges upon the belly and the buttocks to lighten the member; and to stop the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, for it possesses by its attractive virtue the power to draw out the swelling or to discharge the stone from its place; and thus it makes elevation when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture, and these sponges are administered empty without any liquid, and never are they administered together with fluid, and never are they plain with cold water, as in the case of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the sponge with warm water or with water in which there are concomitant herbs that are suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the applied ventouse is like this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And he had two large and half palms of barley, or else a quarter of a league of mustard, as much as to push out an awl; and it may be of rind or wool in front so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb. And in the middle there is a thorn of barley or iron, to put a bandage on, and there are great and small ones according to the ailments and the degree of those who take them; for the blisters of the sick are other than mere bumps, and leaner than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must place this bandage on the limb: grasp the bandage firmly or with linen, and put it through the thorn which is already in the bandage, so that it is taut either at the front of the bandage or that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and two must be placed either on the wound that we have said or on the mark that we have indicated, so that when we see it, if it is going to vapor, we must remove the bandage; and grasp the linen as before, and do it again often, if you are able.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	When the ventouse is used in the treatment of pleurisy, which is acute, there is no swelling or perforation, and it is only administered when it is filled with air, and is placed only on the affected limb; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	They are not administered for anything but limbs where it is not possible to place a ventouse because of their small size, such as the liver and teeth, and similar things; and in wounds stripped of flesh, such as thighs or lips, and other similar things; and the quality of the patient is such that when we find that the veins that are in soft, clean blood do not swell with the puncture, if they are taken; and we put in a plug of soft water, until they are full, and do not have anything in their bellies; and then either drain the vein and the ventouse, or scrub the limb until it is red, and put on the veins; and when they are full, and swell, if it is possible to put on the ventouse, we put it on, for it is better afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this does not suffice, if you lift the limb easily, then with water warm, moist well, and then express; and if the limb remains too long in the water, if you draw more than a cloth of linen in cold water, put upon it, until the limb is extended; and if the limb is multiplied, put upon it ground vitriole, or lead, and similar things, until it is extended; or you take out half of the hairs from the root, and leave them until they burn out on the limb, if you have finished now; and if you must do more, take other hair.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the hairs do not come out easily, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you insert a needle into it until the hair comes out, and then put upon it, and as much as it feels blood, if it comes out; and when you see that it is biting, if you sprinkle upon it a little aloes and bruised sage, or charcoal, if it will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Ci comence li livre des brisures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear me, dear son, for in this book you will find nothing that former authors have ever written, neither in books nor letters; for this reason this science is strange in our land, for I have never learned of it from any other source. I know of it only through the ancient books, or through study and experience, or through the habit of my life; and I have described it in this chapter and summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments which are necessary, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book are the sum of words and the chapters or the learned man puts his understanding into them, and remains on the truth, so that those who are proved learn and learn this noble art, and learn from others.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that whenever there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, if you suspect that the patient is in need of healing on one side or the other, without any other cause, if there is weakness of the limb, or swelling, or old age; or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and if there is too much fat, such as cold baths, and oil of almonds and chamomile, and do not drink wine, do not eat greasy foods, and do not fill the belly too much with meat, until you are certain that the wound has healed, neither by excessive expansion of the matter in the limb.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, if you command that the patient be given no meat which makes great swelling, or which has viscosity, if it be like wheat flour in water, and rye, and testicles, and meat, and fat, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For in part of its nourishment, it returns muscle and more quickly breaks the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken by fractures and decrepitude cannot well reunite or knit according to their nature because of the drying of the limbs; for the same reason as those which are too tender, as bones of small children; but there is no remedy, remain above the fractured bone the great tensions which appeared and join the limb together, until it reinforces as it was before; and do not move from it, for because of this it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as the size of a pen to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And when there is some other method, it has its engine and its own instrument in restoring, according to what is remembered to come in its place; and it is known that the fracture of the bone is recognized by that which makes it twist, and opens well by pulling, and by pressing of the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can well have twisting, or tear, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not possible to move the limb only by hand, but medicine is added afterward, then hold it firmly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And the nails which break that go into the marrow, and are two parts of the joint, it is now necessary to put them in order equally, as well as after incisions; and if after incisions the nails grow too long, if you leave them whole until the incisions are healed; then put them in order with the bone as lightly and cautiously as possible, and the nails which restore the limb are lighter than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain them, as is done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is the hand or the foot, or at the wrist if it is a small limb, or two strings, or one string and the hand; and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the limb that are broken are unbent, if you remember by all means the adjuncts to the bone that you must put, and keep that in your work does not cause any lesion or pain to the patient; and adjust the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if he seems that it is not well: if the wound closes well, and does not tighten too much, do not press as do some who make it come about by their work at the incision and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the limb is fixed in place, if the patient is well advised not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither by day nor night; and take care that the limb is so firmly secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, if it is not at the point, and you can put it into use without pain; keep it straight, do not allow any twisting until it is restored; and the degree of recovery of the limb is as I have said.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The breaks of the limb are various in small and great size and shape.</start_of_turn
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and thighs and the like: if you can cover them with soft and subtle cloths; and those that are large, such as bones and legs: if you can cover them with a wide and strong cloth, because the large cloth embraces the whole great limb and tightens it equally from all sides, so that there is no tension; then put on firm pressure, three turns or four according to the limb, and tighten your hand one palm at the end of the break, then take away a palm from the break; and soften the cloth somewhat, as much as you can take hold of a great part of the limb, then take hold of another cloth and tighten the knot without slipping from the break; then put back to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, not too strong not too weak, as we said at the beginning of this chapter; then put between the cloths some bands of linen or cloths, until they are even, and then tie everything up with a bow, and then put your pins well made on, if there is no abscess or swelling.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, if you put something soothing on the abscess, and which hardens the swelling, and leave it until it has gone down; then strain upon your eyes, and let them be half of a large cane resting steadily, or of a staff from which nails are made, or of reeds of palm, and let them be in this fashion.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the stick which one puts on the fracture be larger and wider than the others; and be as long as it is necessary for the limb of little or great size; then strain upon the eyes just as you did at the first hour, and then bind under a thread of linen without fail, as it was at the first hour on the fracture; the tighter it is, the less; and let the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen. For if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their beds with linen thread and make a great mistake, because the thread will not be even if it is too subtle, and will not hold well.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is nauseated by the blows of the stones after the stretching of the limbs, put some sponges of linen or coarse cloth on them so that they do not bruise.</start_of_turn>
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When there is a wound with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will speak of the treatment of that later.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	The wounds that he cannot bear to endure from these stars shall break all the limbs at the first moment.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when a limb is large, it is not suitable to insert needles until after five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the wound; and when this is done, the method of ancient emblizings should be used to restore a fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take some flour that adheres to the walls of a mill, mix it with eggs, and make this concoction, not too thick nor too thin, and use it. This is the common method of emblizement that restores a fracture in many situations, and even among women and young children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley and linseed and ivy and asafoetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of X; myrrh and aloes, in the amount of V; chamomile, in the amount of VII; and mix them together. If the patient’s complexion is hot, use this dressing, because it is of good composition and restores the fractured bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.</start_of_turn>
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of emblizement that is good for torsion: take mugwort and vismut, in an X ratio; myrrh and aloes, in a VII ratio; acacia, in a VI ratio; archangels’ balsam, in an X ratio, and grind them well, mix with water or eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of supporting joints and bones are to relieve pain, reduce swelling of the bone, and break up the stiffness: take new linen, moisten it in oil and put it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plaster casts do not restore me, but they are good to soothe post-cautery pain, and bones properly the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other method of reduction that restores fractured bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pell leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods of support are to restore the fracture of the bone and to diminish the remaining swelling
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take roots of meadowsweet, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, fennel seed, one part of chamomile; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, soak with vinegar of coriander or water, and use it
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when the abscess bursts and restoration of the limb is required.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of meadowsweet, and poppy seed, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, and violet flowers and camomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that he puts nothing on the broken limb except a little wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between two things neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen commands that we put something dry on the broken limb to restore it, such as mirre and aloes and incense and the like.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of dressing that is good for wound and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or willow buds, and mustard, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen a little after, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone of its limb moved; if not loosen by hand for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you are hasty, and loosen it, and stabilize the displacement now; and put on a light bandage, and a wet sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and lift the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased; then leave the limb rest for an hour, and put on dry lint, moisten in water or oil rose, and bind up with a nut, until you are sure that the abscess has gone; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be sure to stabilize the pain, then repeat the binding and a little displacement, and do not strain it so much as before; and be discreet until it is healed
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around a bone, and if the limb returns to its original position as before, you must immediately immobilize and support it, just as you did the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, if you must force it, do so only after three days or four, or five or seven; and in no case leave it for twenty days, as we have seen, until the bruise has disappeared, and the swelling has subsided; for in that case the restraint must be greater than before, and the limb must be padded, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than usual, the swelling will not go down; then you must apply warm water to the limb every time you move it, for every third hour, and cut a piece of licorice; by this means the swelling will be removed from the limb, and the pain will subside, just as we have experienced.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaks.</start_of_turn>
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures are made, of various figures, and the causes are diverse; for there are fractures which are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is fractured throughout to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as if made by a hatchet or fist; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a fracture of the hatchet.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For when the spear pierces the bone from below in a piercing fashion, and is called this kind of fracture an "absolute fracture"; and is the wound of these major or minor fractures.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fracture or break of bone, or fracture of bone on bone, or swelling on bone, or other similar things.</start_of_turn
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the joint which is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is closed in the bone as thinly as a cobweb, and the wound is small, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a fracture of the cobweb; and if the wound is made or by a wound of stone, or by thorn, or by anything similar, and makes enter the piece of bone below, and the limb is limp as when making broth when they boil over the cauldron; if between the bone inwards.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this often happens under those who have or suffer from moist bones, as in children; and in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are loosened as with stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all these breaks due to the detachment above them, and the inquiry of wounds, and the corrupt flesh which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The blood vessel is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and has wiped around it, if the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's well-being, and if you see no other mishap, such as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes becoming yellow and flushed, and other similar things, if it does not recover without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an impending accident, and you hope for health, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when it comes to the swelling which appears first, and which is in the armpit, if you can remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the muscle which you must remove
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this state, if you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day from the bone which must be removed, then the tissue of the bone will be corrupted, and there will come the accident which we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the skin that covers the brain, if you do not make an incision in the split part: and that is that you take the head of the sufferer and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more than you can; and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or from incisions, if it is of use, and that you fill the cavity with soaked cloths in oil rose; and rest the wound until the incisions have subsided, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then as the bone is turned to heal, and this is done in two ways: one way if the edge of the fracture is narrow in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another incision more extensive than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And thus if you have a variety of different sized wounds, some wide and some narrow, and some pointed and some blunt, and on a lighter wound, do not cauterize the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through, do not make the wound deeper than necessary; and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have several of these, so that if there is bone left in the wound of the thickness of the bone, if you have several punctures you will remove all of the bone.  This is the form of two of these punctures:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through bone is that you put on one tarer over the bone, and turn your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then you remove the tarer from another place a little later, and do the same thing all around, and cut out the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do it more skillfully than you could, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought out the bone from your hand, or from any instrument which you have like nails, pincers; and keep your fingers away from the brain and the jaw.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	When the bone is pierced and treated, if it is possible, reset the loosened ligament that has come loose from the bone to some other instrument resembling a chisel, but make it more firm and flexible than the other chisel; and if nothing remains of the small bones, do not remove any scales, if the bones are slightly fractured with the instruments; then close the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that of the Galenicians, which is more useful; and the load is very strong, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either that which is fractured or broken open, so that when you have uncovered that part, put back the tip of this lenticular incisor, for this is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not penetrate too deeply from one side, for the part that is towards the two costae if the puncture is towards the bone; then place a little mallet above, so that you compress the bone slightly, and take care of the cloth that is underneath; if it is against the bone, if the bone is slightly fractured, for it is well enough in its place, without excessive force or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if a bone breaks through the skin does not pierce completely, and is only slightly fractured by its underside, there are small pieces; if you can rejoin the fracture, and remove the splinters with a blunt scraper, which you must have in various quantities, to mend each limb as well as possible, according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there is before great pain, and afterwards more subtle, and does not cease to do this until it is well.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In some other size of capillary and fracture, it is necessary to provide the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not properly learned by anyone who has put his study into this art.</start_of_turn>
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is discovered, take a drape of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in oil of roses; then place it on the wound. Take another drape of linen doubled in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses, and place it on the first drape. Do this more gently than you can, so as not to damage the wound. Administer further linen and do not restrain it more than is necessary to hold the wound in place; leave it in place for one or two days until the swelling subsides. Then remove it, and administer medicines such as root of hemlock, alum, and incense, and an herbalist. From these things make powder and apply it to the wound, and administer additional medicines without biting. Keep the wound clean and do not allow it to become swollen, for when it swells on the brain, it causes great harm. For when anything biting is placed on the wound, if it does not fester from beneath.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Beware then, if no evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, if there be doubt, sense be doubted.</start_of_turn>
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If darkness does not depart by the medicine which we have placed on it, and if it persists, if you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drapel, and apply it on the surface; then it shall be cured in the same manner as before, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Then comes the treatment of the ways to cure it, as long as it is healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, if you must drink a little wine or broth without fail, and put the broken bone back into its natural position, and support it firmly, until it returns to its normal shape; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the limb, and cannot come from the bone itself, then you must know that you must place the limb equal to the head of a radish.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, if you must do it again, and hurry to restore the first part if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bathe the head of the bone with cloths of linen, if the break is in a limb
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind the other part once more, if the fracture is there; and let the bands be so strong that they fill the wound at the fracture.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should moisten the tents in the burn, and die each one for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think it is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in preparation of an egg and wheat flour powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never do we see a hen's eggshell in place of the tentation, and if there is indeed a feather hanging, hold the brimstick, and blow the patient among them; or do as you see fit.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out while you are working, if you put some lint or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some of this vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if after blistering the nails do not come out, if you put on plaster of defeat, of hemp flour, and powdered incense, confirmed with an egg yolk, and put on soft cotton wool, do not bind tightly; and if the fracture is small and is broken into small pieces, if the extractor has suitable instruments for this, then close the wound and cure with soothing herbs, and sow, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound in the nail itself, cure the tents and put on linen patches until it is healed
de la routure de la mandibule	De la routure de la mandibule.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not broken through, except for a tooth socket, if it is known gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is recommended, if the break is in the outer part, to bite your thumb of the affected side in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, if you take your thumb of the right hand, and touch the break gently, and hold it with the other hand by force, and keep it even
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced, that is to say, if it is shifted, if you must administer an extension of the thumb by parts, as much as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth comes about, or loosening, if they are strained by a golden or silver or silken thread, then put on a broken mandible cerate and put on a pair of double drapes; and put on a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it on to the tooth that you wish, and command the patient to rest, and eat lean meat.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, if the tooth comes loose at the root, and then return to its place; and put on a dressing of powder with egg or oatmeal, after you have oiled the cerate; and put on a linen dressing, and if the dressing comes away, and the patient’s position does not change, leave it as it is until it heals; many times it heals in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus comes from an abscess, if it threatens what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair that neither piece of the bone is broken; if subtle from the bone has covers sufficient to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, if the edge has flared out as you deem necessary.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have united all these pieces, and there is no longer any displacement, if the wound is wide, cover it with suitable bandages to prevent suppuration, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
de la forcele	forcefully.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceful fracture occurs many times beforehand, in the shoulder, and if it is broken and dislodged in two pieces, there are fragments; and the most easy to restore. Or if there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the fracture is when the wound is toward the side, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the forceful fracture; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the fracture back in its place, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to stretch further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of lead, or linen, and be thick as you need; and extend and hold the fracture, and strain the lead with your hand, so that you put the fracture back in its place, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to handle the head of the humerus away from its socket, because it has slipped downwards, know that the patient lies supine on his belly, and put a cushion under the shoulder, namely the middle ear, and support the shoulder blade until the bone of the humerus is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture towards your side, and if you find debris, know that you must cut there; and remove the fragments gently, and if the bones cannot join together by any means, if the pulp has gone into one of the incisors that you have; but that you put a cushion under the humerus, for fear of infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it appears like a spoon, and is not at all crooked, and be as wide as it ought to be, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and have two holes, as you see, and one be large, and the other is small, as is the curvature of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of the apposition, if the wound is great, or if you doubt the apposition, if you employ the wound with bandages and stitches, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the wound edges tear, if moisture comes, if there is oil, rose oil, and vinegar, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stripping of the bone, when it is sensible to wounds and to the saw, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and egg-white, and put on light stockings, and put a pin from below the shoulder; then take a great bandage of a palm of a hand wide, then put on two layers of gauze on the stockings, and plaster; then take a splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains in place; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the collar, and take away the pin from below the shoulder, and the painful shoulder; and keep the chest part resting, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in place, and you see clearly that the splint does not move from the fractured bone, if the patient has regained some sensation, and if the patient cries out, if the restraint is necessary; and make the patient rest on his back, and put under him a small cushion below the shoulder, to raise the arm up; if you align the fracture with the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it unless there is a bad accident that does not come, until about twenty days; then repeat the plastering, if you see that there is need for it, and tighten and leave it in place, until it is restored; and it is restored in about eight days, and in less time for most people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than any man.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder blade is broken or dislocated, do not pull it out with force; if the limb appears according to the break figure, and is restored to its natural form in all ways that you can; then put out the limb powder from the mill with abundance of eggshell, and bandage firmly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and subtle splint, wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is not firmly fixed in any part of the shoulder, use the bundle of flaxseed, so that the splint rests evenly; and then strain it with great tension, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the mark of every joint; and every time it slackens, if you strain, and put back the splint if it has come out of its place, and leave the patient lying down; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if it comes loose, and so be cured, for it is not a bone that is easily broken.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks forward, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone firm and make what we have said in the loosening of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of bone sticks forward, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone firm and make what we have said in the loosening of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks at the outset; but it often breaks upon exertion.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, if it inclines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and fault of moisture, and sweat, and by chance vomiting blood, and opens the jaws in the broken bone, and they feel well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient lies prone upon his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the joints of the two ribs in your hands, and subtly force them even in all positions that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should; then place on dressings and stamp upon the external heel of the bandage with fine salt, or some softer substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind firmly over the fracture, if it does not move; and turn the limb slowly backward, and strain gently, and reward after an hour the limb, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you hurry, and it slips, remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	And if the patient lies prone upon his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the joints of the two ribs in your hands, and subtly force them even in all positions that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should; then place on dressings and stamp upon the external heel of the bandage with fine salt, or some softer substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind firmly over the fracture, if it does not move; and turn the limb slowly backward, and strain gently, and reward after an hour the limb, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you hurry, and it slips, remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed. And in the case of a broken rib.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Its fractures of the ribs only happen at the large angles behind the back and at the head downwards; and they do not happen for anything else except that they are glassy. And one knows well at the inquiry as two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is when you put the break back in its place, as it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the dressing, and bind it with a bandage, if you have need of it
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the fracture of the ribs has descended inwards, if the patient experiences great pain, pointing, as if of pleura, for the bone is pressing on the gut; there is vomiting and evacuation of large amounts of blood, which is a serious illness, and the former has put on great effort.</start_of_turn>
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If any of those things mentioned above are done, it is necessary to administer food that causes the belly to swell, in order to push out the fracture.</start_of_turn>
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for the wounds that remain closed do not heal if they are not opened.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they are opened, if necessary.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one puts sponges on the limb to soak up the pus, because this is almost a reason; however, there is doubt that the sponge will not pull out the pus from the limb because of the weakness of the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth soaked in oil, and put on sponges between the ribs to make the yolk equal all around; then either cure with pleurisin dressing, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the thumb, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is possible to suture above the fractured bone, and to put in place a dressing for the support; then it must be fractured again, and treated gently, and then the two edges of the wound must be stitched together, if they are large, and it must be cured with dressing, until it is healed
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If pus comes from an abscess, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and treat until the limb stops protruding from the abscess, and do not leave it uncovered even if necessary, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the heel, and there is doubt to the patient, if it is necessary to cut above the broken bone, and to put in a dressing; then one must pierce the bone lightly, and draw out the marrow gently, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges. And if an abscess comes up, if put on wet cloths soaked in rose oil on the wound and leave it on; and cure while the bone is being healed, as long as it is necessary. For in the bursting of the heel bone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a bursting of the bone of the heel, and often there is pain; and the same with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to no avail, and you see that it will be healed or not, take care if you see its hands softened and limp and dead, and that they cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel it.</start_of_turn>
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wounds that are mortal in many situations, and if you move them and feel well when you strain and prick them, the wound is saved, and the patient is cured, if you apply the remedy.</start_of_turn
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if anything similar comes to the spine, if you see that there is blood or not, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and that the accident that is in the hands or on the back is evacuated with violence and without fear; and when it has been softened on the belly, evacuate with violence and without fear.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When it is softened on the back and it is seen to swell, it cannot be stopped.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	A wound that is mortal: if it is not treated diligently in its cure
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, if the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if there is an abscess above, put upon the spine oil of roses or oil of nutmeg of an egg, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if a bone is fractured, if you must cover over the wound; and fix the bone, then join together the two parts of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and bandage it, then cure it with ointment until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "break of the jaw", if you have your left thumb in your pouch, and put it equal to the other hand in front, then put on the dressing and the bandage, if you need them; then strain it, and if there are fractured bones, if you leave it on, and fix them, cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the thigh bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if there is no immediate sign of concern at the head [of the bone]; and if it lasts long, and worsens at the root, and brings pain to the patient, swelling and breaking that which is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you place your hand on the [fractured] bone, as long as you are over the fracture; and stretch out what is fractured and the shape of the limb; and if the fracture is only at the head, put it in its natural position, until it is back to its normal shape.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it declines at the root, make the patient rest on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have set the hair even, if you place it on the shoulder joint, then place on a bolster of staff or crook, and hold the limb steady, so that it does not move; and keep the limb still until the hair has grown even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling has subsided; and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and strain it as it should be strained, if there is no other mishap; and that is the way to do it
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the humerus. If it is dislocated, it must be restored in one of two ways: one of which is to take a fistful of moist earth and restore it in this fashion:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And so take two fingers and bind them together, and lift the patient up on his seat; then place the arm broken over the fist, as far as the elbow, and have the fist bent with a curve, then place something heavy on it or the attendant will extend it forward; then put the hand in its place as it was before, until the dislocation returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his hip, and bind the arm to his collar, and command the attendants to hold what is on the dislocation at his hands, and the others to hold below all the bones, and extend the shoulders outwards.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, if you strain them the bristles of the brush, on the brush, and extend skewers of the attendants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the brush is close to the head of the shoulder, you must put one hand in the middle of the armpit and the other towards the elbow, of the armpit; and if the brush is towards the elbow, you must put one hand lightly, with force, as long as the brush is equal on both the shoulder and the elbow; then put the brush equally, if possible, and strain, if the clothes do not come away
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If the afterbirth comes, if it does not strain immediately, place upon it a thick cloth soaked in oil of roses until the afterbirth is calmed; then strain, and keep the method of straining as if you placed the bandage over the bristle. Then assemble the limb on the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put on the drape and strain on the shoulder and the limb, so that the limb is steady, without anything hindering it, or without displacing the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, if you use splints, and place on the bristle a splint wider and stronger than the others, and put between the thumbs two spaces as wide as the bristle; then strain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, stronger and less likely to damage.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if thou seest the swelling of the limb, and the stiffness, as we have said, in the evening that thou restore the limb broken, and thou doubt the incision above the heel, if thou leave it until the seventh day, as we have said; then behold for three days and look whether it doth swell or cause pain in the limb, or that there is no restoration of the limb by that means.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the shoulder joint is dislocated by moisture, and is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such thing happens, if not for three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach; and put the limb in a cushion filled with wool equally, and behold for an hour or two whether the limb is stiff or the ligaments are softened; if the dislocation has been corrected by the power of medicine, and has been done as we have before mentioned, in part as before; and when it begins to recover, if it be great
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and limb must be taken back in forty days at all; and then one must loosen them and administer baths and ointments for the limb to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the dislocation is severe and bloody, it must be loosened after twenty-five days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	... and if the dislocation is stiff and full of blood clots, one must wait to loosen for one or two months.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of twelve bones, which are called the "femora", of which one is small and is like a nail that supports the pouch; and the other is large and is like a socket, over the small bone. By chance, the large bone only breaks sometimes, or the small, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are fractured, restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the great bones are fractured, the healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are fractured whole
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the little bone is fractured, it is enough to extend it slightly and put it back in place
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the great bone is fractured, if the grasp must be stronger; then extend over one cushion, and keep the wrist of the hand higher than the other, and the little finger must be lower than the others, and let the patient lie across on himself with one cushion under his cheek, and another cushion in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not feel any pain; then extend the limb from the armpit to the hand, or to the elbow, and another limb at the other side below
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he sets the eye equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, if you put some of them back into their place, and if there is none left to grasp or touch, and you are unable to restore it to its place, if you leave it as it is and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it breaks into pieces, as I have mentioned in the previous chapter; take hold of the cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	Then at the beginning of the restoration, blood clots often ooze out; if they are too thick, they will stick to the dressing and will not be easily drawn out; if they are too soft, they will not be able to hold the wound closed. So I cover them with a thin layer of oil of roses and white wax, which will neither be too tough nor too soft; and I cover them from above with a subtle layer, until the blood clots have subsided.</start_of_turn>
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then he puts on the cerote, and places a dressing of powdered flour with eggs, because he puts in the stitches. Let the securing suture of the greater strength be at the top and of greater width than the others; and the ligature should have six stitches or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and is more strained on the fracture than elsewhere, and the pain is less severe as the days go by, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cover over the fracture be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor too soft; and let the thread that is being strained be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and the limb again afterwards for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any other misfortune comes to the limb, as if there is swelling in the limb, then you must raise the limb high with warm water until the swelling has gone down; and leave the limb still until it is relaxed.</start_of_turn>
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then commence the treatment again, and if the flesh and bone are softened and the limb is straightened, and anything similar, if the danger is gone.</start_of_turn
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If it is observed that the swelling will not subside from the limb, because it is too severe, then you must soften it indeed; and leave it alone for some days, until the swelling subsides, and then stretch it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things which we have said will come to the patient, do not keep it [treatment] for more than 20 days.</start_of_turn
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or otherwise, then he must keep his hands on his collar, and his collar even, and be careful of movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back; and drink such things as will restore the bruise in 30 days or 50, and sometimes in 20 days, according to the composition and complexion of the virtues.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The bones at the back of the hand, and there are two of them, often break; and it does not come out but pours blood many times.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand is fractured or bleeding, if it is suspected that the bones have shifted, and if the patient is sitting crookedly in front of him, then put his hand on the extended cloth and extend the physician’s fingers. Break the fractured bones, and put them in their place; and put on the dressing and the bandage, if there is no further bleeding. Then put on a splint as appropriate; and if necessary cover it with a bandage.</start_of_turn
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the elbow joint towards the belly of the limb, then make a tourniquet of cloth, and command the patient to tighten it at his fractured limb; and then strain from a long bandage, and the splint should be as wide as the limb, and tighten, as it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the shoulder, if you command that you place a splint on, and another below in the root, so that the hand is overspread and straight, then you must bind it tightly around the hand, and keep it bound between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break does not come from either side, if it is at the pouch, if you put it even, as it should be; and strain it with the root, and if you see that it does not move when you put on a right-angle splint, and it remains still; and if the break is elsewhere, as in the index or any other, if you put it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding the wrist, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the burn, and heal that which comes.
de la cuixe brisie	and if the break does not come from either side, if it is at the pouch, if you put it even, as it should be; and strain it with the root, and if you see that it does not move when you put on a right-angle splint, and it remains still; and if the break is elsewhere, as in the index or any other, if you put it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding the wrist, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the burn, and heal that which comes of the bruise.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when it bends forward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound with a loop above the fracture and another below.</p>
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs symmetrically; and it is when the fracture is fixed in the bone.</p
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, if one of the ligaments running along the outer side of the thigh is torn, and the other ligament running along the inner side of the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee, and in this case either the ligament from the knee or the posterior ligament; then put the thumbs of both hands at the bone in its natural position, and then apply the dressing and bandage, without causing further pain.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess above, if you leave it calm and then return to your work and your treatment, the binding is done in haste.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and to remove the surplus; then flex the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and pass a thread along the thigh from the knee downwards, passing the loop between the thigh and the limb from under the knee, and bring the loop over the thigh and the fracture; then put the pins on the limb and on the thigh, and put the fracture in its place with the stars; then put a stay between the thigh and the limb of strips of cloth to make it equal in tension, and begin to tie three or four knots on the fracture; and the more you go up the fracture, and the less you tighten; then take out two threads that you had passed between the thigh and the limb, and tie three stars below, and bring back to the level of the thread at the top, until you see below the bone; and the tension, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any further pain.</start_of_turn
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is an abscess above, if it comes loose, and if you address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them; and if that is not possible, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain; and to treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the bone broken in this case when one puts in stars, as in the arm and the shoulder; nevertheless, in the restoration that is made, it does not please me the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the stitches that the bone is restored in, in a day or less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the rue de Genouil</start_of_turn>
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hairs that grow in the groin often break, but they fall out many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If they break, if not a mere tear, or an opening, there is pain at all wounds, and pain in the wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus, if it is necessary to put things right, equal what is round with its mate, so that they are joined together firmly; then place the bandage, and place a round cushion if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the arrangements that we have said before, as for example incisions and other similar things; and put in every mishap that it may concern him, so that he may be well.
de la brisure de la jambe	And thus, if it is necessary to put things right, equal what is round with its mate, so that they are joined together firmly; then place the bandage, and place a round cushion if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the arrangements that we have said before, as for example incisions and other similar things; and put in every mishap that it may concern him, so that he may be well.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hairs that grow in the groin have two roots, of which one is called by the right "muscle" and the other "fleshy"; and they all break at the same time as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is whole. And if both roots are broken together, the limb is fractured throughout
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a marrow bone is fractured, the limb is twisted forward.</start_of_turn>
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is fractured, there is great pain, and it is well seen; and it is fractured.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When thus the limb is brought back, extend it fully, and set it straight; however, if it breaks, it is of little avail, and there are many pieces; for the extension must be less violent and lighter; and as you are skilled, bind it accordingly.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, if you take three strips of coarse cloth which wrap around the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the groin to the heel; then encircle with three pieces of linen, which are strong and soft, and bind them together in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not slip downwards or upwards; and this is good; and no one will administer any more medicine which is long on the limb, and if there is swelling, and it is of bone, and puts on the limb; and make the limb still by this binding or any other accident; and move each joint of the limb, to see if there is any other fracture or any other accident; if the cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones due to pain.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture; but in the bones of the forearm there is never a fracture and two are enough; and there is no other cause of death.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the forearm, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put such great pain on the limb as if it were going to die, and then put your limb back in its place, where the bones were raised up, then press on the limb until they return to their natural position; then put on the dressing and bandage, and put a little bandage under the bone at the level of the fracture, and bind the limb steadily, and when the pain has subsided, wrap up the limb with cloth and other things as you deem necessary.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is not healed, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or not fractured.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are two breaks, if you restore them as we have said, do two of them with your hand; then put at the end of each break a splint according to the length of the break, and make it wider; and put on the thumb that which I have said, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more, break them, and put on each break a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	Remember also the other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and secure each accident as it should be secured.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	... of the break of the thumb bone.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then lean her towards the back part; then fill the belly of the woman with wool, and put as much inside as a sto; then draw out the woman, and leave her belly towards the back and front, and then draw out the wool, as much as it comes out of the belly, and bring back the bone with the sto; and when she has urinated, if the bone is pulled out by the wool, and when she has urinated, she will recover; and if she does not see this for seven days or a fortnight: if the fracture is restored, take a bladder of herbs, and bind the belly to the waist, and keep the bladder in the belly; then blow into the bladder until the bladder is emptied: the bone will return to its place; then fill the belly with wool, and leave it for a few days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of a man or a woman is fractured, if it is restored as we have said concerning the hip bone; these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and his work into it, and they are mentioned in my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these fractures signify in many ways the right way of restoration: indeed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the limb is broken, take a goose’s neck and put it around the limb; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for two days or until it is healed, and it will be completely healed.
de brisure avec plaie	Break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is fitting for one with a fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with a bone of the thigh or shoulder or the like, that it should be sound now, as the wounds themselves bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if the rest of the vitriol remains, if you have nothing else, then restore the fracture in this way once more, or that one, for if the pus does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus comes, if let the restoration be until new morning again, as long as the pus is calmed, and do not touch neither a third nor a quarter, for you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks are open above like a cover discovered, if you must know that you must put your hands lightly on them at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the limb does not extend naturally with your hands, if there is a steel instrument which is about twelve or thirteen inches long, and its width is in proportion to the amount of the wound; for this reason it is necessary at the mire that it should grasp three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the case of a broken bone; and be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not crush the limb during the work.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palainche", because it is known that the curved limb must be placed over the head of the visible bone; and once returned, it must be equal to the other side.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, if you must cope with the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you see the head of a bone displaced by an instrument that can cover it, or by incision or excision, at your peril; then take away what is hindering the bone from snapping and from its rough edges.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the limb is set back in place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, swelling that is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do the same when it is in its place, then I drape it in black vinegar and keep it still; and do not put any cerate on the wound or anything else or oil, because it will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the limb, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has happened to fools and they have caused the patient to die or become lame or cause corruption many times; or the pain is milder and more pleasant than the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is small or large, and you doubt that any mishap will occur as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to place it upon supports; but encircle it around, instead of supports, with firm bands, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after one or two days blood oozing from the wound, if that which you placed upon it has healed, and if there are remaining open wounds, as with tetracycline and similar medications.</start_of_turn>
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must keep the limb bound for one hour in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And you must keep the limb bound in part as much as is necessary so that the limb recovers easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the limb persists [dislocated], and it cannot be set right again, with small fragments of bone, because it is necessary that you should attempt to close the wound, and remove all these fragments of bone that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula arises in the limb, or any other kind of corruption, if it is possible to cure it, according to what is stated in this chapter earlier.</start_of_turn
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is fractured, and appears upon the limb, as the bones of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death comes from this; but leave it alone until it has healed; by chance it will mend by itself after twenty days or thirty, and then cure the wound if you wish; or if you do not wish, leave it.</start_of_turn>
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From the root of the bone that comes out from the swelling.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times we come after the swelling of the bone root, even when it is close to the joint, and it is good to see the shape of the limb; and by chance we cannot make the limb do its natural work.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if it is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcodea, acacia, and similar others, make sure that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that is astringent or with eggs or with oil; and put them on the wound, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hands for days; and then remove the dislocation, and do it again until the nodulation is bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of flesh; for the property of flesh is that it makes all the swellings under the limb rigid; and if the nodulation has already become hardened as much as stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above is great, and make the apparent surplus; or do not remove it at all, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb is feeble after the dressing.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture has been restored, and remains feeble after the limb has been bandaged, if there is any pain: sometimes it is because it was too tightly bound and was not sufficiently loose; or because there are too many bands, and it cannot move smoothly; or because of many wounds; or from too great a movement, not even in its proper place; or because there is blood in the bone, if it is feeble.</start_of_turn>
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient move around and keep the limb firm, until the pain has ceased; and give him baths, and make him comfortable; then put on a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice absorbs the great nourishment, and the wound often suffers from excessive heat, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and bring it back to its natural shape.</start_of_turn>
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the bone is fractured open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural movement: if one does not believe the fools who say it must be fractured anew, and many have done this in our land; this practice is blamed, and it brings great harm, and by chance the patient; although when the swelling and the torture are fresh, if it is considered that they have arisen from hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, as ivy leaves, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and it makes one.i. emollient plaster, as with good aquaintance, and you take the nourishment of ivy, and confit it with fat of gelatin or olive oil, and make plaster of it; or you take greasy figs, and grind them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soothe the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so introduce movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and place padding and a dressing over the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to no avail, if it is now to bring back into its place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, if the limb swells up, and by chance one touches it again, there are points on the limb; for this reason one must not move the limb while it is swollen: many times this brings on swelling and other pains; however, when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him alone until the swelling subsides; then raise the limb high with warmth and oil, and move it lightly, and cure each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint from the root to the wrist.</start_of_turn
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The jawbones.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself in multiple positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and accompanied, if you must move it urgently; do not grasp it tightly; and in such a way that the minister grasps the head of the patient and holds his pocket with one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two must be loosened, to make them equal; and command the patient to soften his jaw, teeth, and move them all around
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And behold the eye that is opposite, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns grasped, even if the two mandibles are together, if they are raised with hot water and oil, so that they remain lightly; do not force to return it, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are gently returned to their proper position, and the patient’s mouth is closed comfortably, soften the senses with soft cloths moistened with oil of rose and wax, then bind them lightly with thread; and let the patient rest on his back, with his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or left, or make any effort to open wide, but take moderate food, until the pain has subsided, and the jaw is firm and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jawbones do not wish to return to their place at a single hour, and are not otherwise converted [back to their normal position], if in comes fever and customary sickness, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	When you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death is the result, in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislodge from the costae without causing damage to the surrounding area, and is always damaged when forced, and one can feel it well.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	If the patient lies quiet on his back with his arms extended, then press the limb towards his chest and it will return; then put on the bandage and bind it, and strain it; the limb which is beside the rib cannot be loosened; if this does not happen, and if it loosens at any time, if the dislocation has not already been reset, then reset it again; then put on the bandage and bind it, strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way the dislocation of the shoulder will be returned to its normal position when it is freed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The nails of the shoulder are loosened only by three methods: firstly, that they are loosened at the outer side of the shoulder; secondly, at the inner side; and by chance at the upper part, which is often the case; do not loosen them from behind the shoulder or from within the armpit; loosen them often from below towards the shoulder, even among those who have little hair, for among those who have sufficient hair, loosen them at the points of greatest hair growth and return to the points of greatest hair growth.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are blows or fractures, and the shoulder is dislocated by a thick swelling, and one must take care that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must indeed believe that it is dislocated, as long as you are certain; and then immediately begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation occurs when the shoulder is turned towards the elbow, and that it differentiates between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their difference their diversity perceptible; and at the head of the shoulder you will find a hollow, and from the elbow to the edge of the shoulder, as if there were a wound; and the patient will not be able to bring back his hand to its place, or to move in any way; and in the same way, if it has been loosened above, if it is not concealed, for you will find it immediately on the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not enough to bring back, when it is new, or if the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the hand of the sufferer be held high, then put the thumbs below the armpit, and hold the joint firmly high up; and the sufferer holds the hand, and stretches it high, since he puts it down; if it comes promptly.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not come as we have said before, if you must know, you must bathe the patient in warm water; and give him a soothing and softening medicine, such as a decoction of elderberry, fennel and melilot in water, or give it to him directly. Then either place the patient on his back and put under his seat a cushion of even linen, neither too soft nor too hard, and put his hand on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient. And another attendant will hold the patient's chief, so that it does not move backwards; the shoulder will return immediately. And if you see that it remains in place according to this method: that there is one who is greater than the patient; and two towards the coast, and the shoulder will come out from under the patient's seat, and hold the seat high, so that the patient hangs down; and another attendant will treat the patient's hand backwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, if he can bear nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And in this way it is often done: if the head of the shoulder is long and thick like a pestle, and is neither too thick nor too thin; then one should put on the patient a soft bandage, but that the patient should keep his arm dangling down; and then grasp his hand with the other hand and move the joint back to its place. If it does not return by these means, do this cure: take two thumbs and three fingers of good size, which have a rounded head to enter under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay upon the head of the arm a cloth damped with sweat, that it does not bleed the patient; and put the hand of the patient on the seat; extend the arms over the arm of the longth, and support the limb on the arm, and the hand to the wrist, and put the arm over an inch of a span of a finger, and let the hands hang down, or leave the forearm hanging down: the joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is restored, in whatever way it may be, if you command that you put on the seat a ball of wool equal in size, then put the dressing apart with powdered barley, with incense and alum of egg, upon the whole flank and around, then strain out the moisture from the seat immediately, and draw the limb over the dressing, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands hang down together.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is commanded that he should drink little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then drink more after five or six days, and move it; and if it is stiff and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for some other reason, if you must, administer cautery three times, as is done before or in this chapter.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it remains loose for thirteen days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift the upper arm, then it is likely that the nerves of the shoulder are compressed, stretched or softened; and that the joint will never be stable in its place again.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the dislocation is towards the elbow, and the bones, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the arms, and another support is administered; and it is cured as long as it is done properly.</start_of_turn>
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
de la dislocation dou coute	If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient to the limb, if you see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And it must be remembered that if it is possible to restore it again after the spasm has passed, grasp the hands with both hands; and extend the arms, and let the hands hang down in accordance with the pain of the joint, front and back, and reassemble the dislocation with its sockets together, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and press from the root of the bone that is loosened.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm, and hold it by two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder downwards, and when you have enveloped a double-long and wide bandage; and when you look at the joint with the hand, if there is no oil on the thumb to soften the joint, then restore the joint as it was before; and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with egg white, and the strain will form, and bind the arm to the patient’s chest, and leave it for some days, then take it off.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, if you see that it does not move well, if you rejoin the limb and leave it as it is for some days, until it is firmly set; then you must release it.</p>
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain afterwards the joint has been reset, and if it moves, bathe and rub thoroughly, and press until it is eased; or put upon the joint a mutton fat nail, then leave it in for a night, then extract the nail and bathe; and when it swells, rub the joint gently, then put the nail back in, and then bathe again; do this twice or thrice until it is healed. If you see that it returns to its place, put upon it a moist poultice soaked in urine and bind it up; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand: the joint of the hand is loosened, and the return is laborious, more so than other joints throughout, so it must be immediately repositioned in its place, while it is loosened, even if the bones are fractured, or if there is contamination of the wound.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put the patient’s hand on a table, extend the limb, and look at it so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and press until it returns naturally, it is necessary to watch if it is well placed; then put the patient’s hand back on the table during extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back now, that is good. If not, if the strain of loosening the painful swellings is calming, and you leave it in its original position, it will recover
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after some days, the joint will be fractured; and it does no harm to the patient to leave it relaxed, and he cannot strain anything at all: except that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other reason for straining except to drain by means of fire cautery in this case, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage we mentioned earlier, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and if there is no pain, if there is warm swelling, and you rub it until it is healed
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never is the thumb detached from the wrist at the elbow or at the back of the palm or the belly; therefore let the thumb be held, and the dislocation be reduced to its pouches until it returns, then sustain the head of the thumb, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it for two days, and then put it back equal to before; and do not move it, as we have said, and take hold of it, and move it, and reattach it. Do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is detached at the belly of the thumb, and do as you have done before, until it is well; and do the same if it is detached from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From the loosening of the scapula from the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the back or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosened, if there is no remedy, for the patient dies quickly.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign that it is a wound that is not healing in the right direction is that the discharge of blood is softened and many times the limb is made limp, or the two knees or two arms or one leg is softened; and many times the marrow moves to three parts. The one that moves at the back is called "gilbosite": the cure is that if the "gilbosite" comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, they say of the old methods of treatment with great words, or it has no great benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the heel, there is no remedy; and the same as that which comes straight down at two costs, we cannot cure it except for that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient’s face should be stretched out one inch wide, and should have a strain from the knees down to the toes; then put a tampon between the heel and the earth forms, and another has pliers, and bind up the patient’s ankles, and another has haunches, and has knees, and has calves; and two assistants know the ropes, one at the heel and the other at the toes; and they must be well closed, the heel as we have said, and the patient should put his palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it fails to return by this treatment, take a cube of three hands' length, and hold the edge of the cube against the side, and let the patient lie on their side; then put the thumb of the cube against the spine, and place the middle of the cube on the spinous process; and place the little finger on the other side of the cube, and press firmly, until it returns to its place. If you see that it has not returned, do it at the turn of the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If two nails are fixed at the head of the patient's arm of a great hand, and two others at the fingers, and between each nail there is a loop of gut and a piece of lead, a thumb-width in length; and in each nail one hole, or the nail is crooked, and the nails are firmly fixed in the flesh, so that they do not move; and between two nails there is one nail turning, so that the thread turns with the nail; and there are two small nails of a thumb-width in length on each turn, to hold the thread; and then the surgeon joins the thread which is between the hooks to the turning at the head, and the other thread to the fingers at the other turning, and the surgeon twists the thread around the entire limb, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, if you put on a desiccant plaster with much yolk, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers' length, that will cause the swelling of the belly and the sensitive part of the spine to go down, and bind with a thread, as we have said; and use the patient mild nourishment, until he is well; and if nothing comes to an end of the well-being, if it is necessary, administer soothing and calming medicines, as we have said before; and never give a piece of lead, and never comes the appearance at the back of the spine in the loin, and take care that this is not a dislocation; for it is the bone that has opened, for which we must not presume: by chance comes death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocation
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder do not come loose except for dislocations alone, and it does not come about in any other way; and the joint of the hip is damaged in three parts: front and back, and above and below; the more it is damaged in front, the more it is damaged behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is this: when you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient's knees than the sane, and cannot double his knee at the fire; and it is the thigh which is emptied of its posterior fat, because the head of the femur comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of this is that if these accidents are contrary to the preceding ones.</start_of_turn
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of this is that if it is well supported, according to the completion; nevertheless, do not double the knee with pain, and if you see it done violently, do not do so before, and retain the urine, and swell the belly, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one who has it behind, if he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is dislocated from the socket.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If this semblance of dislocation persists, if indeed the dislocation is old and persists according to its nature, without any remedy; I do not know that there is any hope.</start_of_turn>
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are three methods for dislocation; if you are hasty and turn the joint too quickly, and stretch it outwards and downwards; perhaps it will return, and there will be no need for any other remedy.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, if you must, apply a strong minister, and put the limb firmly at two hands, or at one, that it may be bound upon the knee; and another minister extends his hand under in such a way that he grasps his hands from below his buttocks, then he tightens it with a loop of thread upon the buttock; and another holds the head of the limb; and extend both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is commonly used in three out of four cases; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, if you must, put a remedy in its place. When the dislocation is outside, if you can, support the patient above his costal cartilage, then place the limb upon the root of the buttock, and the limb which is below the ankle, then extend the limb upwards towards the ankle, and towards the heel; then grasp another minister by the arms and embrace the great limb of the painful area, and extend it outwards: if it returns to its place now; this method of dislocation is more gentle than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not firmly grasp it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two toes and above the two knees; and let the limb be extended two fingers more than the others; then suspend it above the head of a staff, or on the ground two arms long; then command one minister to embrace the waist, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who embraces the waist, for the joint has now returned naturally.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is expelled, if the patient is conscious, as we have said in the one with abdominal swelling, grasp the limb firmly above the knee and the foot; then put two cushions, one at the head and one at the toe, and insert one cushion between the buttocks of the patient, shaping like a plough; and plant damp cloths around it, so that it does not bleed the patient; then extend the hands of the ministers towards him, and the master puts his hand equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put under the table, and press on it as we said in the previous case, and keep the patient lying on the straight side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if it is necessary, extend the painful limb as much as possible, as I have said; and put the eyes on the painful part of the limb, and press on the other hand, and extend forward towards the groin.</start_of_turn
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is loose, if it does not spontaneously extend the patient’s foot, do not lift him up from the earth, but rather keep him stretched out as if he had been loosened in this way; and either over his face or on his side, and the limb must be extended as we have said previously, and must be pressed upon the joint at the table; and will be at rest when the patient extends his leg, and they will be equal; then tighten the thighs, put on the bandage, and strain with a belt, so that the limb does not move; and keep it thus for three days or four, then remove the bandage and put on the bandage again; and if you see that they are equal, if the strain is as before, leave them for three days; then remove the bandage, and let him breathe freely, until the limb is comfortable
de la dislocation dou genoil	And if it rests for two or three days, then remove it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it for two days; then remove it and make it swell gently until the limb is comfortable.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture in two ways: forward and backward; and do not make it worse in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And thus the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and if he does not reach his buttock, his nails are loose; and when you restore him, if you make him sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your hand on his heel; then grasp his knee with your palms, and draw inward between your thighs, then bend the two knees of the knee which you have grasped; and another attendant extends his hand, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has regained his limb lightly; then put on the dressing and raise the limb to the buttock, and bind them together for three or four days, then take it off. Do not trouble the patient any more, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at its proper place, if an extension is administered strongly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	And if the limb is not out of place, if an extension is administered firmly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The limb is never completely immobile, and never completely relaxed, and is always somewhat tense and painful.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is displaced, and it is necessary before at the part where it is loosened: one must gently restore it, and gently extend it with the hands when it is only slightly bent.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is thoroughly drained, if you make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg below the ankle; then take the toe in your right hand, and then in your left hand twice, and extend it upwards, and hold it firmly; do this twice as we have said, at the end and at the beginning; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert the heel firmly into the ground between his thighs, and cover him with a blanket; do not move the patient; then hold the limb firmly by the minister and another minister extend the toe with the hands or with the rope that is on the toe; then extend the ankles equally, and keep the bandage firmly in place either between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when it is extended; then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with the hands, and another minister holds the limb steady at the ankle, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it has arrived at a point, if you put on the plaster and stamp on it, and the strain forms, and you tie the limb to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, so that they are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if it has relaxed, if the strain has gone; then remove it at the third or fourth day, and tell the patient for three days. If he goes before this limit, it is not certain that he will not damage it further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the shoulder dislocates again after being reset, as we have mentioned elsewhere, then you must hold it still until it is healed.
des dois	If the shoulder dislocates again after being reset, as we have mentioned elsewhere, then you must hold it still until it is healed.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the dislocation is in no other place than at the back of the limb, then you must make the patient sit on one leg or on a table quite straight, and put your limb on what opens up of these joints, then push your limb forward until it returns; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, if you put on the sole of the limb a table for two fingers, then the strain forms, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and make the limb rest until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	And when they are even, and nothing appears to be open, if you put on the salve of rue marguerite a dose of three quarters of a pound, then the swelling will form, and leave it for two days, then take it off; and rest it until it is healed.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies: if you are not wise in the cure and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and timely, do not be bold; and begin with calming things about the abscess, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you restore the limb to its place, so that the abscess remains; and when the limb is in place, if you administer calming things about the abscess, cure the wound, as it should be, from dried pus; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are fractured, if the bones are firm, do as is said in simple ailments; and you shall refrain from going in the way of fear, as I have said, for this will bring you misery according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your arm and your body.
Amen	Amen.
